"""

From "Mitchell v. Wisconsin" ==> """
Mitchell v. Wisconsin, 588 U.S. ___ (2019), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that "when a driver is unconscious and cannot be given a breath test, the exigent-circumstances doctrine generally permits a blood test without a warrant.".
Background
In May 2013, Gerald Mitchell crashed his car near a lake in Sheboygan, Wisconsin. When police arrived, they used a breathalyzer to test his blood alcohol content. Mitchell registered a 0.24% BAC and was subsequently arrested for OWI. As police were driving him to the police station, he fell unconscious, so the officers changed plans and drove him to a local hospital to have his blood drawn intravenously. This test registered his BAC at 0.22%, and prosecutors formally charged Mitchell with violating several Wisconsin drunk driving laws.
Lower Court Proceedings
At the trial court, Mitchell made a motion to suppress the results of the hospital blood draw on the grounds that it was a warranties search and thus unconstitutional under the Fourth Amendment. The prosecutor argued that Wisconsin's state laws constitute implied consent to blood draws once someone begins driving a vehicle. Sheboygan County Judge Terence Bourke sided with the prosecutor, denying Mitchell's motion to suppress. A jury then convicted Mitchell of all charges.
Mitchell appealed his conviction to the state appellate court on the basis that the evidence gained from his blood draw should have been suppressed. The appellate court declined to hear the case, and instead certified two questions to the Wisconsin Supreme Court - whether the "implied consent" rule was constitutional, and whether a warrantless blood draw from an unconscious person was a violation of the Fourth Amendment.
In a 5-2 decision written by Chief Justice Roggensack, the Wisconsin Supreme Court upheld Mitchell's conviction, answering that the "implied consent" rule was constitutional, and thus the blood draw was permissible under the Fourth Amendment. Justice Kelly wrote a concurring opinion that was joined by Justice Rebecca Bradley. In it, he argued that the "implied consent" rule is unconstitutional, but that the exigent circumstances doctrine, along with United States Supreme Court precedent, allow for a warrantless blood draw from an unconscious driver who is suspected of being intoxicated. Justice Ann Walsh Bradley wrote a dissent joined by Justice Abrahamson, which argued that "implied consent" is not the same as actual consent, and that a blood draw is such an invasive type of search that exigent circumstances do not apply. Thus, nothing the officers did was constitutional, and the blood draw should have been thrown out as evidence.https://cases.justia.com/wisconsin/supreme-court/2018-2015ap000304-cr.pdf?ts=1530623069 
Supreme Court
Mitchell applied for certiorari before the United States Supreme Court, which accepted the case to decide "[w]hether a statute authorizing a blood draw from an unconscious motorist provides an exception to the Fourth Amendment warrant requirement."
Oral argument was held on April 23, 2019.
On June 27, 2019, the Court announced its decision. In a plurality opinion written by Justice Samuel Alito and joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Breyer and Kavanaugh, the United States Supreme Court reversed the judgement of the Wisconsin Supreme Court. Justice Thomas wrote an opinion concurring in the judgement. In opposition, Justice Sotomayor wrote a dissenting opinion that was joined by Justices Ginsburg and Kagan. Justice Gorsuch wrote a lone one-paragraph dissenting opinion, arguing that the Court did not properly decide the question presented. He said that he would have dismissed the case as improvidently granted.
 See also 
 Birchfield v. North Dakota
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Legal history of Wisconsin
Category:Sheboygan, Wisconsin
Category:Blood tests
Category:Breathalyzer
Category:Driving under the influence
"""

From "Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc." ==> """
Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., 473 U.S. 614 (1985), is a United States Supreme Court decision concerning arbitration of antitrust claims. The Court heard the case on appeal from the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, which had ruled that the arbitration clause in a Puerto Rican car dealer's franchise agreement was broad enough to reach its antitrust claim. By a 5–3 margin it upheld the lower court, requiring that the dealer arbitrate its claim before a panel in Tokyo, as stipulated in the contract.
Justice Harry Blackmun wrote for the majority that the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) was broad enough to require arbitration of statutory claims as well as contractual ones, extending a recent line of Court decisions favorable to arbitration. A controversial footnote, creating a possible "prospective waiver" doctrine that would allow a party to avoid arbitration under foreign law, has been much criticized by commentators and at the same time raised by many litigants. In 2009 the Eleventh Circuit found it valid for an injured cruise-ship worker, but two years later cast doubt on that conclusion.
In dissent, Justice John Paul Stevens argued that antitrust claims were too complex and important to be left to arbitrators and that in any event none of the claims were arbitrable under the terms of the contract itself. He expressed incredulousness that his colleagues would require an American company to arbitrate a claim under American antitrust law before a panel of foreign arbitrators.
While the case formed an important part of the Court's expansion of arbitrability in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, it could not have reached a court today. In 2002, after years of lobbying by the National Automobile Dealers Association, Congress passed the Motor Vehicle Franchise Contract Arbitration Fairness Act, which prohibited mandatory predispute arbitration clauses in motor vehicle dealership franchise agreements. President George W. Bush signed it into law, the first time a specific exception to the FAA had been legislated since the Court began expanding its scope.
Underlying dispute
In 1979 Soler was incorporated in San Juan, Puerto Rico, and became a Chrysler-Plymouth dealer, doing business in the Pueblo Viejo district of the nearby suburb of Guaynabo.Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth (Mitsubishi Motors II), , at 617, Blackmun, J. It and Mitsubishi Motors, a joint venture of Chrysler and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, incorporated in Geneva, Switzerland, concluded two separate agreements to this effect: a distributor agreement with Chrysler and separate sales procedure agreements with Chrysler and Mitsubishi. The latter contained arbitration clauses requiring that any disputes under them be arbitrated in Japan under the rules of the Japan Commercial Arbitration Association (JCAA).Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc. (Mitsubishi Motors I), 723 F.2d 155 (1st Cir., 1983) at 157. The goal of the manufacturer and dealer was to introduce the small cars Mitsubishi made for both Chrysler and itself to the Puerto Rican market, for which they were considered ideal.
Soler did excellent business in its first two years, selling more than twice the number of vehicles set in its quota. As the market began to slow down in late 1981, the relationship between Soler and Mitsubishi began to break down. The dealer had trouble meeting sales targets under a higher quota, and Mitsubishi withheld shipments of new vehicles. Eventually 966 destined for Soler were stored near its factories in Japan. Soler began having trouble financing its purchases of new vehicles.
thumb|left|200px|Mitsubishi logo|alt=Three red diamonds arranged in a triangular pattern with the words "Mitsubishi Motors" in black beneath
Seeing that other Japanese car makers were allowing their dealers in Puerto Rico to transship excess inventory to Latin America and the continental United States, Soler asked if it could do the same. Mitsubishi refused, saying the vehicles were customized for the Puerto Rican market. They lacked heaters and defoggers that they would have needed on the mainland, and their engines could not run on the lower-grade leaded gasoline sold in many Latin American countries at that time. Further, Soler had no experience with maritime shipping and would not been able to meet its service obligations under warranty for transshipped cars and trucks. Mitsubishi also was concerned that transshipments to the continental U.S. would be seen as skirting the voluntary import restraints Japanese automakers had been practicing in the American market to mitigate the potential political backlash from their distressed American counterparts.Mitsubishi Motors II, at 618n1.
Soler would later claim that it was told the real reason for the refusal to allow transshipping was that Mitsubishi and Chrysler had divided their territories, informally agreeing that the former brand would have preference outside the mainland U.S. while Chrysler maintained it domestically. The dealership then began to suspect that Mitsubishi intended to sabotage its business in order to replace it with a wholly owned subsidiary once the brand had been established in Puerto Rico. Early in 1982 Soler stopped paying storage costs for the vehicles in Japan, claiming it had disowned them.Mitsubishi Motors I, at 160. Later that year the franchise agreement either ended or was terminated.
Lower courts
Mitsubishi sued in federal district court for Puerto Rico, alleging various breaches of the sales procedure agreement. Soler countersued, alleging violations of the federal Automobile Dealers' Day in Court Act, which allowed civil suits by dealerships for damage due to bad faith on the part of the franchisor.P.L. 84-1026, Aug. 8, 1956, ch. 1038, 70 Stat. 1125 (). and its equivalent territorial statute. They also included antitrust claims under the Sherman Act, claiming that Mitsubishi was purposely driving it out of the motor vehicle retail business with the intent of replacing Soler with its own wholly owned subsidiary.Mitsubishi Motors I, at 158.
Mitsubishi's response was a motion to the judge to compel arbitration as mandated by the agreement. The court ordered most of the contractual claims arbitrated, but reserved jurisdiction on the statutory claims alleged by Soler, including antitrust. Soler made an interlocutory appeal to the First Circuit Court of Appeals, whose jurisdiction includes Puerto Rico, arguing that all its statutory counterclaims were not covered by the arbitration clause, and that Sherman Act claims could not be arbitrated in any event.
Appeals court
In 1983 a three-judge panel of Levin H. Campbell, then the circuit's chief judge, Frank M. Coffin and Hugh Henry Bownes, heard the case. Near the end of the year they handed down their decision. Unanimously they ruled for Mitsubishi on the statutory claims, holding them within the ambit of the arbitration clause. However, they also said, the Sherman Act claims could be litigated as they were not so parochial to American law, and were too important to U.S. public policy to leave to arbitrators.
Coffin wrote for the panel that although the agreement was governed by Swiss law, the scope of the arbitration clause was within the court's jurisdiction. The Federal Arbitration Act preempted Puerto Rican law on the subject, which, he noted, Soler tacitly acknowledged by arguing that the Puerto Rico Dealers' Act (PRDA) was implicitly incorporated into the agreement, since it explicitly incorporated savings and separability clauses from the distributorship agreement that violated the PRDA. He called this argument "tortured", since neither was actually incorporated into the sales procedure agreement as Soler claimed. Nor was the arbitration clause limited to contractual claims.Mitsubishi Motors I, at 159.
"Soler's Sherman Act counterclaim poses a murkier problem," Coffin wrote. It rested on the claim that, by refusing to allow transshipment of unsold vehicles, Mitsubishi was dividing markets. Further anticompetitive practices alleged were wrongful termination of Soler's franchise, and the refusal to ship cars and parts. Mitsubishi responded with its practical objections to the transshipments, that the franchise had expired without being renewed and that the shipments were halted sometimes at Soler's request and sometimes for lack of an acceptable letter of credit. Most of these, Coffin concluded, were differences over the execution of the contract and therefore covered by the arbitration clause.
"The important question now before us," Coffin continued, "is whether, despite such coverage, they are nonarbitrable because of a judicially created policy, hitherto applied only to 'domestic' contracts involving United States citizens, reserving antitrust issues for judicial determination." After oral argument, he recounted, the court had concluded this was a question of first impression and sought guidance from the federal government. The Justice Department responded with an amicus curiae brief, joined by the State Department's Legal Advisor, urging the court to uphold that tradition in this case. The First Circuit agreed.Mitsubishi Motors I, at 161–62.
Coffin found three issues relevant to that determination. The policy he referred to was the Second Circuit's holding in American Safety Equipment v. J.P. Maguire & Co.: "We do not believe that Congress intended such claims to be resolved elsewhere than in the courts."American Safety Equipment v. J.P. Maguire & Co., 391 F. 2d 821, at 827 (2nd Cir., 1968). Several other circuits had affirmed that precedent. "We conclude, therefore, that the nonarbitrability of antitrust issues in domestic contract disputes is established as solid and sound doctrine."Mitsubishi Motors I, at 162–163.
However, this was not a domestic contract dispute but one between an American company and a Japanese one, whose contract, governed by Swiss law, called for any disputes to be arbitrated in Tokyo. Coffin said there were two more questions. "The first is: is the American antitrust ethic and system of law so 'parochial' that insistence on the application of the nonarbitrability of antitrust issues to international agreements would be anathema to other countries and would incite retaliation?" This concern had motivated the Supreme Court in deciding to hold an American firm to its agreement to litigate in London." in The Bremen v. Zapata Off-Shore Co., a key forum selection case.The Bremen v. Zapata Off-Shore Co., .
"We doubt that other nations are ignorant of the primacy we accord to antitrust law," Coffin wrote. The government's amicus brief had advised that German law similarly prohibited disputes under its corresponding statutes from being arbitrated, and the Treaty of Rome which established what was then known as the European Union had five articles devoted to forbidding or restricting anti-competitive practices. "[W]hether or not other nations agree with United States law and attitudes relating to competition, it is extremely doubtful that they would describe them as 'parochial' in the sense of being petty provincialisms," he concluded.
The second question was whether any policy applied that would specifically prevent foreign concerns from arbitrating antitrust claims brought against them by American companies. Coffin again readily found the answer:
But that conclusion was not enough. The court next had to look at that policy in light of whether it would be permitted under the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, known as the New York Convention, negotiated in 1958 under United Nations auspices and acceded to by the United States in 1958. "[It] was preceded by very little helpful history, and followed by very little illuminating history or adjudication," wrote Coffin. "We work with a scattering of crumbs—and, hopefully, a sound sense of the balance struck by the Convention between deeply felt national policies and the desire to facilitate international arbitration." He found its language at first contradictory, requiring that any matter found arbitrable in a member country be arbitrated, but also saying that awards need not be enforced if they were found against the public policy of the country being asked to do so."Mitsubishi Motors I, at 164.
Coffin found guidance in resolving this problem first from an opinion he'd written in another case two years earlierLedee v. Ceramiche Ragno, 684 F. 2d 184 (1st Cir., 1982). which led him to exclude from Convention coverage those arbitration clauses found defective though fraud, mistake, duress, and waiver. This was not one of those cases. "The precise question we ask," he wrote, "is whether a matter that has been barred by unanimous judicial precedent for a decade and a half from resolution by arbitration, because of a multiplicity of solid reasons that lose no pertinence or weight in an international context, is a matter 'capable of settlement by arbitration'". He found this very broad, as any dispute could theoretically be solved that way.
For guidance, Coffin found a State Department memo to the Senate at the time of ratification to be useful. It noted that that clause was meant to account for the laws in member states that forbade certain matters from being arbitrated, and cited laws in some U.S. states that specifically applied that prohibition to real estate title disputes. Commentary on the Convention noted the same issue with the language. "We therefore conclude that an agreement to arbitrate antitrust issues is not 'an agreement within the meaning of' ... the Convention because such an agreement does not concern 'a subject matter capable of settlement by arbitration'", he concluded."Mitsubishi Motors I, at 165–166.
There was nevertheless still "a considerable roadblock" in the form of Scherk v. Alberto–Culver, Inc., a 1971 case where, again faced with a dispute between a domestic and a foreign company where arbitrability was at issue, the Supreme Court had ordered the parties to arbitration.Scherk v. Alberto-Culver, Inc., . If that case were applied broadly, Coffin noted, again there would be almost no inarbitrable dispute. And, since part of the claim involved allegations of securities fraud, the respondent relied on Wilko v. Swan, where the Court had held such claims were inarbitrable.Wilko v. Swan, .
Coffin distinguished the case at hand in several ways. First, the Scherk Court had not considered the case within the context of the Convention. Second, the older case had involved a dispute over the status of foreign trademarks, a decision which necessarily involved foreign law, whereas "the parties here could not be blind to the obvious fact that American law would normally apply to any claim of monopolization or restraint of trade". Third, as he had already discussed, antitrust was not a peculiar and parochial American concern. Fourth was the different policies underlying the respective laws: while the securities laws in Scherk were meant to protect individual investors,
Before the Court
Both parties appealed to the Supreme Court. Arbitration proceedings continued, as both parties paid the fees and the JCAA assembled a panel to hear the case. In September 1984, immediately after Mitsubishi presented its case to the panel, Soler declared bankruptcy, resulting in an automatic stay.Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth (Mitsubishi Motors III), 814 F. 2d 844 (1st Cir., 1987). Shortly afterward, the Court granted certiorari.
Amici briefs were filed by several parties. The American Arbitration Association urged reversal of the holding on the Sherman Act claims; the National Automobile Dealers Association (NADA) urged reversal of the other aspect of the holding. The Solicitor General's office filed one on behalf of the federal government in support of Soler. The International Chamber of Commerce and the commonwealth of Puerto Rico also shared their thoughts on the case in briefs.
Oral argument
The Court heard oral arguments in March 1985. Wayne Cross argued for Mitsubishi and Benjamin Ramon-Rodriguez for Soler. In addition, Jerrold Joseph Ganzfried was allowed some time to argue for the federal government in support of Soler.
Mitsubishi
Cross repeatedly asserted that there was just one question for the justices to consider: "Whether a party's contractual right to arbitrate antitrust disputes can be frustrated absent such a countervailing federal policy found in a federal statute." In support of this he cited a case the Court had decided unanimously two weeks earlier, Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. v. Byrd, where it had upheld a request for arbitration of securities fraud claims under state law even though the parallel claims under federal law were still to be litigated.Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. v. Byrd, . "The preeminent concern of Congress in passing the [FAA]," Cross quoted from Justice Thurgood Marshall's opinion in that case, "was to enforce private agreements into which parties had entered, and that concern requires that we rigorously enforce agreements to arbitrate ... at least absent a countervailing policy manifested in another federal statute."
Cross initially rebuffed efforts by the justices to ask about the issue still being argued by Soler, that the other statutory claims were non-arbitrable as well. He declined initially, reminding them that the two lower courts had held otherwise. After he was reminded that they were still making the argument, he said that he did not think it would be applicable to their specific claims.
He continued to the specifics of his argument. "We submit that the circuit court's reliance upon the American Safety case is fundamentally at odds with the purpose of the Federal Arbitration Act." In Byrd and other recent cases, the court had affirmed "a strong national policy favoring arbitration," as it had put it in Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Construction Corp.,Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Construction Corp., , at 24. and he saw no reason to stop here. However, when challenged on how the Court could reach his desired result without overruling American Safety and thus avoid the question of whether purely domestic antitrust claims were arbitrable, he pointed the justices to Scherk. "I did not read [it] ... as overruling Wilko so much as a limitation on Wilko in international conduct."
The justices had some concerns about the international nature of the case. Could arbitrators overseas simply decide to ignore American law in deciding the antitrust claim? Cross said that it was not likely, from what he understood, and that in any event arbitrators had handled cases as complex, if not more than, antitrust claims and so were not incapable of the instant case. He called the American Safety doctrine "a usurpation of power."
Soler
Rodriguez-Ramon laid out the facts of the case at length in order to bolster his case that the arbitration clause should not be applied to matters the parties had not expressly agreed to arbitrate such as the statutory claims. "You have a fairly hard row to hoe here in getting us to change that," one justice told him, acknowledging the lower-court rulings. Rodriguez-Ramon cited the efficiency and expediency offered by arbitration as factors the Court had held in its favor, and contrasted that with his now-bankrupt client, who would have to take all his witnesses and evidence to Japan for a case to be heard in that country's language.
Asked why, given the clear advantage that seemed to offer, Mitsubishi would have written into what Rodriguez-Ramon contended was an adhesion contract such a narrow arbitration clause, the lawyer insisted that "Mitsubishi only considered the possibility of arbitrating commercial contractual controversy." Why else, he suggested, would the language of the arbitration clause have specifically mentioned the sections of the contract to which it applied? And even if it had been intended so broadly, he reminded the Court that it had held in many other cases that some statutory claims could not be arbitrated.
Further, both the FAA and the Convention allowed for this distinction. "Finally, in terms of antitrust litigation, what are we talking about?" Rodriguez-Ramon concluded. "An antitrust litigant in this country has a right to litigate before a court and before his peers. He is entitled to have a trial by jury. He is entitled to be heard by 12 of his peers concerning whether the defendant has committed ... a restraint of trade."
Lastly, Rodriguez-Ramon distinguished Soler's case from Scherk by two factors. First, the contract had not been negotiated as it had been in the older case; and second, the contract in Scherk called for performance overseas while Soler had to make its performance in a U.S. territory. Nor did he find Southland Corp. v. Keating, in which the Court held the FAA applied to contracts executed under state law,Southland Corp. v. Keating, . applicable, since in that case the Court had considered a law unique to California whereas here it was dealing with a law parallel to a federal statute that almost every state had enacted.
"The consequence of a contrary holding by this honorable Court, I respectfully submit, are ominous," said Rodriguez-Ramon. If it allowed arbitration such as the one his client was preparing for, almost any large international corporation would be able to word contracts so as to skirt American law. [A]ll these people will have to go to arbitrate outside of the continental United States, in foreign arbitration areas different from the United States, possibly under different languages, under different juridical criteria for the adjudication of controversies."
United States
"The Court of Appeals properly accommodated the three interests that are at issue in this case," Ganzfried told the justices. "[T]hose interests are, one, the primacy of antitrust law in preserving our economic system of free competition; two, the general encouragement of arbitration as a means of resolving private disputes; and three, our commitment to an international convention that requires enforcement of agreements to arbitrate with very limited exceptions."
An agreement to arbitrate antitrust claims would not be enforceable, he maintained, even if it specified members of Congress or senior federal judges as arbitrators. "The fact is that they are operating in a system in which there is no substantive appellate review." Even if that was part of what the parties bargained for, he maintained, the underlying public policy was too important.
Private actions had always been intended under antitrust law, Ganzfried reminded the justices. He raised the possibility that a manufacturer could, through agreements with all its distributors, create "a nice, tidy buffer from the American antitrust laws", since the indirect purchasers would likewise lack standing to sue under the Illinois Brick doctrine. When it was pointed out that the FAA was passed after the antitrust laws, "the history of the enforcement of the antitrust laws strongly indicates that it was not even considered a remote possibility worth discussing that antitrust actions would be subject to arbitration." There was no record anyone had been able to find of private parties arbitrating one.
Cross, allowed five minutes for rebuttal, addressed Ganzfried's closing observation that under JCAA rules, testimony was not taken under oath. "[I]t may be that the oath taking process has something to do with the culture of Japan where taking an oath doesn't have quite the significance that it does here." He admitted that the arbitrators still had to consider the credibility of the witnesses, but called Ganzfried's claim "a straw man."
Decision
The Court announced its decision in July, near the end of term. Harry Blackmun wrote for a five-justice majority that affirmed the First Circuit's holding that the statutory claims were arbitrable and reversed it by holding the antitrust claims arbitrable as well. John Paul Stevens' lengthy dissent argued primarily that the arbitration clause was inapplicable to the dispute, and the precedent against arbitrating antitrust claims was far stronger than the majority represented it to be. Justice Lewis Powell took no part in the case.
Majority opinion
thumb|right|200px|Justice Harry Blackmun, who wrote the majority opinion|alt=An older man with glasses wearing black with a shelf full of brown, red and black books behind him
"[W]e find no warrant in the Arbitration Act for implying in every contract within its ken a presumption against arbitration of statutory claims," Blackmun wrote in response to Soler's claims under the Car Dealers' Day In Court Act. The Court's own recent decisions on arbitration had been very supportive, and he saw no reason to hold, in their light, that they did not apply only to contractual disputes. While conversely not every statutory claim was suitable for arbitration, "the Act itself provides no basis for disfavoring agreements to arbitrate statutory claims by skewing the otherwise hospitable inquiry into arbitrability ... Soler's concern for statutorily protected classes provides no reason to color the lens through which the arbitration clause is read."Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., , at 625–628.
The antitrust claims led to a lengthier discussion. First, Blackmun noted that in both Scherk and The Bremen, the Court had found the international nature of the dispute was a special circumstance justifying arbitration. "We must weigh the concerns of American Safety against a strong belief in the efficacy of arbitral procedures for the resolution of international commercial disputes and an equal commitment to the enforcement of freely negotiated choice-of-forum clauses."Mitsubishi Motors II, at 628–631.
"[W]e confess to some skepticism of certain aspects of the American Safety doctrine," Blackmun wrote. Where the First Circuit had expressed concern that the underlying contract may have been adhesive, he said that suspicion was too narrow a ground to defeat the arbitration clause, especially since the Court's Prima Paint separability doctrine had held that the validity of the arbitration clause itself could be attacked in court.Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & Conklin Mfg. Co.,  He also doubted that even some of the appellate courts which had followed American Safety truly believed that antitrust cases were too complex for arbitrators to handle. Nor did he believe that arbitators might inherently be too conflicted.Mitsubishi Motors II, at 632–634.
The last of the First Circuit's justifications Blackmun considered was the public policy doctrine argument. While he agreed that this was demonstrated by the treble damages provision, "[its] importance ... does not compel the conclusion that it may not be sought outside an American court." In fact, the Court itself had found when inquiring into the legislative history of the Sherman Act in Brunswick Corp. v. Pueblo Bowl-O-Mat, Inc. that the treble damages were primarily intended to help individual litigants and not to serve a greater public policy.Brunswick Corp. v. Pueblo Bowl-O-Mat, Inc., , at 485–86.Mitsubishi Motors II, at 634–640.
"To be sure," Blackmun qualified,
The interests of American law and the American courts would, he noted, be served on the enforcement of the claim, which under the New York Convention individual countries could refuse to do if the verdict or award were contrary to their public policy.
Blackmun concluded by noting the increase in international trade, and with it arbitration to resolve disputes. "The controversies that international arbitral institutions are called upon to resolve have increased in diversity as well as in complexity," he observed. "Yet the potential of these tribunals for efficient disposition of legal disagreements arising from commercial relations has not yet been tested." He exhorted American courts "to subordinate domestic notions of arbitrability to the international policy favoring commercial arbitration" when faced with similar cases in the future.
Dissent
Stevens' lengthy dissent was joined by William Brennan and, with the exception of Part II, where Stevens argued against allowing statutory claims to be arbitrated, Thurgood Marshall. "I am convinced," Stevens began, "that the Court of Appeals' construction of the arbitration clause is erroneous, and because I strongly disagree with this Court's interpretation of the relevant federal statutes, I respectfully dissent."Mitsubishi Motors II, at 641, Stevens, J., dissenting.
200px|left|thumb|Justice John Paul Stevens (pictured in 2006)|alt=An older man with white hair wearing a black robe and a bow tie
First, Stevens observed that the arbitration clause was in the sales procedure agreement, to which Chrysler as well Soler and Mitsubishi were party. It only applied to two-party disputes, yet Soler's antitrust claim was against both manufacturers. "Only by stretching the language of the arbitration clause far beyond its ordinary meaning could one possibly conclude that it encompasses this three-party dispute." Second, it only covered five of the 15 articles of the contract, and none of those five addressed areas which had given rise to Soler's antitrust claim. "The federal policy favoring arbitration cannot sustain the weight that the Court assigns to it. A clause requiring arbitration of all claims 'relating to' a contract surely could not encompass a claim that the arbitration clause was itself part of a contract in restraint of trade."Mitsubishi Motors II, at 643–645.
This, Stevens noted, was the first time the Court had held a statutory claim, as opposed to a merely contractual one, to be arbitrable. However, in its longer line of cases on labor arbitration, the Court had consistently held that statutory claims could not be arbitrated. "It is reasonable to assume that most lawyers and executives would not expect the language in the standard arbitration clause to cover federal statutory claims."Mitsubishi Motors II, at 647–650.
He reiterated past holdings in antitrust cases where the Court had indeed recognized the public-policy role of private actions, particularly by noting the uniqueness of the treble-damages provision when first passed. "There are, in addition, several unusual features of the antitrust enforcement scheme that unequivocally require rejection of any thought that Congress would tolerate private arbitration of antitrust claims in lieu of the statutory remedies that it fashioned": Only federal courts had jurisdiction, Congress had required that depositions in Sherman Act cases be made public, and the Clayton Act allowed that a judgement or decree in a Sherman Act case was prima facie proof of wrongdoing for actions under it. "[I]t is not surprising that all of the federal courts that have considered the question have uniformly and unhesitatingly concluded that agreements to arbitrate federal antitrust issues are not enforceable," he wrote, citing American Safety once again.
In his final section, Stevens responded to the majority's arguments about the international nature of the dispute making arbitration more important. The Convention had fully anticipated that signatory nations had or were likely to declare, through their own laws, that certain disputes were not arbitrable. "[T]he international obligations of the United States permit us to honor Congress' commitment to the exclusive resolution of antitrust disputes in the federal courts," much as how foreign courts had held that certain categories of disputes, including analogous competition-law disputes, in their countries could not be arbitrated. The State Department's brief had promised that other signatory countries to the Convention would not be upset if antitrust claims were exempted due to those policies, he reminded the majority.Mitsubishi Motors II, at 658–661.
Since the majority had tacitly accepted this by not grounding its argument to the contrary in any outside support, Stevens noted, it "seeks refuge in an obtuse application of [Scherk]." Soler's case was, for him, distinguished from Scherk by the same issue that Court had distinguished it from Wilko: the claim involved purely American law. "I consider it perfectly clear that the rules of American antitrust law must govern the claim of an American automobile dealer that he has been injured by an international conspiracy to restrain trade in the American automobile market ... the same antitrust questions would be presented if Mitsubishi were owned by two American companies instead of by one American and one Japanese partner. When Mitsubishi enters the American market and plans to engage in business in that market over a period of years, it must recognize its obligation to comply with American law and to be subject to the remedial provisions of American statutes." And that, to Stevens, meant the Car Dealers' Day in Court Act as much as the Sherman Act.Mitsubishi Motors II, at 661–665.
"The Court's repeated incantation of the high ideals of 'international arbitration' creates the impression that this case involves the fate of an institution designed to implement a formula for world peace," Stevens concluded.
Subsequent proceedings
On remand almost two months later, the First Circuit affirmed the entire original district court decision, allowing for arbitration to resume. In September Mitsubishi moved in Bankruptcy Court to vacate the automatic stay that had been in place pending the outcome of the case at the Supreme Court. Soler began an adversary proceeding in bankruptcy court, reiterating its original complaints against the manufacturer. A separate answer to Mitsubishi's motion was filed in October, in which Soler argued that its desperate financial straits prevented it from being "legally or equitably compelled" to return to Tokyo.
Mitsubishi responded by filing in district court to withdraw reference of both actions from bankruptcy court to its own jurisdiction. Soler consented to a stay of those proceedings while the district court considered the motion. In April 1986 that action was removed to district court. After its motion to reconsider was denied, Soler again appealed to the First Circuit.
Coffin and Bownes were again on the panel, this time joined by Juan R. Torruella. They affirmed the district court unanimously, citing res judicata. "Here, Soler failed to raise the issue of its inability to finance the arbitration in Japan before any of the courts involved in the series of proceedings initiated by Mitsubishi's attempt to compel arbitration," Coffin wrote. It had declared bankruptcy before the Supreme Court's certiorari grant, so at all times since then it was aware of the issue.
The first question, then, was whether it had had an adequate opportunity to do so, regardless of whether it actually had. Soler claimed that it could not have done so at the Supreme Court since the record was already fixed. Therefore, it argued, neither there nor on remand could it have done so.
"We are unpersuaded by Soler's argument," Coffin responded, "and view this latest round of litigation as yet another episode in Soler's long series of misguided efforts to avoid arbitration with Mitsubishi at all costs." The dealership had cited no legal basis for why it could not have added the bankruptcy to its record before the Supreme Court, and Coffin could not find anywhere in the record where it had brought it up. As for remand, while it was not uncommon for parties to raise new issues there, "but Soler was content to remain silent and await a second bite at the apple before the bankruptcy court. Soler has offered no compelling argument to justify its silence at this stage of the proceedings, nor can we even conceive of one." He described its behavior as a "'sandbagging' strategy of the type that the doctrine of res judicata is designed to prevent ... This we cannot tolerate."
The second question Coffin described as "more troublesome": did the district court abuse its discretion by lifting the stay without a hearing? The bankruptcy code required one, but the district court had done so simply after reviewing the record. While normally the appeals court would have reversed the district court and ordered a hearing, "given the unique circumstances and history of this case, we cannot fault the district court for determining that the stay should be lifted expeditiously in accordance with the prior orders of the Supreme Court and this court."
"Soler's only colorable argument for maintaining the stay was its inability to finance the Japanese arbitration, precisely the issue it was precluded from raising at such a late date," Coffin wrote. Since it did not, the district court did not need to hold a hearing; there was no other argument.
Subsequent jurisprudence
Two years later, in Shearson/American Express Inc. v. McMahon, the Court built on Mitsubishi Motors, and again overruled a long-standing Second Circuit precedent, holding that statutory claims of securities fraud under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 were also arbitrable.Shearson/American Express Inc. v. McMahon, . Sandra Day O'Connor wrote for the majority that Mitsubishi Motors and its predecessor cases had helped dispel former judicial mistrust of arbitration;McMahon, 482 U.S. 226, 232, O'Connor, J. similarly, it dismissed public-policy arguments in support of the nonarbitrability of Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) actions.McMahon, at 239–242. Blackmun, dissenting this time, claimed that the majority was "in direct contradiction" of his opinion in Mitsubishi Motors, since it had rested on the lack of public policy intentions in the statute at issue rather than doubts about the suitability of the arbitral process.McMahon, at 251, Blackmun, J., dissenting. Two more years later, in 1989, the Court extended the FAA's reach over statutory disputes even further when it overruled Wilko v. Swan completely in Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/American Express Inc., adding claims under the Securities Act of 1933 (effectively, all remaining possible securities fraud claims) to those that could be arbitrated.Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/American Express Inc.,  By the late 1990s McMahon and Rodriguez were being described as the other two components of the "Mitsubishi Trilogy", due to their combined role in opening the doors to arbitration of other statutory claims,Lewton, Robert J.;"Are Mandatory, Binding Arbitration Requirements A Viable Solution For Employers Seeking to Avoid Statutory Employment Discrimination Claims?"; 59 Alb. L. Rev. 991, 1006 (1995-1996). as the Court did with Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) claims in 1991's Gilmer v. Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp..Gilmer v. Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp., .
The Second Circuit was the first lower court to apply Mitsubishi in 1986 when it heard Genesco, Inc. v. T. Kakiuchi & Co., Ltd., a case with many similarities. Genesco, a clothing manufacturer, had brought antitrust claims against both its American supplier of fabric and its eponymous Japanese parent company, alleging they and one of Genesco's employees conspired to destroy it by consistently selling it overpriced and/or low-quality material in violation of RICO and the Robinson–Patman Act, along with tortious interference and fraud claims. The two defendants sought arbitration before the JCAA per their contracts. After the district court stayed the fraud and RICO claims against the American subsidiary, both it and the parent company appealed.Genesco, Inc. v. T. Kakiuchi & Co., Ltd., 815 F. 2d 840 (2nd Cir., 1987).
Richard J. Cardamone wrote for a panel that followed Mitsbushi'''s analysis: first holding the arbitration clause valid, then inquiring into whether the claims came under its scope. Since, as the Mitsubishi majority had found, the alleged bad acts arose from the activities covered by the contract, all save the RICO and tortious interference claims were arbitrable. It told the district court to stay even the RICO claims, however, pending the outcome of McMahon at the Supreme Court (which ruled them arbitrable).
Abandonment of American Safety
Since Mitsubishi had explicitly avoided the question of whether purely domestic antitrust claims were arbitrable, lower courts mostly proceeded with caution. A 1987 Southern District of New York case noted that "the foundations of the American Safety doctrine have been significantly eroded" and speculated that the Supreme Court would likely overrule that case if the question came before them.Gemco Latinoamerica, Inc. v. Seiko Time Corp., 671 F. Supp. 972, 979 (S.D.N.Y., 1987). Four years later, after Rodriguez, William C. Conner, another judge from that district, held that along with the later cases, Mitsubishi should be read to make domestic antitrust claims arbitrable as well;Hough v. Merrill Lynch, 757 F. Supp. 283 (S.D.N.Y., 1991). the Second Circuit affirmed without an opinion.946 F. 2d 883 (2nd Cir., 1991).
An explicit overruling of American Safety at the appellate level came from the Ninth Circuit. A Title VII employment-discrimination case it heard in 1994, Nghiem v. NEC Electronic, Inc., included an antitrust claim among its appeals of an arbitration award. Judge Diarmuid O'Scannlain wrote that while the circuit had followed American Safety since 1984,Lake Communications, Inc. v. ICC Corp., 738 F. 2d 1473 (9th Cir., 1984). the post-Mitsubishi cases, including Gilmer, "the Supreme Court has indeed undermined the reasoning behind [that case]". He noted the Court's later reliance on Mitsubishi for ordering other statutory claims arbitrated and reiterated Blackmun's criticism of the American Safety doctrine. "Given the Court's meticulous step-by-step disembowelment of the American Safety doctrine, this circuit will no longer follow [it]. We hold that Mitsubishi effectively overruled American Safety and its progeny ..."Nghiem v. NEC Electronic Inc., 25 F. 3d 1437 (9th Cir., 1994). The Eleventh Circuit followed suit in 1996, overruling its own precedent to comply with Mitsubishi.Kotam Electronics, Inc. v. JBL Consumer Products, Inc., 93 F. 3d 724 (11th Cir., 1996).
Prospective-waiver dictum in footnote 19
In his 19th footnote, Blackmun had admitted there was in the case a possible reason not to compel arbitration, raised in the federal government's brief: that, since the contract was governed by Swiss law, the arbitration panel could therefore decide to disregard the Sherman Act entirely and consider Soler's claims under that body of law. On the other side, the International Chamber of Commerce had conceded in its amicus brief that that could occur as well, though it considered the possibility unlikely. Blackmun allowed that this was a valid concern but countered that Mitsubishi had already stipulated at oral argument that American law would control the antitrust claims, mooting it in the instant case.Mitsubishi Motors II, 473 U.S. 614, 637n19.
Should that issue actually arise in a future case, Blackmun observed, the proper time to raise it was not prior to the arbitration but afterwards, when the court would be asked to enforce the award. He added that "... in the event the choice-of-forum and choice-of-law clauses operated in tandem as a prospective waiver of a party's right to pursue statutory remedies for antitrust violations, we would have little hesitation in condemning the agreement as against public policy." Several subsequent cases, at the Supreme Court and in the Eleventh Circuit, all in admiralty law, have considered and applied that dictum.
In 1995, the Supreme Court decided Vimar Seguros y Reaseguros, S.A. v. M/V Sky Reefer. Fruit shipped from Morocco to New England via a Panamanian-flagged boat was found by the buyer to have been improperly stored and damaged; the buyer's insurer pursued an in rem action against the ship to recover. The bill of lading contained a clause calling for disputes to be arbitrated in Japan by the Tokyo Maritime Arbitration Commission (TOMAC); the buyer had cited the non-waiver provisions of the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act (COGSA) in opposition. Both the district court and the First CircuitVimar Seguros y Reaseguros, S.A. v. M/V Sky Reefer, 29 F. 3d 727 (1st Cir., 1994). compelled arbitration.Vimar Seguros y Reaseguros, S.A. v. M/V Sky Reefer (Vimar Seguros II), , at 531–532, Kennedy, J.
The petitioner argued that the Japanese Hague Rules, which would govern the arbitration, allowed them to recover less than COGSA would since it released the shipper from liability for the action of hired stevedores. In support they relied on the footnote 19 dictum. Anthony Kennedy, writing for a 7–1 majority, extended it slightly by observing that it was not clear at that point whether TOMAC actually would apply the Hague Rules instead of COGSA, and if it did and Vimar was unsatisfied it could then seek a remedy from American courts during enforcement.Vimar Seguros II, at 539–541.
Only once since then has the Court mentioned it. In 2009's 14 Penn Plaza LLC v. Pyett, it held that a collective bargaining agreement's arbitration clause required members of the signatory union to arbitrate ADEA claims. Clarence Thomas's majority opinion briefly noted in passing that under that dictum, "a substantive waiver of federally protected civil rights will not be upheld."14 Penn Plaza LLC v. Pyett, .
While the Ninth Circuit has said that it does not consider footnote 19's prospective-waiver dictum binding,Simula v. Autoliv, 175 F. 3d 716, 723 (9th Cir., 1999). and indeed seems to resent litigants raising it,Richards v. Lloyd's of London, 135 F. 3d 1289, 1295 (9th Cir., 1998). "Without question this case would be easier to decide if this footnote in Mitsubishi had not been inserted." the Eleventh Circuit has explored it at some length in two recent cases involving disputes between cruise-ship workers and the lines that employ them. In Thomas v. Carnival Corp., it held that an arbitration clause requiring a Philippine national to arbitrate a negligence claim there under Panamanian law, which had no equivalent of the Seamen's Wage Act on which the claim was based, worked in tandem to deny Thomas an opportunity for review by an American court, and was therefore null and void. "... [T]he possibility of such a result would counsel against being deferential in this circumstance," its per curiam opinion said, "as it is exactly the sort that the Supreme Court has described."Thomas v. Carnival Corp., 573 F. 3d 1113, 1120–1124 (11th Cir., 2009).
left|225px|thumb|The Norwegian Dawn, where Lindo worked. Many cases considering footnote 19 have been brought by cruise ship employees|alt=A white ship several stories, seen from off the starboard side of the bow, with "Norwegian Dawn" painted on the side
Two years later, in 2011, the circuit divided sharply over a similar case, Lindo v. NCL (Bahamas) Ltd., where footnote 19 was "hotly disputed."Lindo v. NCL (Bahamas) Ltd., 652 F. 3d 1257, 1266. A Nicaraguan who suffered a back injury on the Norwegian Dawn challenged the Bahamanian-law arbitration mandated by his contract on the same grounds as Thomas. Frank M. Hull wrote a lengthy opinion that reviewed in detail all relevant case law up to ThomasLindo, 1260–1275. and heavily criticized it. Thomas, Hull wrote, ignored Vimar and had ignored circuit precedent that under the Convention, arbitration clauses could only be voided prior to the process for the same general grounds as contracts anywhere. It also failed to properly apply the Convention, rendering its public-policy defense in error. Footnote 19, she wrote, was "indisputably dicta".Lindo, 1277–1280.
Rosemary Barkett, a member of the original Thomas panel, dissented. "I do not believe that Lindo must needlessly wait until after arbitration to raise his public policy argument," she wrote. The majority had read the Convention too narrowly, and footnote 19, far from being dicta, "was critical to the Court's reasoning and the outcome of the case. Merely because the Court did not find a prospective waiver there does not make that language—forming part of the Court's core reasoning—dicta." If it were, she observed, the Court would have said so in Vimar and Pyett.Lindo, at 1288, 1294.
She accused her colleagues of "effectively transform[ing] the enforcement of international arbitration agreements into the top U.S. public policy" by treating footnote 19 as dicta. "[T]here is nothing to suggest that the political branches ever intended such a result ... I believe the Supreme Court meant what it said in Mitsubishi."Lindo, 1297.
Motor Vehicle Franchise Contract Arbitration Fairness Act
In the wake of the decision, more automobile manufacturers began putting arbitration clauses in their contracts, and courts began enforcing them. Dealers opposed them, sometimes in court, since the ADDCA had been passed to give them a judicial forum for those disputes, as its popular name implied. Some took refuge in state laws regulating motor vehicle franchising that explicitly barred the enforcement of arbitration clauses. But in 1990 the Fourth Circuit struck that provision of Virginia's Motor Vehicle Dealer Licensing Act down as incompatible with the FAA under Southland Corp. v. Keating and the Supreme Court's other arbitration jurisprudence.Saturn Distribution Corp. v. Williams, 905 F.2d 719 (4th Cir., 1990).
Dealers had lobbied Congress and the state legislatures for many years for ADDCA and its corresponding state statutes, through the National Automobile Dealers Association (NADA) and other groups, and saw the court holdings as an assault on the protections they had gained. They began lobbying Congress for an exception to the FAA that would make arbitration of such disputes voluntary.Carrington, Paul D.; Self-Deregulation, The "National Policy" of the Supreme Court; 3 N.L.J. 259, 271; Winter 2002/2003. Retrieved April 15, 2012. Early in the 21st century, the 107th Congress considered the Motor Vehicle Franchise Contract Arbitration Fairness Act (MVFCAFA), which would add new language to the ADDCA stating that "Whenever a motor vehicle franchise contract provides for the use of arbitration to resolve a controversy arising out
of or relating to the contract, arbitration may be used to settle such controversy only if after such controversy arises
both parties consent in writing to use arbitration to settle such controversy" and requiring "a written explanation
of the factual and legal basis for the award."
Referring to Mitsubishi, "[t]he Supreme Court was not persuaded by the argument that only contractual disputes, not statutory rights, should be determined through mandatory binding arbitration even when the claims presented are complex and carry as many public policy implications as a claim under the Sherman Act," the Senate Judiciary Committee said in its report on the bill. After recounting some unsatisfactory dealer experiences with arbitration, it concluded that "[i]t is clear that dealers are being required to forfeit important rights and remedies afforded by [s]tate law as a condition of obtaining or renewing their motor vehicle franchise contracts" and that due to Mitsubishi and the other similar cases, it was necessary for Congress to create an exception to the FAA. A minority report criticized the MVFCAFA as "revers[ing] a long-standing congressional policy favoring arbitration in a manner that undermines the sanctity of contract." According to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce only a small fraction of dealers had franchise agreements with predispute arbitration clauses that would have been negated; some consumer groups like Public Citizen which had been lobbying against mandatory predispute arbitration clauses in consumer adhesion contracts actually opposed the MVFCAFA on the grounds that such clauses were far more common in contracts between dealers and consumers.
It was passed as a rider on that year's Justice Department appropriations bill,21st Century Department of Justice Appropriations Authorization Act, P.L. 107-273, Nov. 2, 2002, sec. 11028, 116 Stat. 1758 (). and went into effect later in the year after President George W. Bush signed it into law. "The three-paragraph Act is a landmark," Franchise Law Journal commented. "For the first time, a special-interest exemption to the FAA has become law."
In 2010, two associates at Nelson Mullins Riley & Scarborough in South Carolina reviewed how the MVFCAFA had been interpreted by the courts in the intervening eight years. "At first blush, [it] appeared to be a big win for automobile dealers," they observed. But courts had construed it narrowly, as applicable only to the actual franchise agreement and not any separate dealer-manufacturer agreements even where the disputed conduct touched on issues referenced in the franchise agreement. Most cases had thus turned on whether contract law in the state of the dispute allowed the separate agreement to be treated as incorporated by reference into the franchise agreement. Courts had also rejected in most cases a reading of the law as intended to protect dealers, holding that it may not be used by them to compel arbitration with the manufacturer when it would prefer to litigate. "Despite the Congressional attempt to tip the balance of power between dealers and manufacturers in favor of dealers, courts have allowed manufacturers to retain their ability to compel arbitration in many of the disputes that arise between dealers and manufacturers," they concluded.
Analysis and commentary
Commentators have ascribed much importance to Mitsubishi Motors, calling it "landmark"Donovan, Donald F. and Greenawalt, Alexander K.A.; "Mitsubishi After Twenty Years: Mandatory Rules before Courts and International Arbitrators"; from Pervasive Problems in International Arbitration 11, 2006; Loukas Mistelis & Julian D.M. Lew eds., Kluwer, 2006, p. 14. Retrieved April 16, 2012. and "significant".Carbonneau, Thomas; "The Reception of Arbitration in U.S. Law", 40 Me. L. Rev. 263, 271 (1988). Retrieved April 16, 2012. It has been discussed in both the context of domestic and international arbitration.
In the former area, critics of the increased role of arbitration in dispute resolution have objected to it strongly. Duke law professor Paul Carrington has complained that by denying the public policy behind the Sherman Act, the Court effectively repealed the treble-damages provision since there is no corresponding provision in Japanese competition law. Likewise, later decisions holding that the provisions of both the FAA and ADDCA can be satisfied by arbitration allow an older statute to effectively repeal a later one. "The Court has not explained the jurisprudence reflected in this intellectual gymnastic."
Ramona Lampley, a Wake Forest visiting professor who has since returned to private practice, calls the Mitsubishi trilogy the "vindication of statutory rights" trilogy. "Mitsubishi'' laid the cornerstone for the Court's sheltered fostering of arbitration agreements," she writes. However, "in a case intended to cast arbitration, even of remedial statutes, on equal or more favorable footing as the judicial forum, the Court crafted language that would soon give rise to a method for invalidating arbitration agreements" when litigants in later class actions were able to invalidate arbitration clauses by successfully questioning whether the process would vindicate their statutory rights.Lampley, Ramona L.; '"Is Arbitration Under Attack? Exploring the Recent Judicial Skepticism of the Class Action Waiver And Innovative Solutions to the Unsettled Legal Landscape", 40 J.L.P.P. 477, 493 (2009); retrieved April 16, 2012.
Within the international-arbitration context, commentators have applauded the Court's support for the process but criticized its reasoning. Laurence Smith, a law student at Penn, criticizes the decision as an "unprincipled" route to the proper result Instead of the balancing test the Court used, he recommends a two-prong test based on the extraterritorial acceptance of U.S. antitrust law and the provisions of the Convention.
Another writer gladdened to see more support for international arbitration, Thomas Carbonneau, nevertheless found much to agree with in Stevens' dissent. "[T]here is much that is unfortunate about [the majority]'s reasoning and methodology," he wrote. "[It] is misguided; it advances a distorted and disproportionate view of arbitration." Regulatory claims, he said, were by design best left to national courts, criticizing the Court's "anational" approach.
He also found footnote 19 to be a "careless afterthought ... it is unlikely that such an award would ever come to the United States for enforcement." Other commentators have found that it either contradicts itself or the rest of the opinion, and/or offers no guidance to courts faced with such a case.Donovan and Greenawalt, 24–25.Guzman, Andrew; "Arbitrator Liability: Reconciling Arbitration and Mandatory Rules"; 49 Duke L. J. 1279, 1297 (2000). Retrieved April 16, 2012.
See also
Arbitration case law in the United States
List of abrogated U.S. Supreme Court decisions
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 473
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
References
External links
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States forum selection case law
Category:Abrogated United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:Mitsubishi
Category:Guaynabo, Puerto Rico
Category:Economic history of Puerto Rico
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Mobile Life Insurance Co. v. Brame" ==> """
Mobile Life Insurance Company v. Brame, 95 U.S. 754 (1877), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the remedies available under the Louisiana code for manslaughter were not available under the common law.
Statutes in question
The Revised Civil Code of Louisiana contains the following articles:
ART. 2314. Every act whatever of man that causes damage to another, obliges him by whose fault it happened to repair it; the right of this action shall survive, in case of death, in favor of the minor children and widow of the deceased, or either of them, and in default of these, in favor of the surviving father or mother, or either of them, for the space of one year from the death.
ART. 2316. Every person is responsible for the damage he occasions, not merely by his act, but by his negligence, his imprudence, or his want of skill.
ART. 2324. He who causes another person to do an unlawful act, or assists or encourages in the commission of it, is answerable in solido with that person for the damage caused by such act.
External links
Category:1877 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Mobile v. Bolden" ==> """
Mobile v. Bolden, 446 U.S. 55 (1980), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that disproportionate effects alone, absent purposeful discrimination, are insufficient to establish a claim of racial discrimination affecting voting.. 
In Gomillion v. Lightfoot (1960), which challenged new city boundaries that excluded virtually all black voters from Tuskegee, Alabama, the court had held that creating electoral districts which disenfranchised blacks violated the Fifteenth Amendment.. It did not as readily distinguish between intent and results as it would in Mobile.
 Background 
In 1911 the state legislature enacted a three-member city commission form of government for the city of Mobile, Alabama. With members elected at-large, the commission exercised all legislative, executive and administrative power. Since the entire city voted for each Commissioner, the white majority generally controlled the elections. At the time both African Americans and poor whites were effectively disenfranchised by practices of the 1901 state constitution.
After African Americans regained the power to register and vote through passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, they were discouraged by being unable to elect candidates of their choice to the city commission. The financial and strategic demands for citywide elections made it difficult for them to enter the race, and the white majority tended to support white candidates, particularly as conservatives moved into the Republican Party. African Americans supported Democratic Party candidates.
In the late 1970s, a class-action suit was filed on behalf of all the city's black residents against the city and all three Commissioners by three young civil rights lawyers in Mobile, J.U. Blacksher, Larry Menefee and Gregory B. Stein. They received assistance from Edward Still of Birmingham and NAACP Legal Defense attorneys Jack Greenberg, James W. Nabrit III and Charles E. Williams. Their complaint alleged that the city's electoral system violated the Fourteenth and Fifteenth amendments and Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, among other laws.Keith Nicholls, "Politics and Civil Rights in Post-World War II Mobile" in Thomason, Michael,  Mobile: the New History of Alabama's first city (Tuscaloosa, University of Alabama Press 2001)  pp. 269-270 The city hired C.B. Arendall, Jr, who assisted David A. Bagwell and S.R. Sheppard of the city's legal Department. U.S. District Judge Virgil Pittman found for the city's black residents and the Court of Appeals affirmed. The form of city government was subsequently changed. (See below.)
The Supreme Court agreed to examine the issues to determine whether this at-large system violated Amendments Fourteen or Fifteen, or the Voting Rights Act.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court ruled 6-3 for the city of Mobile. In his plurality opinion, Justice Stewart concluded that the relevant language of the Voting Rights Act paralleled that of the Fifteenth Amendment. Stewart analyzed the Fifteenth Amendment claim, citing "the District Court's findings of fact, unquestioned on appeal, [that] make clear that Negroes register and vote in Mobile 'without hindrance,' and that there are no official obstacles in the way of Negroes who wish to become candidates for election to the Commission."Bolden, 446 U.S. at 73 In rejecting the Fifteenth Amendment claims, he held that "action by a State that is racially neutral on its face violates the Fifteenth Amendment only if motivated by a discriminatory purpose," which the District Court had found no evidence for.Bolden, 446 U.S. at 62.
The Court similarly rejected the Fourteenth Amendment claims and Justice Marshall's dissenting opinion in favor of finding such claims, stating, "Whatever appeal the dissenting opinion's view may have as a matter of political theory, it is not the law. The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment does not require proportional representation as an imperative of political organization."Bolden, 446 U.S. at 76-77. Justice Blackmun concurred in the result, but believed the District Court had exceeded its discretion in its order for remedial action, believing the District Court had failed to consider alternative remedies. Justice Stevens concurred in the judgment concerning the constitutionality of Mobile's system, but applied a slightly different standard in his concurring opinion.
The case somewhat limited the court's previous holding in Gomillion.
Result
The Supreme Court remanded the case to the lower court for settlement. U.S. District Judge Virgil Pittman held a second hearing beginning May 1981, by which time the U.S. Department of Justice's Civil Rights Division also intervened on behalf of the plaintiffs, and the law firm of Hand, Arendall, Bedsole, Greaves, and Johnston represented the city. A "smoking gun" letter had been discovered and admitted into evidence—written by Mobile lawyer and Congressman Frederick G. Bromberg to the Alabama legislature in 1909, it advocated the at-large system in order to prevent blacks from holding office. The district court proposed three single-member districts, noting that executive functions could not readily be separated among positions elected in this system. In addition, in this period Congress strengthened Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act with amendments changing the prohibition against "discriminatory intent" to creation of "discriminatory results" standard for use in evaluation of forms of government or electoral practices.
In 1985 Mobile's state legislators proposed a mayor-council form of government for the city, consisting of seven members to be elected from single-member districts, with the mayor to be elected at-large. By that time, Mobile was the last major city in Alabama to retain a city commission form of government. This change was approved by 72% of state voters, including formerly excluded African Americans and poor whites. The change to single-member districts enabled a wider range of candidates to enter politics at the local level. The three African Americans elected to the council that fall became the first blacks to hold city office since Reconstruction. Since the change, African Americans and women have won election to the Mobile city government.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fifteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:History of Mobile, Alabama
"""

From "Mohawk Industries, Inc. v. Carpenter" ==> """
Mohawk Industries, Inc. v. Carpenter, 558 U.S. 100 (2009), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that disclosure orders adverse to attorney–client privilege do not qualify for immediate appeal under the collateral order doctrine..
This opinion is notable, as being the first Supreme Court opinion authored by Justice Sonia Sotomayor.  In addition, this is the first time a Supreme Court opinion used the term "undocumented immigrant" - the term "illegal immigrant" having appeared in a dozen earlier opinions.
 Background 
Norman Carpenter, a Mohawk shift supervisor, had e-mailed Mohawk’s human resources department, claiming that the company was employing undocumented immigrants.  Carpenter was directed to meet with a lawyer representing the company, who allegedly pressured Carpenter to recant his statements.  Carpenter alleged that he was terminated when he failed to do so.
Carpenter filed suit in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, which granted his motion to compel Mohawk to produce information regarding Carpenter’s meeting with the Mohawk lawyer, finding that the company had waived the privilege of attorney–client confidentiality.  The U.S. Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit affirmed, and the U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve a conflict amongst the circuit courts of appeals.
 Question presented 
Do disclosure orders adverse to the attorney–client privilege qualify for immediate appeal under the collateral order doctrine?
 Opinion of the Court 
Under Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp.,. a party may immediately appeal a district court order if it: 1) conclusively determines the disputed issue; 2) resolves an important issue completely separate from the merits of the action; and 3) is effectively unreviewable on appeal from a final judgment.
The Court agreed with the Court of Appeals, that the third prong of the Cohen requirements is not met, because there are adequate remedies available upon an appeal from a final judgment where there was a discovery order adverse to attorney–client privilege.  Although the Court acknowledged the importance of the attorney–client privilege, it reasoned that there are many other important rights that litigants must wait to vindicate until after the entry of final judgment.  Appellate courts can remedy improper disclosure of privileged materials the same way erroneous evidentiary rulings are remedied: by vacating judgment and remanding the matter back to the district court for a new trial in which the protected material and its fruits are excluded.
The Court also reasoned that the possibility of a disclosure order and a delayed potential appeal is unlikely to interfere with attorney–client communications.
The Court noted that parties subject to an adverse disclosure order regarding attorney–client privilege have other options besides a collateral order appeal, such as the certification and acceptance of an interlocutory appeal under 28 U.S.C. Section 1292(b), petitioning for a writ of mandamus, or by defying the order and incurring court-imposed sanctions such as a contempt of court citation which is immediately appealable.
The Court predicted that including privilege-related disclosure orders within the category of collateral orders would not justify the institutional cost, because it would delay the resolution of cases in the district courts and would unnecessarily burden the Courts of Appeals.
The collateral order doctrine does not extend to disclosure orders adverse to the attorney–client privilege.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States attorney–client privilege case law
"""

From "Molina-Martinez v. United States" ==> """
Molina-Martinez v. United States, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit's reliance on a requirement that defendants show "additional evidence" to show substantial harm arising from incorrect sentencing guidelines is impermissible.
Background
Saul Molina-Martinez was convicted of aggravated burglary in 2002 and again in 2011. He was arrested in 2012 at a border checkpoint in Texas and later pleaded guilty to being unlawfully present in the United States after being deported for an aggravated felony. The Probation Office prepared a presentence report, as required by law, for Molina-Martinez which recommended a sentence of between 77 and 96 months in prison.
Presentencing reports recommend a sentence by using an elaborate set of rules to evaluate the criminal history of the defendant and the severity of the crimes, known as the offense level. The recommended sentence for Molina-Martinez was based upon a mistake in calculating his offense level which resulted in a higher recommended sentence. The Probation Office gave Molina-Martinez an offense level of 21 points, with 18 of those points being based upon his criminal history. Of those 18 points, 11 were from five aggravated burglary convictions handed down on the same day. The Probation Office treated them as separate convictions, but because the sentencing for those five convictions occurred on the same day, the guidelines dictate that they be treated as one conviction, not separately.USSG §4A1.2(a)(2) (Nov. 2012) Calculated correctly, the convictions would have resulted in 5 points rather than 11, dropping the recommended sentence range to 70 to 87 months.
No one noticed this error at trial, and the judge sentenced Molina-Martinez to 77 months in prison, the minimum recommended by the incorrect guidelines. On appeal, Molina-Martinez raised the calculation error for the first time. Because Molina-Martinez's lawyer did not object at trial, Molina-Martinez was required to show that the mistake was not a harmless error but impacted his substantial rights.Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 52 The court of appeals ruled against Molina-Martinez stating that an incorrect sentencing range in and of itself is not sufficient to show substantial harm. Because of disagreement among the courts of appeals on how to decide errors in sentencing reports, the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Oral arguments
Arguing for Molina-Martinez, Timothy Crooks relied on the court's decision in Peugh v. United States which noted the importance of federal sentencing guidelines in the sentencing of defendants. Crooks argued that "the natural effect of an erroneously high Guideline range is to skew a defendant’s sentence higher than it would have been under the correct range."Oral arguments,  Justices Scalia and Alito questioned Crooks as to how this would shift the burden from the defendant to the prosecution on appeal. Crooks responded by pointing out that the effect of the guidelines is prejudicial and that the defendant on appeal would need to show more than prejudice to succeed.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|alt=Justice Anthony Kennedy in his robes|Justice Kennedy delivered the opinion of the Court
In a 6-2 decision authored by Justice Kennedy the Court ruled that courts may not have rigid requirements for additional evidence to hear a case if the sentencing guidelines were in error.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:United States sentencing case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "Monasky v. Taglieri" ==> """
Monasky v. Taglieri, 589 U.S. ___ (2020), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the court held that a child's "habitual residence" under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction should be determined based on the totality of the circumstances specific to the case, and should not be based on categorial requirements (e.g. such as an agreement between the parents)..
This case is notable as the fourth case heard by the Supreme Court concerning the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction. Previously, this case was only the second Hague International Child Abduction case heard en banc in history (by the entire panel of judges because of its exceptional public importance) by a US Court of Appeals.
Monasky was also the first case in which the United States Supreme Court substantively addressed the meaning of the definition of "habitual residence" as contemplated by The Hague Convention of 25 October 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.
 Background 
 Case history 
After Michelle Monasky and Domenico Taglieri met and married in the United States, they moved to Italy in 2013 due to Taglieri’s employment. Monasky became pregnant in mid-2014 while her marriage was already experiencing difficulties, including alleged incidents of domestic violence against her (which continued through her pregnancy and afterward, she claims). Shortly before their daughter was born, Monasky informed Taglieri that she would not tolerate his abusive behavior any further and that she intended to return to the US with their child as soon as she was physically able. After yet another altercation between the spouses in late March 2015, Monasky went to the Italian police with her daughter and was placed in a domestic violence safe house. As soon as she was able to obtain a US passport for her daughter, Monasky left Italy with her daughter for Ohio. 
 Legal issues 
There were two circuit-split issues presented in Monasky v. Taglieri:
1) whether the standard on appeal is the highly deferential “clear error” review (if habitual residence is seen as a truly and only a factual question) or “de novo” (if it is really a mixed question of law and fact, or otherwise an issue of “ultimate fact”); and,
2) whether the “shared parental intent” standard for determining an infant’s habitual residence can be proven when the parents never agreed or had a meeting of the minds on where the infant should be raised.
 In lower courts 
Taglieri petitioned an Italian court for custody of the child. In Monasky's absence, the court ruled in his favour. He then requested an order from a District Court that Monasky return the child to Italy, which was also granted. Monasky applied for stays from both the Sixth Circuit and Supreme Court, but when both were denied she complied.
A three-judge panel of the Sixth Circuit upheld the lower court's ruling, as did the full en banc Circuit.
 At the Supreme Court 
The Supreme Court held oral arguments on December 11, 2019. Monasky was represented by Amir Tayrani, an attorney for Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher. Taglieri was represented by Andrew Pincus, an attorney for Mayer Brown.
 Majority opinion 
On February 25, 2020, the Supreme Court affirmed the ruling by the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals. Writing for the court, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg noted that a child's "habitual residence" (as the term is used by the Hague Convention) should be determined by the totality of the circumstances specific to each individual case, not on categorical requirements such as an actual agreement between the parents. Ginsburg noted that the Hague Convention does not define "habitual residence" and that courts should conduct a fact-driven inquiry based on the unique circumstances of each case and common sense, which is how courts in other countries have enforced it. In addition, Ginsburg noted that Monasky's argument that an actual agreement between the parties was necessary to determine "habitual residence" was unpersuasive and would lead to problems in adjudicating custody cases. The majority opinion also held that the trial court's determination of habitual-residence is a mixed question of law and fact, and should be judged on appeal only by a clear error standard.
 Concurrence 
 Thomas 
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote an opinion concurring in part with the majority opinion and concurring with the judgment. He agreed with Ginsburg that an actual agreement is not necessary to determine habitual residence and agreed that the habitual-residence inquiry is fact-specific. However, he argues that the decision should be grounded firmly in the text of the treaty itself and that less weight should have been given to how other countries' courts have interpreted the term "habitual residence".
 Alito 
Justice Samuel Alito wrote an opinion concurring in part with the majority opinion and concurring with the judgment. Like Thomas, Alito agreed with Ginsburg that an actual agreement is not necessary to determine habitual residence and agreed that the habitual-residence inquiry is fact-specific. He also agreed with Thomas's opinion that the decision should be grounded in the text of the treaty and that the interpretations of the country's courts is not necessary. In addition, Alito argues that the question of "habitual residence" is not a pure question of fact and notes that the standard of review of appeal should be based on abuse of discretion, not clear error as was stated in the majority opinion.
See also
Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
References
External links
 Supreme Court docket for Monasky v. Taglieri (No. 18-935)
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Child custody
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States family case law
Category:Italy–United States relations
"""

From "Moncrieffe v. Holder" ==> """
Moncrieffe v. Holder, 569 U.S. 184 (2013), is a United States Supreme Court decision in which the court ruled in a 7–2 decision that "social sharing of a small amount of marijuana" by a legal immigrant does not constitute aggravated felony and so does not require mandatory deportation..
Background
Adrian Moncrieffe is a Jamaican national who has lived in the United States since he moved there in 1984 at the age of three. In 2008 he was stopped by police in Georgia for a traffic violation when they found 1.3 grams of marijuana in his car. Moncrieffe pleaded guilty to the charge of marijuana possession with intent to distribute and agreed to a deal with no jail time. Two years later, immigration officials discovered the arrest and decided to detain and finally deport him, as drug trafficking charge is treated as an aggravated felony under immigration policies. After Moncrieffe lost his challenge in an administrative case, he was deported back to Jamaica.
Georgia's marijuana law, like in most other states, defines possession with intent to distribute marijuana for no remuneration and distributing a small amount of marijuana charge under the same statute, which made his case.  Under federal marijuana law, the prior charge is treated as a possession case if it involves a small amount of marijuana, which cleared Moncrieffe from having committing an aggravated felony of drug trafficking under immigration law.
The Fifth Circuit Court upheld the deportation order, ruling that as the prosecution was not required to prove the amount of marijuana involved, the conviction amounted to a felony under federal law. The Supreme Court granted writ of certiorari to clear up confusion in the lower courts. The federal government argued that as the distinction based on the amount of marijuana possessed was a sentencing and not a conviction issue and so did not affect the deportation order.
 Decision 
Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor, writing for the majority, agreed with Moncrieffe's lawyers that he was still eligible for the exception for possession of small amounts of marijuana under federal law. He would thus be able to appeal his deportation with immigration officials.
 See also 
 2012 term United States Supreme Court opinions of Sonia Sotomayor
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:2013 in cannabis
Category:Cannabis law reform in the United States
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:Cannabis in Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Monell v. Department of Social Services of the City of New York" ==> """
Monell v. Department of Social Services, 436 U.S. 658 (1978), is an opinion given by the United States Supreme Court in which the Court overruled Monroe v. Pape by holding that a local government is a "person" subject to suit under Section 1983 of Title 42 of the United States Code: Civil action for deprivation of rights.. Additionally, the Court held that §1983 claims against municipal entities must be based on implementation of a policy or custom..
Origins
The case began in July 1971 as a challenge to the New York City Board of Education's forced maternity leave policies. Monell was a part of a class of women employees of the Dept. of Social Services and Board of Education of the city of New York who were compelled to take maternity leave before such leaves were required for medical reasons. The women sued the Dept. and its Commissioner, the Board and its Chancellor, and the city of New York and its Mayor. The District Court found that petitioners' constitutional rights had been violated, but ruled that petitioners' claims for injunctive relief were mooted by a supervening change in the official maternity leave policy, and that under Monroe v. Pape, petitioners were barred recovering back pay from the city. The Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed. The Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari to consider whether local governmental officials and/or local independent school boards are "persons" within the meaning of § 1983 when equitable relief in the nature of back pay is sought against them in their official capacities.
Following the Supreme Court decision holding that municipalities were liable under §1983, the city settled for $375,500, to be divided among all women employees placed on forced maternity leave from July 1968 to the time of the case being filed. The city increased the money available for compensations to $11 million after an unexpectedly large response from women to notices announcing the settlement. The claims were paid in late 1981.
Analysis
First, the Court undertook a fresh review of the legislative history of the Civil Rights Act of 1871, now codified as 42 U.S.C. §1983 that Monroe v. Pape relied upon in holding that municipal entities were not "persons" subject to §1983. The Court examined the vote on Section 1 of § 1983, (2) the Sherman Amendment and its vote, (3) the text and vote on the first conference report, and (4) the text and vote on the second conference report. The Court found that Congress did intend for municipal entities to be included among those "persons" to whom § 1983 applies, and that Congress at this time would not have thought the statute unconstitutional as applied to local governments. The Court wrote that the Monroe Court misinterpreted the meaning of §1983, and that were §1983 unconstitutional as applied to municipal entities, it would also be unconstitutional as applied to municipal officers. The Court noted that 1871 Congress clearly intended §1983 to apply to such officers and agreed that they could be subject to liability under §1983, and that the Act was also clearly intended to provide a remedy against all forms of official violation of constitutional rights.Monell, 436 U.S. at 663–69.
Second, in overruling Monroe v. Pape, the Court considered that Monroe departed from prior practice insofar as it completely immunized municipal entities from liability under §1983. Reasoning that there was no principled distinction between school boards and other municipal entities, the Court found that its many cases that held school boards liable were inconsistent with Monroe, and were a further indication that Monroe should be overruled. The Court wrote that immunizing school boards against liability under §1983 would be contrary to instances where Congress refused to immunize school boards from federal jurisdiction under §1983, and that municipalities could not have arranged their affairs so as to be able to violate constitutional rights indefinitely, and therefore could not have a reliance interest in absolute immunity.Monell, 436 U.S. at 694–700.
Third, the Court, in analyzing the legislative history, found that Congress did not intend for a municipality to by held liable under §1983 solely because it employed a tortfeasor, and that therefore a local government could not be held liable under respondeat superior.Monell, 436 U.S. at 690–94.
The court reasoned that since there was no clear statement in the legislative history justifying the excluding municipalities as "persons" under §1983, such entities could be sued directly under §1983 for policies or customs that violated the U.S. Constitution.Monell, 436 U.S. at 701.
Holding
The United States Supreme Court held that a local government is a "person" that can be sued under Section 1983 of Title 42 of the United States Code: civil action for deprivation of rights. The Court, however, required that a §1983 claim against a municipal entity be based on the implementation or execution of a "a policy statement, ordinance, regulation, or decision officially adopted and promulgated by that party's officers".Monell, 436 U.S. at 690.  Additionally, the Court held that municipal entities "may be sued for constitutional deprivations visited pursuant to governmental 'custom' even though such a custom has not received formal approval through the body's official decisionmaking channels".Monell, 436 U.S. at 690–91. Local governments may not, however, be sued under Section 1983 for an injury solely by its employees or agents–in other words, a municipality cannot be held liable under Section 1983 on a respondeat superior theory. Justice Brennan drafted the majority opinion.Monell, 436 U.S. at 660.
Concurrence
Justice Powell was prompted to write by "the gravity of overruling part of so important a decision". Powell noted that the considerations of stare decisis operated in both directions in this case, and that this case was different than the usual case where the Court is asked to overrule a precedent, reasoning that on the one hand, there are cases ruling that municipal entities are not "persons" under the statute, but on the other hand cases holding school boards liable. Powell also wrote that there were still substantial line-drawing issues regarding what constitutes a policy or custom.Monell, 436 U.S. at 704–14.
Dissent
Justice Rehnquist dissented, arguing that adequate justification for overruling Monroe'''s interpretation of §1983's legislative history did not exist. Noting that Congress did not amend §1983 after Monroe, Rehnquist wrote that the Court should not overrule the earlier decision unless it was beyond a doubt that the Monroe Court made a mistake, and that at most the evidence of such a mistake in earlier interpretation of the legislative history was unclear.Monell, 436 U.S. at 714.
Arguments made by the parties
In her brief for certiorari, Monell argued that (1) a school board is a "person" within the meaning of §1983; (2) an official withholding wages in violation of the constitution can be compelled to provide back pay under §1983; (3) a district court can award monetary relief in a §1983 action for injury sustained between filing the complaint and the granting of final injunctive relief.Petitioner's Brief, Monell v. Department of Social Services, 436 U.S. 658 (1978). File Date: 5/11/1977. 87 pp. Term Year: 1976. In the reply brief, Petitioners argued that (1) the existence of immunity based on the good faith of the policy at issue was not before the Court; and (2) that relief was authorized against the Board of Education.Petitioner's Reply Brief, Monell v. Department of Social Services, 436 U.S. 658 (1978).  File Date: 10/28/1977. 21 pp. Term Year: 1976.
Amici for the Petitioners included the National Education Association and the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights.Amicus Brief, Monell v. Department of Social Services, 436 U.S. 658 (1978). File Date: 5/11/1977. 71 pp. Term Year: 1976.
In its brief against certiorari, the City argued that both stare decisis and legislative history supported upholding Monell. Further, the City argued that the School Board should be treated as another other municipal entity for the purposes of §1983 liability, and that therefore damages against any municipal entity should not be permitted here.Respondent's Brief, Monell v. Department of Social Services, 436 U.S. 658 (1978). File Date: 7/12/1977. 42 pp. Term Year: 1976. In its reply brief against certiorari, the City argued that retroactive application of Title VII to allow damages would "operate unjustly" and that their maternity leave policies were "adopted with the most laudatory motives" to "protect women employees and their unborn children", no matter "how unreasonable or arbitrary they might seem by today's rapidly evolving standards". Regarding the issue of §1983 liability, the City noted that it approved of the analysis in the Court of Appeals decision, and that "[a]ny other result than that reached here on these issues would render virtually meaningless this Court's decision in Monroe v. Pape."Respondent's Reply Brief, Monell v. Department of Social Services, 436 U.S. 658 (1978).  File Date: 12/3/1976. 14 pp. Term Year: 1976.
Significance
This resolution created a precedent that for the first time established local government monetary accountability for unconstitutional acts and created the right to obtain damages from municipalities in such cases. This accountability is a legal doctrine known as Monell liability that has been further developed by subsequent case law.Rodney A. Smolla, 2 Federal Civil Rights Acts (3d ed.), §14
Subsequent case law
The Court's holding means that liability for an individual defendant sued under §1983, who can be liable for any constitutional violation (absent immunities), even if the conduct is unauthorized or a one-off incident,  is very different from liability for municipal entities, who can be sued under §1983 only pursuant to a policy or custom. This can mean either an affirmative policy or custom or a policy by omission.Rodney A. Smolla, 2 Federal Civil Rights Acts (3d ed.), §14:16. In subsequent cases, the Court defined what constituted a policy or custom for purposes of Monell liability.
In Pembaur v. City of Cincinnati, the Court held that a single decision made by municipal policy maker can establish policy sufficient for Monell liability.Pembaur v. City of Cincinnati, 475 U.S. 469 (1986) In determining who is a municipal policy maker in City of St. Louis v. Praprotnik (1988), the Court held that if an official has final policy-making authority and is responsible under state law for making policy in that area of city's business, he or she is a municipal policy-maker.City of St. Louis v. Praprotnick, 485 U.S. 112 (1988)
Regarding policies of omission, the Court held in City of Canton v. Harris that a municipality can be liable for a failure to train its employees when this failure constitutes a deliberate indifference to the person whose rights were violated.. The same standard of deliberate indifference applies to failure to screen employees.. In Board of Commissioners of Bryan County v. Brown, the Court held that a municipality can be liable for failure to screen if it is deliberately indifferent to the fact that the people the municipality was hiring were the kind of people with who would predictably commit this type of constitutional violation.
Other U.S. Supreme Court cases analyzing Monell
 Connick v. Thompson, 563 U.S. 51 (2011)
 L.A. County v. Humphries, 562 U.S. 29 (2010)
 McMillian v. Monroe County, 520 U.S. 781 (1997)
 Jett v. Dallas Indep. Sch. Dist., 491 U.S. 701 (1989)
 Will v. Michigan Dep't of State Police, 491 U.S. 58 (1989)
 Springfield v. Kibbe, 480 U.S. 257 (1987)
 Oklahoma City v. Tuttle, 471 U.S. 808 (1985)
 Brandon v. Holt, 469 U.S. 464 (1985)
 Newport v. Fact Concerts, Inc., 453 U.S. 247 (1981)
 Owen v. Independence, 445 U.S. 622 (1980)
 Quern v. Jordan, 440 U.S. 332 (1979)
 Hutto v. Finney, 437 U.S. 678 (1978)
Scholarship discussing Monell
Treatises
 Rodney A. Smolla, Deprivation of Rights Under Color of Law: § 1983, Bivens Actions, and Related Issues Erwin Chemerinsky, Federal Jurisduction (7th edition 2016)
 Stuart M. Speiser, Charles F. Krause, Alfred W. Gans, Monique C. M. Leahy Contributing Editor, American Law of Torts, Strict Liability in Tort and Related Remedies; Intentional TortsLaw Review articles
 David  Achtenberg, Taking History Seriously: Municipal Liability Under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and the Debate Over Respondeat Superior, 73 Fordham L. Rev. 2183 (2005)
 Susan Bandes, Introduction: The Emperor's New Clothes, 48 DePaul L. Rev. 619 (1999)
 Susan Bandes, Monell, Parratt, Daniels, and Davidson: Distinguishing a Custom or Policy from a Random, Unauthorized Act, 72 Iowa L. Rev. 101 (1986)
 Jack Beermann, Municipal Responsibility for Constitutional Torts, 48 DePaul L. Rev. 627 (1999)
 Karen Blum, Municipal Liability, 48 DePaul L. Rev. 687 (1999)
 George Brown, Municipal Liability under § 1983 and the Ambiguities of Burger Court Federalism, 27 B.C.L.Rev. 883 (1986)	 
 Mark Brown, The Failure of Fault Under § 1983: Municipal Liability for State Law Enforcement, 84 Cornell L. Rev. 1503 (1999)
 Mark Brown, Correlating Municipal Liability and Official Immunity Under § 1983, 1989 U.Ill.L.Rev. 625 (1989)
 Mark Brown, Accountability in Government and § 1983, 25 U.Mich.J.L. Ref. 53 (1991)
 Oscar Chase & Arlo Monell, Monell: The Story Behind the Landmark, 31 Urb. Law. 491 (1999)
 Douglas Colbert, Bifurcation of Civil Rights Defendants: Undermining Monellin Police Brutality Cases, 44 Hastings L.J. 499 (1993)
 Steven Cushman, Municipal Liability under § 1983: Toward a New Definition of Municipal Policymaker, 34 B.C.L. Rev. 693 (1993) 
 Richard Frankel, Regulating Privatized Government Through § 1983, U.Chi.L. Rev. (2009)
 Michael Gerhardt, Institutional Analysis of Municipal Liability Under § 1983, 48 DePaul L. Rev. 669 (1999)
 Michael Gerhardt, The Monell Legacy: Balancing Federalism Concerns and Municipal Accountability under § 1983, 62 S.Cal.L. Rev. 539 (1989)
 Myriam Gilles, Breaking the Code of Silence. Rediscovering "Custom" in § 1983 Municipal Liability, 80 B.U.L. Rev. 17 (2000)
 David Hamilton, The Importance and Overuse of Policy and Custom Claims: A View from One Trench, 48 DePaul L. Rev. 723 (1999)
 Eric Harrington, Judicial Misuse of History and § 1983: Toward a Purpose-Based Approach, 85 Tex. L. Rev. 999 (2007) 
 Robert Kaczorowski, Reflection on Monell's Analysis of the Legislative History of § 1983, 31 Urb. Law. 407 (1999)
 Kit Kinports, The Buck Does Not Stop Here: Supervisory Liability in § 1983 Cases, 1997 U. Ill. L. Rev. 147 (1997)
 Barbara Kritchevsky, Civil Rights Liability of Private Entities, 26 Cardozo L. Rev. 81 (2004)
 Barbara Kritchevsky, Making Sense of State of Mind: Determining Responsibility in § 1983 Municipal Liability Litigation, 60 G.W. L. Rev. 417 (1992)
 Barbara Kritchevsky, Reexamining Monell: Basing § 1983 Municipal Liability Doctrine on the Statutory Language, 31 Urb. Law. 437 (1999)
 Ronald Levin, The § 1983 Municipal Immunity Doctrine, 65 Geo. L. J. 1483 (1977)
 Harold Lewis & Theodore Blumhoff, Reshaping § 1983's Asymetry, 140 Pa. L. Rev. 755 (1982)
 Robert Manley, Effective But Messy, Monell Should Endure, 31 Urb. Law. 481 (1999) 
 Susanah Mead, 42 U.S.C. § 1983 Municipal Liability: The Monell Sketch Becomes a Distorted Picture, 65 N.C.L. Rev. 518 (1987)
 Solomon Oliver, Municipal Liability for Police Misconduct under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 after City of Oklahoma City v. Tuttle, 64 Wash.U.L.Q. 151 (1986)
 Laura Oren, If Monell Were Reconsidered: Sexual Abuse and the Scope-of-Employment Doctrine in the Common Law, 31 Urb. Law. 527 (1999)
 Eric Schnapper, Civil Rights Litigation After Monell, 79 Colum. L. Rev 213 (1979)
 Barbara Rook, The Final Authority Analysis: A Unified Approach to Municipal Liability under § 1983, 1986 Wis.L.Rev. 633 (1986)
 G. Flint Taylor, A Litigatior's View of Discovery and Proof in Police Misconduct Policy and Practice Cases, 48 DePaul L. Rev. 747 (1999)
 Ronald Turner, Employer Liability for Supervisory Hostile Environment Sexual Harassment: Comparing Title VII's and § 1983's Regulatory Regimes, 31 Urb Law. 503 (1999)
 Christina B. Whitman, Government Responsibility for Constitutional Torts'', 85 Mich.L. Rev. 225 (1986)For further scholarship, see http://www1.law.umkc.edu/justicepapers/monelldocs/MonellMainPage.htm
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:United States state sovereign immunity case law
Category:Parental leave in the United States
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:City of New York litigation
"""

From "Monroe v. Pape" ==> """
Monroe v. Pape, 365 U.S. 167 (1961), was a United States Supreme Court case that considered the application of federal civil rights law to constitutional violations by city employees. The case was significant because it held that 42 U.S.C. § 1983, a statutory provision from 1871, could be used to sue state officers who violated a plaintiff's constitutional rights.. § 1983 had previously been a relatively obscure and little-used statute, but since Monroe it has become a central part of United States civil rights law.
 Background 
Thirteen police officers of the City of Chicago, Illinois broke into the residence of the Monroe family..  The officers roused the parents from their bed and made them stand naked in the living room while other officers ransacked every room of the house,  emptying drawers and ripping mattress covers.  Mr. Monroe was then taken to the police station and interrogated concerning a two-day-old murder case.   He was not allowed to make any telephone calls or to contact a lawyer during his interrogation.   He was not charged and was finally released.  The police had not acted under authority of a search warrant or an arrest warrant when making the raid.  
Plaintiffs Monroe (six African American children and their parents) sued the police officers and the City of Chicago for violating their civil rights under §1983.
The City of Chicago moved to dismiss the complaint on the ground that it could not be held liable under the Civil Rights Acts for acts committed in performance of its governmental functions. The District Court dismissed the complaint. The Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit affirmed. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to decide two particular constitutional questions: (1) whether Congress, in enacting §1979/§1983 meant to give a remedy to parties deprived constitutional rights, privileges and immunities by an official's abuse of his position; and (2) whether Congress sought to bring municipal corporations within the ambit of §1979/§1983.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court dismissed the complaint against the city itself, finding that Congress had not intended the word "person" in section 1983 to apply to municipalities. This aspect of Monroe was later partially overruled in Monell v. Department of Social Services of the City of New York,  which held that local governments were "persons" under the act and could face liability under certain circumstances.
However, the Court reversed the lower court's dismissal of the complaint as against the officials.  The Court concluded that Congress "meant to give a remedy to parties deprived of constitutional rights, privileges, and immunities by an official's abuse of his position" under section 1983.  Furthermore, the federal remedy was available despite Illinois constitutional provisions that provided protections similar to those provided by the Fourteenth Amendment and section 1983. Monroe remains good law for the proposition that the "state action" language of section 1983 is satisfied by the actions of any state actor at any level of state government.
 Legal consequences 
When Monroe v. Pape was decided, the annotations to 42 U.S.C.A. § 1981-1988 were contained in about 4 pages. Now those annotations consume approximately 2 volumes of the U.S.C.A.
This decision not only provided for compensation to injured citizens, but greatly deterred arbitrary actions by state officers. The scope of Monroe v. Pape covers much more than police brutality or racial bias; it has been invoked in cases ranging from improper land use decisions to inappropriate school allocations to wrongful denials of liquor licenses.42 U.S.C.A. § 1981 et seq.
 See also 
 Will v. Michigan Dept. of State Police
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 365
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
Category:United States state sovereign immunity case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
"""

From "Monsanto Co. v. Geertson Seed Farms" ==> """
Monsanto Co. v. Geertson Seed Farms, 561 U.S. 139 (2010), is a United States Supreme Court case decided 7-1 in favor of Monsanto..  The decision allowed Monsanto to sell genetically modified alfalfa seeds to farmers, and allowed farmers to plant them, grow crops, harvest them, and sell the crop into the food supply. The case came about because the use of the seeds was approved by regulatory authorities; the approval was challenged in district court by Geertson Seed Farms and other groups who were concerned that the genetically modified alfalfa would spread too easily, and the challengers won.  Monsanto appealed the district court decision and lost, and appealed again to the Supreme Court, where Monsanto won, thus upholding the original approval and allowing the seeds to be sold.Monsanto Co. and Forage Genetics International; Availability Determination of Nonregulated Status for Alfalfa Genetically Engineered for Tolerance to the Herbicide Glyphosate  Federal Register, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, 27 June 2005, Retrieved 28 August 2012
In 2005 the United States Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) deregulated Monsanto's Roundup-ready alfalfa (RRA) based on an Environmental Assessment (EA) of Monsanto's RRA.USDA/APHIS Environmental Assessment United States Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Biotechnology Regulatory Services, October 2004, Retrieved 28 August 2012  In 2006, Geertson Seed Farm and others filed suit in a California district court against APHIS' deregulation of RRA. The district court disallowed APHIS' deregulation of RRA and issued an injunction against any new planting of RRA pending the preparation of a much more extensive Environmental Impact Statement (EIS).0503.pdf Memorandum and Order Re: Permanent Injunction United States District Court for Northern California, Case No C 06-01075 CR, 3 May 2007, Retrieved 28 August 2012 The court also refused to allow a partial deregulation.
After losing an appeal at the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit,McEowan, Roger (15 January 2010)Roundup-Ready Alfalfa Injunction Upheld Iowa State University, Center for Agricultural Law and Taxation, Retrieved 28 August 2012  Monsanto and others appealed the decision to the U.S. Supreme Court in 2009. In 2010 the Supreme Court reversed the lower court's decision to bar partial deregulation of RRA pending completion of the EIS.  They stated that, before a court disallow a partial deregulation, a plaintiff must show that it has suffered irreparable injury. "The District Court abused its discretion in enjoining APHIS from effecting a partial deregulation and in prohibiting the planting of RRA pending the agency’s completion of its detailed environmental review." The Supreme court did not consider the district court's ruling disallowing RRA's deregulation and consequently RRA was still a regulated crop waiting for APHIS' completion of an EIS. At the time, both sides claimed victory. This was the first ruling of the United States Supreme Court on genetically engineered crops.Koons, Jennifer (21 June 2010) Supreme Court Lifts Ban on Planting GM Alfalfa New York Times, Energy & Environment, Retrieved 28 August 2012
Background
As of 2010, alfalfa is the 4th largest cash crop and grows on approximately  of land throughout the United States. This crop is grown for two primary purposes; hay for livestock consumption and seed for future stock. Since alfalfa undergoes open pollination, many farmers that grow organic and commercial alfalfa were concerned about the potential for cross-pollination occurring between the genetically modified alfalfa and non-genetically modified alfalfa.thumb|right|200px|Alfalfa seeds
APHIS, a branch of the United States Department of Agriculture, has the right to regulate any organism and product that is altered or created by genetic engineering. They use the precautionary standard when addressing genetically modified organisms (GMOs). GMOs are classified as plant pests under the Plant Protection Act (PPA) and are therefore regulated articles. Anyone can choose to petition the regulated status of a GMO. APHIS is then required to perform an Environmental Impact Statement  ( EIS) under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). If, in an Environmental Assessment  (EA), no significant environmental impact is found, then a full EIS is not required.
The petitioner,  Monsanto, is the owner and licensor of the intellectual property rights to RRA, and licenses the technology to Forage Genetics, developer of the Roundup Ready alfalfa seed. In April, 2004, Monsanto petitioned APHIS for deregulation of RRA. APHIS has three options:
 Take no action
 Completely deregulate, requires a finding of "no significant impact"
 Partially deregulate RRA, by imposing geographical restrictions
In 2005, APHIS prepared a draft Environmental Assessment and allowed for public comments. Of the total 663 comments only 137 were supportive of the APHIS decision to deregulate RRA.   The 537 opponents were mainly organic and conventional farmers who feared that cross-pollination would occur and would have detrimental effects on the alfalfa market.  APHIS released its EA, finding that RRA would not have any significant adverse impact on the environment. APHIS found that alfalfa is pollinated by bees and that pollination has been documented to occur up to  from a pollen source.  Therefore, it was highly unlikely RRA would have a significant impact on non-GMO/organic farms.
In February 2006, plaintiffs (see parties below) filed suit stating that APHIS violated NEPA.  Subsequently, the district court ruled that APHIS had failed to take a "hard look" at RRA and its potential for genetic contamination.  Monsanto and Forage Genetics argued that many farmers had already purchased and planted or planned to plant RRA seeds for the new harvest.  In order to allow the planting of seed already purchased, the court granted a preliminary injunction prohibiting the planting and sale of RRA after March 30, 2007, pending a permanent injunction.
In April 2007 the permanent injunction was granted.  In 2008 Monsanto and APHIS appealed to the Ninth Circuit, which upheld the decision of the district court. The defendants appealed, and on April 27, 2010 this case was argued in front of the United States Supreme Court.
 Parties 
This case arose from the 2005 decision made by the  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), an arm of the  U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). APHIS ( the defendant) performs a variety of services and is tasked with both protecting and promoting U.S. agricultural health and regulating genetically modified organisms. APHIS has the authority to regulate any genetically engineered products that are plant pests or believed to be plant pests.
Monsanto ( the defendant-intervenors), is a corporation that manufactures several different chemicals, including pesticides and herbicides.  A problem arose when Monsanto applied for deregulation of two specific lines of its Roundup Ready Alfalfa.   APHIS responded favorably to Monsanto's request, but the deregulation was put on hold when Geertson Seed Farms (an Oregon Company), Trask Family Seeds (a South Dakota business) and other environmental groups sought to permanently enjoin APHIS from deregulating RRA until a final Environmental Impact Statement was completed.
 Granting of certiorari 
Certiorari was granted January 15, 2010.
 Issues 
The Supreme Court limited its inquiry to whether the lower court had abused its discretion. Its analysis turned on the following questions:
Was Geertson exempt from having to show a likelihood of irreparable harm in order to obtain an injunction?
Did the District Court improperly grant the injunction without holding an evidentiary hearing to resolve disputed facts?
Did the court of appeals incorrectly affirm the injunction prior to the "remote possibility of reparable harm" standard articulated in Winter v. NRDC?
It was noted that no party challenged the fact that APHIS had violated NEPA and that vacating the deregulation was within the District Court's discretion.
Decision
 Standing 
1. Respondents (Geertson) have standing to seek injunctive relief, and petitioners (Monsanto) have standing to seek this Court’s review of the Ninth Circuit’s judgment affirming the entry of such relief.
   (a) The Court held that Monsanto satisfied all three Article III requirements for standing to seek review of the lower court decision.
   (b) The Court affirmed the District Court's finding that Geertson had established a reasonable probability that their conventional alfalfa crops would be infected with the engineered Roundup Ready gene if RRA were completely deregulated.
2. The District Court abused its discretion by enjoining APHIS from effecting a partial deregulation and in prohibiting the planting of RRA pending the agency’s completion of its detailed environmental review.
   (a) The Court assumes that the District Court acted lawfully in vacating the agency’s decision to completely deregulate RRA, but addresses whether it overreached its authority by granting a nationwide injunction pending completion of the EIS process.
   (b) Geertson did not satisfy the four-factor test for a permanent injunction articulated in eBay Inc. v. MercExchange, LLC.
   (c) None of the four factors justified the District Court's decision prohibiting APHIS from "partially" deregulating RRA until completion of the EIS.
   (d) A nationwide injunction was too drastic a remedy given the facts and the District Court's refusal to consider partial deregulation.
 District Court's Injunction 
The Supreme Court stated that the District Court only considered a complete deregulation of RRA pending the completion of an EIS by APHIS. The four-factor test for granting a permanent injunction:
The plaintiff has to have suffered an irreparable injury.
The remedies available by law are inadequate to compensate for that injury.
The court needs to consider the balance of hardship between the plaintiff and the defendant.
The public interest would not be harmed by this permanent injunction.
The Supreme Court ruled that the District Court erred by imposing a nationwide injunction, banning APHIS from partially deregulating RRA because all four factors could not be met, particularly, the irreparable injury factor. It was also held that a NEPA violation does not warrant automatic injunctive relief.
The Supreme Court also stated that if a partial deregulation presented further danger to the respondents, they may file another suit for injunctive relief. And the respondents could not prove that partial deregulation would cause irreparable harm.
In addition, the Supreme Court found that the District Court further erred in issuing injunctive relief because it preempted APHIS' ability to enact a partial deregulation that may not pose any appreciable risk of environmental harm. It was also held that because the District Court did not consider the use of a less extraordinary measure to relieve the injury claimed by Geertson, the injunction was inappropriate. The second factor, that there must be no other option available to the court to remedy the injury, could not be met because the vacatur would have prevented the complete deregulation.
Dissent
In his dissent, Stevens wrote that the majority decision was based on an incorrect understanding of the District Court decision, namely, an understanding that "the District Court enjoined APHIS from partially deregulating RRA in any sense" and in doing so, the District Court had exceeded its authority.  Stevens did not accept that reading, finding that the District Court's decision addressed "only (1) total deregulation orders of the kind that spawned this lawsuit, and (2) the particular partial deregulation order proposed to the court by APHIS."   The majority's understanding and its implications were not the subject of briefs nor extended arguments, and Stevens therefore dissented because "the key legal premise on which the Court decides this case was never adequately presented.  Of course, this is not standard — or sound — judicial practice.... Today’s decision illustrates why, for it is quite unclear whether the Court’s premise is correct, and the Court has put itself in the position of deciding legal issues without the aid of briefing."
In Stevens' dissent, he maintained that the injunction was warranted because there was a clear danger that cross-pollination could happen, even in controlled settings, and that APHIS's ability to regulate and prevent this contamination was limited.
 See also 
 Monsanto Canada Inc. v. Schmeiser
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 561
References
External links
 Animal and Plant Health Inspection Services website: http://www.aphis.usda.gov/
 Monsanto V. PUBPAT: http://www.pubpat.org/monsanto-seed-patents.htm
Category:2010 in the environment
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:Monsanto litigation
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:Monsanto
Category:Regulation of genetically modified organisms
"""

From "Mont v. United States" ==> """
Mont v. United States, No. 17-8995, 587 U.S. ___ (2019), is a United States Supreme Court case concerning the proper interpretation of "supervised release" under 18 U.S.C. §3624(e). The case involved a prisoner who was convicted on drug distribution charges and was sentenced to imprisonment and supervised release. While on supervised release, he was charged and pleaded guilty to various state-law offenses, but due to administrative delays, his sentence was not entered until after the day on which his supervised release was to end. He was nonetheless charged with violating the terms of his supervised release, and he sought to challenge the court's jurisdiction to hear the case, arguing that his pretrial detention for the later offenses. The question in the case was whether a term of supervised release for one event can be tolled (paused) by imprisonment for another offense.
The Supreme Court decided that a term of supervised release is paused by imprisonment for another offense in a 5–4 decision that did not conform to typical ideological lines. Justice Thomas authored the majority opinion, in which Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Alito, Kavanaugh, and Ginsburg joined.. Justice Sotomayor filed a dissenting opinion joined by Justices Breyer, Kagan, and Gorsuch.
 Factual background 
Jason Mont pleaded guilty to several drug-related federal offenses in 2005 in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Ohio. He was sentenced to 120 months imprisonment and five years of supervised release to end on March 6, 2017. Mont was later arrested, during his term of supervised release, in June of 2016 for state drug offenses. At this point, Mont's probation officer reported Mont's violation of his term of supervised release to the District Court and alerted the District Court that the probation office was tolling his federal term of supervised release because they were not able to supervise him while he was in state custody. Mont later entered into a plea deal where he pleaded guilty to the state charges and a sentencing hearing was set for December of 2016. In late October 2016, Mont admitted to the District Court that he had violated the terms of his supervised release, but objected to a supervised-release hearing in November of that same year to allow the state conviction to become final. After several delays, Mont, in late March of 2017, was finally sentenced to six years' imprisonment with the ten months in pretrial detention counted as time served, and the District Court scheduled a hearing for June 28, 2017. But before the hearing, Mont objected to the District Court's jurisdiction to hear the case because he claimed his supervised release ended March 6, 2017.
 Legal background 
Under federal law, a “term of supervised release commences on the day the person is released from imprisonment,” and it is paused "during any period in which the person is imprisoned in connection with a conviction for a Federal, State, or local crime . . . .". At issue in this case was whether the term of supervised release could be tolled while the prisoner is in pretrial detention for another offense--put differently, whether pretrial detention counts as "imprison[ment] in connection with a conviction."
 Procedural posture 
Mont originally challenged the jurisdiction of the District Court, arguing that his term of supervised release ended March 6, 2017. The District Court retained jurisdiction under 18 U.S.C. §3583(i). A three-judge panel on the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed the decision but on different grounds, holding that under Sixth Circuit precedent Mont's term of supervised release was tolled during the time that he was in pretrial detention for another offense.
At the time the Sixth Circuit decided the case, there was a circuit split about this exact issue. The United States Courts of Appeal for the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth,Goins, 516 F.3d at 424. and EleventhUnited States v. Johnson,  Circuits all agreed, prior to the Supreme Court granting certiorari, that pretrial detention counts as "imprison[ment] in connection with a conviction" under 18 U.S.C. §3583(i) while the Ninth and D.C. Circuits disagreed. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the question.139 S. Ct. 451 (Mem), 202 L. Ed. 2d 346.
 Arguments 
Mont, the defendant in this case, argued that the term of supervised release should not be paused during pretrial detention because pretrial detention is not "imprison[ment] in connection with a conviction . . . ."Brief for Petitioner at 14-16, Mont v. United States, 587 U.S. __ (2019) (No. 17-8995). Specifically, Mont argued that pretrial detentions are only in connection with a conviction when the defendant is found to be guilty, thus imposing a retroactive definition not contemplated in the statute nor its history. In response, the United States argued that any other reading would not comport with the plain text of the statute and tolling terms of supervised release during pretrial detention better serves the "supervised-release scheme" because supervised release is meant to help people reintegrate into society--something not possible when that person is in detention.Brief for Respondent at 12-13, Mont v. United States, 587 U.S. ___ (2019) (No. 17-8995).
 Supreme Court 
 Majority 
In a majority opinion by Justice Thomas, the Court ruled in favor of the United States, holding that terms of supervised release are tolled while a person is in pretrial detention in accordance with 18 U.S.C. §3624(e). The Court employed a firm textualist approach to the statute, stating that the dictionary definition of "imprisonment" clearly includes pretrial detention. Further, the Court reasoned that because pretrial detention is often counted as time served once someone is convicted, it clearly is in "connection with a conviction." The Court went on to reason the statute juxtaposes supervised release and probation with imprisonment, clearly distinguishing the two different sentences and "it would be an exceedingly odd construction of the statute to give a defendant the windfall of satisfying a new sentence of imprisonment and an old sentence of supervised release with the same period of pretrial detention." The Court agreed with the United States that the purpose of supervised release would be frustrated by a reading that allowed a term to continue concurrently with pretrial detention, therefore holding that tolling is appropriate and affirming the decision of the Sixth Circuit.
 Dissent 
Justice Sotomayor authored the dissent, joined by three other justices, and relied heavily on the statute's present-tense construction. She emphasized that a plain reading of the statute did not allow pretrial detention to be read as "imprison[ment] in connection with a conviction" because at the time of pretrial detention no conviction exists. It's only upon retroactive application, she argued, that pretrial detention can be said to be in connection with a conviction, yet the way the statute is written precludes that conclusion.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 587
 References 
External links
 "Opinion analysis: Divided court holds that pretrial detention can toll a term of federal supervised release". SCOTUSblog. 2019-06-04. Retrieved 2020-02-22.
 "Mont v. United States". The George Washington Law Review. 2019-02-18. Retrieved 2020-02-22.
 https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/cert/17-8995
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Montana v. United States" ==> """
Montana v. United States, 450 U.S. 544 (1981), was a Supreme Court case that addressed two issues: (1) Whether the title of the Big Horn Riverbed rested with the United States, in trust for the Crow Nation or passed to the State of Montana upon becoming a state and (2) Whether Crow Nation retained the power to regulate hunting and fishing on tribal lands owned in fee-simple by a non-tribal member..  First, the Court held that Montana held title to the Big Horn Riverbed because the Equal Footing Doctrine required the United States to pass title to the newly incorporated State. Second, the Court held that Crow Nation lacked the power to regulate nonmember hunting and fishing on fee-simple land owned by nonmembers, but within the bounds of its reservation. More broadly, the Court held that Tribes could not exercise regulatory authority over nonmembers on fee-simple land within the reservation unless (1) the nonmember entered a "consensual relationship" with the Tribe or its members or (2) the nonmember's "conduct threatens or has some direct effect on the political integrity, the economic security, or the health or welfare of the tribe."
The Supreme Court in Montana v. United States set a precedent which resulted in a wave of litigation challenging not only the exercise of tribal court authority over non-members, but the very existence of that authority.
Background
In October 1973, the Crow Tribal Council enacted Resolution Tribal Edict No. 74-05, to restrict fishing in response to increasing food prices and tribal enrollment, coupled with decreasing supplies of fish and game on the reservation. In May 1974, James Junior Finch, a non-tribal member, went fishing, in open defiance of the tribal resolution. Charges were filed against Finch in district court. In September, District Court Judge James F. Battin ruled (for the moment) that the Bighorn riverbed was held in trust by the United States for the tribe. This ruling was consistent with one he made three years earlier, declaring in 1971 that, since the U.S. did not expressly withhold the riverbed in any of the Fort Laramie treaties, it gave the tribes "absolute right of use over the area described." In that ruling Battin made note that the Crow reservation was superimposed on traditional Crow territory.
In April 1975, Battin overruled the decision he made 8 months earlier, deciding that the riverbed in question was owned by the state. He asserted that the tribe did not have the "exclusive right to fish" since the first Fort Laramie Treaty in 1851 only referred to fishing as a "mere privilege" and the 1868 Fort Laramie Treaty "does not contain any reference to fishing." Battin further concluded that the tribe lacked sufficient sovereignty to regulate non-members from fishing and hunting on the reservation. "The blunt fact…is that an Indian tribe is sovereign to the extent the United States permits it to be -- neither more nor less."
Days after this decision, the tribe approved a special ordinance and resolution in response to Battin's ruling and reasserted their authority to regulate non-members' sporting activities on tribal land, empowering tribal game wardens and police to arrest non-members going on the reservation to boat, fish, trap, or hunt. They also appealed Battin's decision to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. Chairman Patrick Stands Over Bull, Thomas Lynaugh (attorney), and eighteen other delegates went to D.C. to "argue their case" to the government. The tribe felt that Battin's ruling undermined their sovereignty as well as threatened future coal production and water rights.
In December 1976, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Judge Battin's decision. Judge Anthony Kennedy held that the riverbed fell within the boundaries of the reservation and was therefore owned by the U.S. and the Crow Tribe. Kennedy also made reference to the Fort Laramie treaties, stating that the establishment of the reservation was to provide a permanent homeland for the people and that they had every right to the resources contained within it. Kennedy applied traditional canons of Indian law by stating that the negotiations of the two treaties had no other meaning to the natives other than the fact that the "government recognized all lands within the metes and bounds of the reservation were theirs."
In July 1978, on remand, Battin once again ruled in favor of the state, concluding that the U.S. did not reserve the river bed for the tribe, that the "Crow tribe was not indigenous historically to either Montana or Wyoming," that they were a nomadic people with origins in Canada. Despite testimony from Joe Medicine Crow and Henry Old Coyote supporting the fact that Crows routinely fished and often supplemented their diet with fish, Battin concluded that "fishing was not central to the Crow diet." Battin then addressed the issue of whether or not the State has power to regulate hunting and fishing by non-members within reservation limits. Again, Battin ruled in favor of the state, holding that Montana did have authority to regulate non-members on the river and on all non-Indian fee land within the reservation. Battin also concluded that the state had "concurrent jurisdiction" with the U.S. to regulate these activities on tribal land if the activities violated state law. Battin addressed tribal rights by stating that, while they retain the right to give permission to non-members to hunt and fish on tribal lands, tribes do not have the power to regulate non-members unless specifically granted by an "act of Congress," referring to Oliphant v. Suquamish..
In June 1979, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals unanimously overturned Battin's ruling, holding that the river (bed and banks) was held by the United States in trust for the Crow tribe. Addressing the emergent regulatory issues, they ruled that the tribal resolution 74-05 was invalid only when it came to "resident non-members" on fee land that they personally owned, and that the resolution was valid when it came to regulating "non-resident non-member owners of land and resident non-members on any other territory" within the reservation. The tribe could regulate both members and non-members as long as the non-members were not subjected to criminal sanctions and the process was carried out in a non-discriminatory fashion, consistent with conservation principles. Both parties were dissatisfied with the decision and both petitioned for a rehearing, but both of these petitions were denied.
In April 1980, the U.S. Supreme Court granted the state of Montana's petition for certiorari. In the ensuing briefings, Montana's attorneys argued that lands under navigable waters on federal land were supposed to be held in trust by the U.S. for the State. States are considered to have "equal footing" in this regard. They argued that the tribe held no authority to regulate non-members on non-Indian lands within the reservation and that the "allotment legislation" voided any treaty-based authority given to the tribe. They supported these claims with the Oliphant case, which denied tribes inherent sovereign authority to exercise criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians.
The U.S. and Crow attorneys contended that the U.S. appropriated the land in question prior to statehood for the benefit of the Crow tribe and that the tribe did not expressly cede the rights in question in any treaty. They urged that the Allotment acts did not in any way change or "dilute" treaty rights.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|left | Seal of the Supreme Court of the United States
In this case, the Supreme Court ruled on two issues: (1) Who held title of the Big Horn Riverbed and (2) Whether Tribes retained regulatory authority over hunting and fishing on reservation land owned in fee-simple by non-Indians.
First, the Court resolved whether title of the Big Horn Riverbed remained with the United States, held in trust for the Crow Tribe, or was transferred to the State of Montana when it was admitted to the Union. The Court found the title belonged to Montana.450 U.S. at 550–52. Since the federal government, "[a]s a general principle," transfers title for navigable waterways to States upon incorporation, the equal footing doctrine requires that Montana retain the same right to title for navigable waters within the geographic boundaries as other states.450 U.S. at 551.  While the Second Treaty of Fort Laramie conveyed land to the Crow Tribe, setting it "apart for the absolute and undisturbed use and occupation of the Indians," it did not explicitly refer to the riverbed.e "set apart for the absolute and undisturbed use and occupation of the Indians herein named...."
450 U.S. at 553 (quoting Second Treaty of Fort Laramie, May 7, 1868, Art. II, 15 Stat. 650.) Therefore, the Treaty language cannot overcome the presumption that title passed to the State of Montana.450 U.S. at 554–57.
Second, analogizing to Oliphant's holding in the context of criminal jurisdiction, the Court held that Tribes do not have inherent sovereign power to exercise civil jurisdiction over activities occurring on fee-simple reservation land owned by nonmembers unless (1) the nonmembers have entered "consensual relationships with the tribe or its members, through commercial dealing, contracts, leases, or other arrangements"450 U.S. at 565. or (2) the nonmember's "conduct threatens or has some direct effect on the political integrity, the economic security, or the health or welfare of the tribe."450 U.S. at 566. The Court found that nonmember hunters and fishers on fee-simple land neither entered consensual relationships with the tribe nor threatened the political or economic integrity of the Tribe.450 U.S. at 566–67. Therefore, the Tribe could not regulate nonmember hunting and fishing practices on fee-simple land within the reservation.
Dissent
Harry Blackmun's dissenting opinion, with William Brennan and Thurgood Marshall joining, addresses the issue of the canons of construction regarding treaties. 
Only two years ago, this Court reaffirmed that the terms of a treaty between the United States and an Indian tribe must be construed "in the sense in which they would naturally be understood by the Indians." As in any case involving the construction of a treaty, it is necessary at the outset to determine what the parties intended. ...With respect to an Indian treaty, the Court has said that "the United States, as the party with the presumptively superior negotiating skills and superior knowledge of the language in which the treaty is recorded, has a responsibility to avoid taking advantage of the other side." ...In holding today that the bed of the Bighorn River passed to the State of Montana upon its admission to the Union, the Court disregards this settled rule of statutory construction. Because I believe that the United States intended, and the Crow Nation understood, that the bed of the Big Horn was to belong to the Crow Indians, I dissent from so much of the Court's opinion as hold otherwise. As in any case involving the construction of a treaty, it is necessary at the outset to determine what the parties intended. ...the Crow were assured in 1867 that they would receive "a tract of your country as a home for yourselves and children forever, upon which your great Father [the US President] will not permit the white man to trespass."
Rebutting the 'equal footing' argument, the dissent in part II states:
...it defies common sense to suggest that the Crow Indians would have so understood the terms of the Fort Laramie Treaties. In negotiating the 1851 treaty, the United States repeatedly referred to the territories at issue as 'your country,' as 'your land,' and as 'your territory.' ...It is hardly credible that the Crow Indians who heard this declaration would have understood that the United States meant to retain the ownership of the riverbed that ran through the very heart of the land the United States promised to set aside for the Indians and their children 'forever.' Indeed, Chief Blackfoot, when addressed by Commissioner Taylor, responded: 'The Crows used to own all this Country including all the rivers of the West.' Id., at 88. (Emphasis added.) The conclusion is inescapable that the Crow Indians understood that they retained the ownership of at least those rivers within the metes and bounds of the reservation [450 U.S. 544, 579] granted them. This understanding could only have been strengthened by the reference in the 1868 treaty to the mid-channel of the Yellowstone River as part of the boundary of the reservation; the most likely interpretation that the Crow could have placed on that reference is that half the Yellowstone belonged to them, and it is likely that they accordingly deduced that all of the rivers within the boundary of the reservation belonged to them.
In fact, any other conclusion would lead to absurd results.
The dissent thus stands firmly against the majority's "silent nullification" of the treaties in its "equal footing" argument that there was a "strong presumption" that the federal government held lands under navigable waters in trust for the states rather than the tribes.
Effects
thumb|Montana State Flag
Montana v. United States is a critical case because, in part, it left behind a "cauldron of confusion" regarding jurisdiction. The opinion states that tribes "inherent sovereign power to exercise some forms of civil jurisdiction over non-Indians on their reservations, even on non-Indian fee lands. A tribe may regulate, through taxation, licensing, or other means, the activities of nonmembers who enter consensual relationships with the tribe or its members, through commercial dealing, contracts, leases, or other arrangements." In addition, tribes retain "inherent power to exercise civil authority over the conduct of non-Indians on fee lands within its reservation when that conduct threatens or has some direct effect on the political integrity, the economic security, or the health or welfare of the tribe."
Since the court decision in 1981, it has been used many times as an important precedent. Shortly after the Montana decision was made, the Court used it in both National Farmers Union Ins. Co. v. Crow Tribe (1985). and Iowa Mutual Ins. Co. v. LaPlante (1987).. Both cases were related to tribal power, and the Court relied on Montana to rule that "tribal inherent powers do not extend beyond what is necessary to protect tribal self-government or to control internal relations." These decisions dictate that a nonmember of the tribe can enter "federal court to challenge tribal court jurisdiction over them, usually after they've first 'exhausted' tribal court remedies." The Montana decision was used again in the Atkinson Trading Company v. Shirley (2001). to strike down a tax imposed on non-tribal members for operating a hotel on lands owned by the Navajo Reservation. The ruling has created problems for the courts since it was made. In the 1997 court case Strate v. A-1 Contractors,. the Montana ruling was used to determine that tribal courts did not have the authority to listen to a case that involved an accident involving two non-tribal members on the reservation. The Montana case outlined the principles on tribal sovereignty, especially over issues relating to non-tribal members. The ruling made in the Montana-Strate-Atkinson is derived from the Oliphant ruling, and shows the inherent tribal civil jurisdictional powers.
The Montana ruling continues to be applied. In 2005 an on-duty police officer died in a single car accident when the officer's Ford Expedition rolled over on a tribally maintained road. It was a single car accident, and the car allegedly rolled over due to a product defect. The Ford Motor Company entered federal court looking to challenge the issue of tribal jurisdiction in this case. The Montana ruling was applied, and neither of its two exceptions were found to apply, because there were no consensual relations between the tribe and the Ford Motor Company, and the security of the nation was not at stake. This is just one example of how the Montana ruling is still being applied in 21st century court cases.
Legacy
Montana has been cited hundreds of times in the lower courts with mixed outcomes. An important part of Montana is the ability of the tribes to regulate all activity related to tribal interests under the first "direct effects" exception. To the chagrin of the State of Montana, the "direct effects" exception was used by the Ninth Circuit to uphold the substantive authority of the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes to set water standards on the reservation that had the effect of imposing obligations on non-Indians living off the reservation upstream. Another vital part of the Montana ruling is the ability of tribes to regulate consensual activity under the second exception. This exception permitted the tribal courts of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians to hear a case in which a non-Indian employee of a Dollar General retail store was accused of committing a tort against a teenage tribal member.Dolgencorp, Inc. v. Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, 746 F.3d 167, (5th Cir. 2014), affirmed sub. nom. by an equally divided court, Dollar Gen. Corp. v. Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, 579 U.S. ___ , 135 S. Ct. 2159 (June 23, 2016) (per curiam). These two exceptions have been addressed many times by the courts since the ruling was made in 1981.
See also
Nevada v. Hicks, 533 U.S. 353 (2001)
Atkinson Trading Co. v. Shirley, 532 U.S. 645 (2001)
Strate v. A-1 Contractors, 520 U.S. 438 (1997)
Dollar General Corp. v. Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, 579 U.S. ___ (2016)
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 450
Further reading
 Deloria, Jr., Vine, ed. American Indian Policy in the Twentieth Century. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 1985.
 Deloria, Jr., Vine and Clifford M. Lytle. American Indians, American Justice. Austin: University of Texas Press. 1983.
 Johansen, Bruce E. Enduring Legacies: Native American Treaties and Contemporary Controversies. Praeger 2004
 Johansen, Bruce E. The Encyclopedia of Native American Legal Tradition. Greenwood, 1998.
 Wilkins, David E. American Indian Sovereignty and the U.S. Supreme Court: The Masking of Justice. Austin: University of Texas Press. 1997.
 Wilkins, David E. and Heidi Kiiwetinepinesiik Stark. American Indian Politics and the American Judicial System. Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, Inc. 2011.
References
Bibliography
External links
Montana v. United States at Oyez, Oyez audio of argument
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:Crow tribe
Category:Native American history of Montana
"""

From "Montanile v. Board of Trustees of Nat. Elevator Industry Health Benefit Plan" ==> """
Montanile v. Board of Trustees of the National Elevator Industry Health Benefit Plan, 577 U.S. ___ (2016), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States clarified subrogation procedures under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act ("ERISA")., slip op. at 1–2 (2016). The Court held that healthcare plan fiduciaries cannot demand reimbursement for medical benefits from a plan member's general assets if the beneficiary's general assets cannot be traced back to the original payment from the fiduciary.Montanile, slip op. at 2, 8–14, 15. Although some scholars suggested that the court's ruling would have little impact,See, e.g., Ronald Mann, Opinion analysis: Justices reaffirm limitations on ERISA plan’s right to recover medical-reimbursement costs, , January 20, 2016; John W. Klinker, When Equitable Remedies Give Way to Remedies at Law (or How to Avoid a Benefits Plan's Subrogation Clause), , February 24, 2016. others suggested the case places "significant restrictions" on the rights of ERISA benefit plan providers.See, e.g., Joshua Bachrach, Montanile v. Board of Trustees: New Model for Recovery, , February 22, 2016.
Background
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 regulates health care benefit plans that are established by employers.See 88 Stat. 829, as amended,  et seq. Section 502(a)(3) of the Act states that healthcare plan fiduciaries may bring civil lawsuits to enforce the terms of healthcare plans.. Robert Montanile participated in an ERISA health plan that was administered by the Board of Trustees of the National Elevator Industry Health Benefit Plan ("the Board").Montanile, slip op. at 2. The terms of his plan stated that he would be required to reimburse the Board when he recovers money from third parties to pay for medical expenses. 
Initial lawsuit
Robert Montanile, a unionized elevator constructor, was severely injured when a drunk driver struck his vehicle In December 2008.Montanile, slip op. at 2–3. Montanile's health plan paid for $121,044.02 of his initial expenses, and he subsequently signed an agreement "reaffirming his obligation to reimburse the plan from any recovery he obtained".Montanile, slip op. at 3. After receiving this disbursement, Montanile filed suit against the driver that caused his injuries and ultimately obtained a settlement valued at $500,000. The Board then filed a lawsuit against Montanile under ERISA §502(a)(3) in which they claimed they were entitled to reimbursement for the medical expenses they paid. The United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida ruled in favor of the Board and the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit affirmed the district court's judgment.Montanile, slip op. at 4. Montanile appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States, which granted certiorari to resolve a circuit split with respect to whether ERISA fiduciaries may enforce a lien against a beneficiary's separate assets in subrogation proceedings.
Opinion of the Court
In a majority opinion written by Justice Clarence Thomas, the Court held that plan fiduciaries cannot recover medical expenses from a beneficiary's separate assets unless those assets can be traced back to the original ERISA payment.Montanile, slip op. at 2, 15. Justice Thomas stated that historically, equitable liens have only been available to plaintiffs when they identify the specific property that was wrongfully withheld by the defendant.Montanile, slip op. at 8. If a defendant's general assets cannot be traced to funds that were wrongfully withheld, then equitable liens cannot be used to attach untraceable general assets.Montanile, slip op. at 8–9. Justice Thomas therefore held that the Board could not recover the cost of the initial payment from Montanile's general assets.Montanile, slip op. at 9–14. However, because the lower courts did not determine which of Montanile's assets could be traced back to the medical payment, the Supreme Court remanded the case for further proceedings.Montanile, slip op. at 14.
Justice Ginsburg's dissenting opinion
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg filed a short, single-paragraph dissenting opinion in which she argued that Montanile should not be allowed to escape liability by "rapidly" spending his money on non-traceable items.Montanile, slip op. at 1 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting). She described the majority's ruling as a "bizarre conclusion" and instead argued that the Court should have affirmed the judgment of the Eleventh Circuit. Justice Ginsburg also urged the Court "to confess its error" and overturn Great-West Life & Annuity Ins. Co. v. Knudson, a case in which the Court held that Congress intended to limit remedies that were available under ERISA section 502(a)(3).Montanile, slip op. at 1 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting) (internal quotations omitted) (citing Great-West Life & Annuity Ins. Co. v. Knudson, 534 U.S. 204, 224–234 (2002)).
Commentary and analysis
Following the release of the Court's decision, commentators offered a variety predictions about the case's long-term impact. In his review of the Court's decision, Ronald Mann described the case as "a strong candidate for this year’s award for 'case that breaks the least new ground'".Ronald Mann, Opinion analysis: Justices reaffirm limitations on ERISA plan’s right to recover medical-reimbursement costs, , January 20, 2016. John W. Klinker agreed that "[t]he precedent set by this decision may be quite narrow" but also suggested that the case "has the potential to greatly affect the funding of welfare benefits plans".John W. Klinker, When Equitable Remedies Give Way to Remedies at Law (or How to Avoid a Benefits Plan's Subrogation Clause), , February 24, 2016. Joshua Bachrach, on the other hand, argued that the Court's decision places "significant restrictions on a plan’s right of recovery when the funds have been spent" and that "benefit plans must consider new ways to preserve their rights".Joshua Bachrach, Montanile v. Board of Trustees: New Model for Recovery, , February 22, 2016.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
"""

From "Montejo v. Louisiana" ==> """
Montejo v. Louisiana, 556 U.S. 778 (2009), is a 5–4 decision by the United States Supreme Court that overruled the Court's decision in Michigan v. Jackson.. The case concerned the validity of a defendant's  waiver of his right to counsel during a police interrogation. In reversing Jackson, the Court said such a waiver was valid.. 
Facts
At a preliminary hearing, Montejo was charged with first-degree murder. Montejo was also appointed court-ordered counsel, which he neither expressly requested nor denied. Later that day, while in prison, police read Montejo his Miranda rights, and he agreed to go along on a trip to locate the murder weapon. While in the police car, Montejo wrote an inculpatory letter of apology to the victim's widow. Only upon return did Montejo first finally meet his court-appointed attorney. At trial, the letter of apology was admitted over Montejo's objection. The jury convicted Montejo of first-degree murder, and he was sentenced to death.
 Supreme Court's decision 
In a decision written by Justice Scalia, the Court expressly overturned Michigan v. Jackson, , asserting that requiring an initial “invocation” of the right to counsel in order to trigger the Jackson presumption, might work in States that require an indigent defendant formally to request counsel before an appointment is made, but not in more than half the States, which appoint counsel without request from the defendant.
Justice Alito filed a concurring opinion. Justice Stevens, who had written the Opinion of the Court in the overturned Jackson, filed a dissenting opinion in which Justice Souter and Justice Ginsburg joined. Justice Breyer joined that dissenting opinion, except for footnote 5. Justice Breyer also filed a separate dissenting opinion.
 Analysis 
The Fifth Amendment's right to counsel attaches upon invocation (i.e., when an attorney is requested). The Sixth Amendment's right to counsel attaches when adversarial proceedings begin (i.e., at the arraignment). The presumption in Jackson attempted to analogize the Fifth Amendment's right against self-incrimination through Edwards v. Arizona to the Sixth Amendment's right to counsel, essentially not allowing police interrogation after the right attached. Under Montejo, in the case where the Defendant has not asserted his Fifth Amendment's right to counsel but rather relies on his Sixth Amendment's right to counsel, police may reinitiate interrogation after his Miranda rights have been read. However, if a Defendant has asserted his Fifth Amendment's right to counsel and adversarial proceedings have begun, police may not reinitiate questioning without counsel present and waiver under Edwards, or unless the Defendant initiates the conversation and police get a waiver. Criticisms of the Montejo decision include arguments that the case's importation of Fifth Amendment rationale into Sixth Amendment contexts "has resulted in a blurring of the line between legitimate law enforcement efforts and illegitimate police deception."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 556
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
 The Right to Counsel, Weakened (NYT Editorial)
 Criminal Defense Attorney's Analysis of the Case
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:Massiah doctrine case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Montgomery v. Louisiana" ==> """
Montgomery v. Louisiana, 577 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that its previous ruling in Miller v. Alabama (2012),. that a mandatory life sentence without parole should not apply to persons convicted of murder committed as juveniles, should be applied retroactively. This decision potentially affects up to 2,300 cases nationwide.
This case is one in a series since 2005 that have mitigated the harshness of sentencing of juveniles and persons who committed crimes as juveniles. It is based in part on scientific evidence showing that juvenile brains are not equivalent to those of adults.
 Background 
 Issue 
In Roper v. Simmons (2005), the Supreme Court of the United States by a 5–4 vote established that the death penalty for children under 18 was unconstitutional.  In Graham v. Florida (2010), the Court ruled that it was unconstitutional to impose mandatory life sentence without parole on prisoners who committed non-murder crimes as juveniles.
Two years later, in Miller v. Alabama (2012), the Court by a 5–4 vote decided that mandatory life sentence without parole should not apply to persons who committed the crime as juveniles.The Supreme Court, 2011 Term — Leading Cases, 126 Harv. L. Rev. 276 (2012).
 Petitioner 
Henry Montgomery was 17 years old on November 13, 1963, when he shot and killed police officer Charles Hurt, a sheriff's deputy, in East Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana. A jury convicted Montgomery of murder and sentenced him to death in February 1964 but, in January 1966, the divided Louisiana Supreme Court annulled that verdict, finding he had not received a fair trial due to public prejudice.State v. Montgomery, 181 So. 2d 756, 248 La. 713 (1966).https://casetext.com/analysis/will-supreme-court-decision-be-death-knell-for-juvenile-life-without-parole In October 1966, Montgomery escaped from the parish jail and was rearrested two hours later.State v. Montgomery, 242 So. 2d 818, 257 La. 461 (1970).
In February 1969, a jury again convicted Montgomery of murder, triggering an automatic sentence of life in prison without parole, which was affirmed by the Louisiana Supreme Court in November 1970, over the dissent of Justice Mack Barham.
Montgomery became a model member of the prison community, serving as a coach on the prison boxing team, working in the prison's silk-screen program, and offering advice to younger prisoners.  After the U.S. Supreme Court decided Miller v. Alabama, Montgomery made a motion to correct an illegal sentence, which, in June 2014, was denied by the Louisiana Supreme Court, over the dissent of Chief Justice Bernette Joshua Johnson.State v. Montgomery, 141 So. 3d 264 (La. 2014).
Supreme Court of the United States
In September 2014, Montgomery filed a petition for a writ of certiorari from the U.S. Supreme Court, which was granted.  Seventy-five minutes of oral arguments were heard on October 13, 2015, with attorneys appearing for the prisoner and the state as well as an amicus curiae appointed by the Court, arguing against the Court's jurisdiction, and the U.S. Deputy Solicitor General, arguing as a friend of the prisoner.
Opinion of the Court
On January 25, 2016, the Supreme Court delivered judgment in favor of the prisoner, by a vote of 6–3. Writing for the Court, Justice Anthony Kennedy, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts, along with Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan, applied the Miller v. Alabama rule retroactively, holding that prisoners previously given automatic life sentences with no chance of parole for crimes committed as juveniles must have their cases reviewed for re-sentencing or be considered for parole.The Supreme Court, 2015 Term — Leading Cases, 130 Harv. L. Rev. 377 (2016).
The Court first found that it had jurisdiction over Louisiana's prisoner because the rule governing retroactivity is constitutional, not statutory.  Next, Justice Kennedy wrote that "prisoners like Montgomery must be given the opportunity to show their crime did not reflect irreparable corruption; and if it did not, their hope for some years of life outside prison walls must be restored." Applying the presumption from Teague v. Lane (1989) that a new rule is not retroactive on collateral review unless it is substantive or "watershed", Kennedy said the decision was founded on substantive grounds, based "on the diminished culpability of all juvenile offenders, who are, he said, immature, susceptible to peer pressure and capable of change. Very few, he said, are incorrigible. But he added that as a general matter the punishment was out of bounds."
Dissents
Justice Antonin Scalia, joined by Justices Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito dissented.  Criticizing the majority's "sleight of hand", Scalia wrote that Kennedy had twisted the language in the Miller decision to make it sound categorical when it merely required a new sentencing procedure.  Scalia also stated that it would be very difficult for judges and juries to decide whether defendants were incorrigible decades after they were originally sentenced.
Justice Thomas filed another dissenting opinion, alone, stating that the majority's decision "repudiates established principles of finality".
Subsequent developments
On June 28, 2016, the Louisiana Supreme Court vacated Montgomery's life sentence and remanded for resentencing in a per curiam decision, with Justice Scott Crichton additionally concurring.State v. Montgomery, 194 So. 3d 606 (La. 2016). In February 2017, Montgomery, now 70 years old, remained a prisoner at the Louisiana State Penitentiary in Angola. In February 2018 and April 2019, Montgomery had parole hearings, and was denied both times. On November 17, 2021, the Louisiana Board of Pardons and Parole granted parole to Montgomery by a unanimous vote of 3–0. Following the vote, Montgomery was freed from prison and released. His release was opposed by some of Hurt's family members, however, two of Hurt's daughters had met with Montgomery in prison and forgiven him.
In March 2020, the Supreme Court certified a related case, Jones v. Mississippi, involving a person who had killed his grandfather when he was 15 in 2004 and given the mandatory sentence of life without parole. Due to the reactive rulings in Miller and Montgomery, Jones was given a rehearing but was still resentenced to life in prison, and appealed, claiming the court did not evaluate any aspect of his incorrigibility as required under Montgomery. Oral hearings were held on November 3, 2020.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court decisions on capital punishment
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:United States children's rights case law
Category:2016 in United States case law
"""

From "Moore v. City of East Cleveland" ==> """
Moore v. City of East Cleveland, 431 U.S. 494 (1977), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that an East Cleveland, Ohio zoning ordinance that prohibited a grandmother from living with her grandchild was unconstitutional. Writing for a plurality of the Court, Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr. ruled that the East Cleveland zoning ordinance violated substantive due process because it intruded too far upon the "sanctity of the family." (plurality opinion). Justice John Paul Stevens wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment in which he agreed that the ordinance was unconstitutional, but he based his conclusion upon the theory that the ordinance intruded too far upon the Moore's ability to use her property "as she sees fit."Moore, 431 U.S. at 520 (Stevens, J., concurring). Scholars have recognized Moore as one of several Supreme Court decisions that established "a constitutional right to family integrity."Kevin B. Frankel, The Fourteenth Amendment Due Process Right to Family Integrity Applied to Custody Cases Involving Extended Family Members, 40  301, 311 (2007).
Background
East Cleveland zoning ordinance
In 1966, East Cleveland, Ohio passed a zoning ordinance that limited the occupancy of a housing unit to "members of a single family."Moore, 431 U.S. at 495-96 (plurality opinion) (citing E. Cleveland, Ohio,  Housing Ordinances, § 1341.08 (1966)). The ordinance contained "an unusual and complicated" definition of "family," which only recognized a few narrowly defined categories of individuals as a family unit.Moore, 431 U.S. at 496 (plurality opinion). Specifically, the ordinance defined a "family" as "the head of a household, his or her spouse, the couple's childless unmarried children, at most one child of the couple with dependent children, and one parent of either the head of the household or his or her spouse."Kevin B. Frankel, The Fourteenth Amendment Due Process Right to Family Integrity Applied to Custody Cases Involving Extended Family Members, 40  301, 313 (2007).
Initial lawsuit
Inez Moore lived in East Cleveland, Ohio with her son, Dale Moore Sr., his son, Dale Moore Jr., as well as John Moore Jr., a grandson who was the child of one of Inez Moore's other children.Kevin B. Frankel, The Fourteenth Amendment Due Process Right to Family Integrity Applied to Custody Cases Involving Extended Family Members, 40  301, 313 (2007); see also Moore, 431 U.S. at 497 n.4 (plurality opinion) (noting that John's father, John Moore Sr., had apparently lived with the family since the time of the trial, but that his presence in the home also likely violated the ordinance). In early 1973, Inez Moore received a citation from the City, which informed her that John Moore Jr. was an "illegal occupant" in violation of the city's zoning ordinance because he did not fit within the statute's definition of a "family" unit.Moore, 431 U.S. at 497 (plurality opinion). When Inez Moore refused to remove John Moore Jr. from the home, the City filed criminal charges. At trial, Moore argued that the ordinance was facially unconstitutional, but the court sentenced her to five days in jail and ordered her to pay a $25 fine.Moore, 431 U.S. at 497 (plurality opinion) (noting that Moore filed a motion in the trial court challenging the constitutionality of the ordinance). The Ohio Court of Appeals affirmed the decision of the trial court, and the Ohio Supreme Court denied review.Moore, 431 U.S. at 497-98 (plurality opinion). In 1976, the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari to review the case.Moore, 431 U.S. at 498 (plurality opinion). Moore was represented by Legal Aid Society of Cleveland.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|upright=1.0|In his plurality opinion, Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr. argued that "the tradition of uncles, aunts, cousins, and especially grandparents sharing a household" deserved "constitutional recognition."Moore, 431 U.S. at 504 (plurality opinion).
Writing for a plurality of the Court, Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr. ruled that the East Cleveland zoning ordinance violated substantive due process and was therefore unconstitutional.Moore, 431 U.S. at 499, 503-04, 506 (plurality opinion). Justice Powell noted that this case was distinguishable from the Court's prior zoning law jurisprudence by virtue of the fact that earlier cases like Euclid v. Ambler Realty Co. and Village of Belle Terre v. Boraas did not restrict the ability of family members to live together.Moore, 431 U.S. at 498-99 (plurality opinion) (citing Euclid v. Ambler Realty Co. ; Village of Belle Terre v. Boraas ) (noting that Belle Terre was distinguishable because the ordinance in that case "only unrelated individuals"). Because the East Cleveland ordinance "[chose] to regulate the occupancy of its housing by slicing deeply into the family itself" and imposed an "intrusive regulation on the family," neither Euclid nor Belle Terre were applicable in this case.Moore, 431 U.S. at 498-99 (plurality opinion). Likewise, Justice Powell ruled that deference to the legislature was inappropriate.Moore, 431 U.S. at 499 (plurality opinion).
Justice Powell cited a long line of cases in which the Supreme Court recognized that "freedom of personal choice in matters of marriage and family life is one of the liberties protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment."Moore, 431 U.S. at 499 (plurality opinion) (quoting Cleveland Board of Education v. LaFleur, . Additionally, Justice Powell ruled that the ordinance did not advance the City's goals of preventing overcrowding, minimizing traffic, and not overburdening the City's school system because the ordinance would have allowed for Moore to live with "a dozen school-age children" from one son while John Moore Jr. would be forced to live elsewhere.Moore, 431 U.S. at 500 (plurality opinion). Although Justice Powell noted that that substantive due process "has at times been a treacherous field" for the Supreme Court, he ruled that the Court's precedent establishes "that the Constitution protects the sanctity of the family precisely because the institution of the family is deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition."Moore, 431 U.S. at 503 (plurality opinion).
Concurring opinions
Justice William J. Brennan Jr. wrote a concurring opinion in which he emphasized that "the zoning power is not a license for local communities to enact senseless and arbitrary restrictions which cut deeply into private areas of protected family life."Moore, 431 U.S. at 507 (Brennan, J., concurring). He stated that he wrote "only to underscore the cultural myopia of the arbitrary boundary drawn by the East Cleveland ordinance in the light of the tradition of the American home," which he argued "displays a depressing insensitivity toward the economic and emotional needs of a very large part of our society."Moore, 431 U.S. at 507-08 (Brennan, J., concurring). Justice Brennan argued that the Constitution cannot be interpreted "to tolerate the imposition by government upon the rest of us of white suburbia's preference in patterns of family living."Moore, 431 U.S. at 508 (Brennan, J., concurring).
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which he argued that the "critical question presented by this case is whether East Cleveland's housing ordinance is a permissible restriction on appellant's right to use her own property as she sees fit".Moore, 431 U.S. at 513 (Stevens, J., concurring). After reviewing the history of the Court's zoning jurisprudence, Justice Stevens concluded that "[t]here appears to be no precedent for an ordinance which excludes any of an owner's relatives from the group of persons who may occupy his residence on a permanent basis." Additionally, Justice Stevens concluded that the East Cleveland ordinance did not bear a substantial relationship "to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare" of East Cleveland. Because the ordinance "cuts so deeply into a fundamental right normally associated with the ownership of residential property," Justice Stevens also concluded that the ordinance constituted a taking under the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution.Moore, 431 U.S. at 520-21 (Stevens, J., concurring).
Dissenting opinions
Chief Justice Warren Burger wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that the constitutional question was foreclosed by the fact that Inez Moore did not exhaust "a plainly adequate administrative remedy."Moore, 431 U.S. at 521 (Burger, C.J., dissenting). He wrote that Moore's lawyers "made no effort to apply to the Board for a variance to exempt her from the restrictions of the ordinance, even though her situation appears on its face to present precisely the kind of 'practical difficulties and unnecessary hardships' the variance procedure was intended to accommodate."Moore, 431 U.S. at 522 (Burger, C.J., dissenting). Although Chief Justice Burger noted that the Supreme Court had not yet established that appellants must "utilize available state administrative remedies as a prerequisite to obtaining federal relief," he argued that "such a requirement is imperative if the critical overburdening of federal courts at all levels is to be alleviated." Consequently, Chief Justice Burger argued that the Court "should now make clear that the finite resources of this Court are not available unless the litigant has first pursued all adequate and available administrative remedies."Moore, 431 U.S. at 531 (Burger, C.J., dissenting).
Justice Potter Stewart and Justice Byron White also filed dissenting opinions. Justice Stewart argued that the court's earlier decision in Belle Terre should determine the outcome in this case and that Moore's claims regarding associational freedom and privacy should not invoke constitutional protections.Moore, 431 U.S. at 534-35 (Sewart, J., dissenting). Justice White emphasized that the "substantive content of the [Due Process] Clause is suggested neither by its language nor by pre constitutional history" and concluded that "the interest in residing with more than one set of grandchildren" is not "one that calls for any kind of heightened protection under the Due Process Clause."Moore, 431 U.S. at 543, 549 (White, J., dissenting). Additionally, Justice White concluded that "the normal goals of zoning regulation are present here and that the ordinance serves these goals by limiting, in identifiable circumstances, the number of people who can occupy a single household."Moore, 431 U.S. at 550-51 (White, J., dissenting).
Analysis and commentary
Analysts have observed that Moore is one of several cases have established "a constitutional right to family integrity." Some commentators have also noted that the Moore decision lies at the intersection between the competing goals of controlling population density and maintaining family integrity, but in their rush to overturn "traditional-family ordinances," the Court may have "burn[ed] the house to roast the pig."J. Gregory Richards, Zoning for Direct Social Control, 1982  761, 796 (1982) (internal citations and quotations omitted). Other commentators have observed that opinions like Moore have "a Trojan-Horse quality" because the Court's decision to recognize rights only for an extended biological family "is itself a potent form of state regulation of family life."David D. Meyer, The Paradox of Family Privacy, 53  527, 565-66 (2000).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 431
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States land use case law
Category:East Cleveland, Ohio
Category:1977 in United States case law
"""

From "Moore v. Dempsey" ==> """
Moore et al. v. Dempsey, 261 U.S. 86 (1923), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled 6–2 that the defendants' mob-dominated trials deprived them of due process guaranteed by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. It reversed the district court's decision declining the petitioners' writ of habeas corpus. This case was a precedent for the Supreme Court's review of state criminal trials in terms of their compliance with the Bill of Rights.
The facts of the case
Moore v. Dempsey was the first case to come before the court in the 20th century related to the treatment of African Americans in the criminal justice systems of the South, where they lived in a segregated society that had disenfranchised them. The case resulted from prosecution of twelve men for the death of a white man associated with the Elaine Race Riot in Phillips County, Arkansas. A white railroad security employee died on September 30, 1919, after shots were exchanged outside a church where a black tenant farmers union was meeting. With rumors of black insurrection, Governor Charles Hillman Brough led a deployment of federal troops into the rural county, arresting hundreds of blacks. Other blacks were allowed to be in public only with military passes. In the week after the shooting, roving bands of whites and federal troops killed upwards of 200 blacks.
In the aftermath, a grand jury made up of local landlords and merchants decided who would be indicted. Those blacks willing to testify against others and who agreed to work on whatever terms their landlords set for them were let go; those who had been labeled ringleaders or who were judged unreliable were indicted. According to the affidavits later supplied by the defendants, many of the prisoners had been beaten, whipped or tortured by electric shocks to extract testimony or confessions and threatened with death if they later recanted their testimony. Indictments were brought against 122 defendants, including 73 for murder.
On November 2, 1919, the Phillips County authorities began trying the defendants on charges of murder. Frank Hicks was charged with first degree murder of Clinton Lee, with Frank Moore, Ed Hicks, J. E. Knox, Paul Hall, and Ed Coleman charged as accessories. Hicks and a total of eleven defendants were sentenced to death after perfunctory trials: counsel for the accused, who did not meet their clients until the trial began, called no witnesses, produced no evidence, and did not call on the defendants to testify. The first trial took three-quarters of an hour, after which the all-white jury returned a guilty verdict on the first-degree murder charge in eight minutes. Later trials were just as short; the juries took less than ten minutes to reach a verdict in each case. A twelfth defendant was sentenced to death several weeks later, after the jury deliberated for four minutes.
Thirty-six other defendants chose to plead guilty to second-degree murder rather than face trial. Sixty-seven additional defendants went to trial and were convicted; they were sentenced to various terms of imprisonment.
The trials were dominated by white mobs; crowds of armed whites milled around the courthouse. As Justice Holmes later stated in his opinion, "There was never a chance of an acquittal," as the jurors feared the mob. The Arkansas Gazette applauded the trials as the triumph of the 'rule of law,' as none of the defendants had been lynched.
The investigation
thumb|Walter F. White
The NAACP sent its assistant secretary, Walter F. White, to investigate the violence in October 1919. White, who was of mixed-race and blonde, used his appearance to pass for white when it was useful to his investigations of lynching and riots. He was granted credentials from the Chicago Daily News, which aided him in obtaining an interview with Governor Brough.
White was able to interview both whites and blacks in Phillips County, but had to cut his visit short after hearing rumors that he had been discovered as a person of color. White published his findings in the Daily News, the Chicago Defender and The Nation, as well as the NAACP's own magazine The Crisis, reporting on the high number of fatalities among blacks and the lack of government prosecution of their deaths.
The appeal
The NAACP organized the appeal for defendants in the Elaine case. It raised more than $50,000 and hired Scipio Africanus Jones, an African-American attorney from Little Rock, and Colonel George W. Murphy, a Confederate veteran, former Attorney-General for the State of Arkansas, for the defense team.
The defendants' cases took two paths. The defendants' lawyers obtained reversal of the verdicts by the Arkansas Supreme Court in six of the cases: Ed Ware, Will Wordlow, Albert Giles, Joe Fox, Alf Banks Jr., and John Martin (henceforth Ware et al.) due to a defect in the wording of the jury verdict. The court ruled that the jury had failed to specify whether the defendants were guilty of murder in the first or second degree; those cases were accordingly sent back to the lower court for retrial. They were convicted again, but the state supreme court overturned the verdicts, saying that discrimination against black jurors (the juries were all-white) was contrary to the Fourteenth Amendment and the Civil Rights Act of 1875. Because the lower court had not acted upon their cases for more than two years by April 1923, under Arkansas law the defendants were entitled to be released. Jones applied for and gained an order for their release from the Arkansas Supreme Court on June 25, 1923.
The Arkansas Supreme Court upheld the death sentences of Moore and the other five murder defendants, rejecting the challenge to the all-white jury as untimely. It found that the mob atmosphere and use of coerced testimony did not deny the defendants the due process of law. Those defendants unsuccessfully petitioned the United States Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari from the Arkansas Supreme Court's decision.
The defendants petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus, alleging that the proceedings that took place in the Arkansas state court, while ostensibly complying with trial requirements, satisfied these only in form. They argued that the accused were convicted under pressure of the armed mob, with blatant disregard for their constitutional rights, and that pre-trial publicity had prejudiced the proceedings. The defense team had originally intended to file this petition in federal court, but the only sitting judge was assigned to other judicial duties in Minnesota at the time and would not return to Arkansas until after the defendants' scheduled execution date. The state chancery court issued the writ. Although it was later overturned by the State Supreme Court, this process postponed the execution date long enough to permit the defendants to seek habeas corpus relief in federal court.
The state of Arkansas argued a narrowly legalistic position, based on the United States Supreme Court's earlier decision in Frank v. Mangum (1915).  The State did not dispute the defendants' evidence of torture used to obtain confessions or mob intimidation, but argued that, even if true, this did not amount to a denial of due process. The federal district court agreed, denying the writ.
The Case
U.S. Supreme Court Proceedings
thumb|The Taft Court
The Court did not consider issues related to the convictions of the accused black men, but rather whether their rights were abridged under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment by the process of the trial. In a 6–2 decision, Justice Holmes wrote for the Court that a mob-dominated trial violated the due process provisions. He also said that federal courts, upon being petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus, were compelled to review such claims of discrimination in state trials and to order the release of defendants judged unfairly convicted.
Opinions
Justice Oliver W. Holmes, Jr.
In his majority opinion, Associate Justice Holmes outlined the pertinent facts of the case, in a somewhat acerbic manner, before proceeding to the Court's considerations and decision.
The Court had previously ruled in Frank v. Mangum  that, while mob interference with a criminal trial would amount to a denial of the due process promised by the Fourteenth Amendment, the state could undo the constitutional violation by allowing the defendant to challenge the conviction on appeal. This foreclosed any federal review of the allegations of mob intimidation. The Court effectively overruled Frank, holding that the district court presented with a habeas corpus petition must examine the facts presented in order to determine if the defendants' rights had been violated.
Holmes' opinion acknowledged the rule in Frank, while holding that subsequent judicial review would not cure constitutional violations if the state courts, in fact, had failed to correct the wrong:
We assume in accordance with that case that the corrective process supplied by the State may be so adequate that interference by habeas corpus ought not to be allowed. It certainly is true that mere mistakes of law in the course of a trial are not to be corrected in that way. But if the case is that the whole proceeding is a mask—that counsel, jury and judge were swept to the fatal end by an irresistible wave of public passion, and that the State Courts failed to correct the wrong, neither perfection in the machinery for correction nor the possibility that the trial court and counsel saw no other way of avoiding an immediate outbreak of the mob can prevent this Court from securing to the petitioners their constitutional rights.
The Court therefore remanded the matter to the federal district court for it to determine if the defendants' claims of mob intimidation and coerced testimony were true:
We shall not say more concerning the corrective process afforded to the petitioners than that it does not seem to us sufficient to allow a Judge of the United States to escape the duty of examining the facts for himself when if true as alleged they make the trial absolutely void. We have confined the statement to facts admitted by the demurrer. We will not say that they cannot be met, but it appears to us unavoidable that the District Judge should find whether the facts alleged are true and whether they can be explained so far as to leave the state proceedings undisturbed.
McReynolds' dissent
Justice James C. McReynolds, joined by Justice George Sutherland, deemed the issue at stake to be "one of gravity". He suggested that if any man convicted of a crime in a state court may try his luck with the federal court by swearing that some events that have abridged his constitutionally protected rights took place, the already long list of permitted delays in punishment would grow even longer.
Effects of the Decision
Per the Court's ruling, the case was sent back to lower courts. The prosecution and defense eventually "agreed that the Moore defendants would plead guilty to charges of murder in the second degree, with their sentences to be retroactively counted." On November 11, 1925, their sentences were commuted by Governor T.C. McRae. They were released several months later. Arkansas also freed the other defendants who had been convicted of lesser charges and who were still imprisoned.
Moore is significant for establishing precedent for wider use of federal writs of habeas corpus to oversee state court convictions that occurred under conditions that violated federal constitutional rights. It marked the beginning of stricter scrutiny by the Supreme Court of state criminal trials in terms of their compliance with the Bill of Rights.  This ruling reduced the capacity of a local community "to permanently deprive or deny the rights of those who might be prosecuted in its courts."Harrison Bennett, "The Phillips County Riot Cases"], Chicken Bones: A Journal, 2012 (article first published as "Justice on Trial: The Phillips County Riot Cases", December 1999, Arkansas State University
See also
 Palko v. Connecticut
Footnotes
 From Justice Holmes’ opinion: "According to the allegations and affidavits there never was a chance for the petitioners to be acquitted; no juryman could have voted for an acquittal and continued to live in Phillips County and if any prisoner by any chance had been acquitted by a jury he could not have escaped the mob."
 When commenting on the Committee of Seven, who apparently solemnly promised to a lynch-ready mob that "the law would be carried out", for example, Holmes notes that "According to affidavits of two white men and the colored witnesses on whose testimony the petitioners were convicted, […] the Committee made good their promise by calling colored witnesses and having them whipped and tortured until they would say what was wanted…"
Further reading
 Cortner, Richard C., A Mob Intent On Death, 
 Waterman, Julian Seesel,  and Elvin E. Overton. "The Aftermath of Moore v. Dempsey" ''Washington U. Law Rev. 18#2 (1933): 117+. online
References
External links
Nationalization of the Bill of Rights
The Phillips County Riot Cases
Category:1923 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:Legal history of Arkansas
Category:History of Phillips County, Arkansas
Category:Red Summer
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Moore v. Harper" ==> """
Moore v. Harper is an ongoing United States Supreme Court case related to the independent state legislature theory (ISL), arising from the redistricting of North Carolina's districts by the North Carolina legislature following the 2020 census, which the state courts found to be too artificial and partisan, and an extreme case of gerrymandering in favor of the Republican Party.
 Background 
North Carolina's congressional and legislative districts have been subject to protracted litigation over the 2010s and 2020s in both federal and state courts. In the 2019 decision in Rucho v. Common Cause, which arose out of district maps in North Carolina, the Supreme Court of the United States held that partisan gerrymandering claims are beyond the reach of federal courts, and that asking for judicial intervention would represent an expansion of powers.
Courts can still evaluate redistricting maps for racial gerrymandering under the Voting Rights Act. In 2017, the General Assembly modified state law to direct that the speaker of the North Carolina House of Representatives and the president pro tempore of the North Carolina Senate be able to intervene in any litigation over the constitutionality of state law. Following the 2020 United States census, the state gained an additional seat in the U.S. House of Representatives and required a redistricting of the state. The census also showed that the state demographics were about 60% Caucasian and the remaining from other racial backgrounds, with African Americans and Hispanics making up the largest percentages. The Republican-controlled legislature started drafting new maps that they claimed to be in line with a previous North Carolina Supreme Court ruling from 2019 that required the maps to be compliant with the Voting Rights Act to avoid racial gerrymandering, along with an open and transparent process to the voters of the state. State Senator Dan Blue, the state senate's Democratic leader, stated that the resulting maps gave an advantage to the Republican Party in ten seats to the Democrats in four. Multiple lawsuits were filed against the leaders of the North Carolina legislature in November 2021 on claims that the maps were both racially and partisan gerrymandered. 
Wake County Superior Court upheld the maps in January 2022. On the partisan gerrymandering, the court stated that in the lines of Rucho, "Were we as a court to insert ourselves in the manner requested, we would be usurping the political power and prerogatives of an equal branch of government." The court also said the plaintiffs had not shown sufficient evidence that the new maps were racially gerrymandered. On appeal, the North Carolina Supreme Court held the maps unconstitutional in a 4–3 decision given in February 2022. Under remand to the superior court, the General Assembly attempted to draw up new maps to comply with the Supreme Court decision, but these failed to satisfy the judges on the superior court. A special master team of outside experts were assigned to create a new map, which was accepted by the superior court on February 24, 2022.
On February 25, 2022, the General Assembly sought a stay for the newly drawn maps pending appeal by the U.S. Supreme Court, to allow for review of the Elections Clause issue. It was denied on March 7, 2022, over the dissent of Justice Samuel Alito, who was joined by Justices Neil Gorsuch and Clarence Thomas. Justice Brett Kavanaugh concurred, asserting the Purcell principle counseled against intervention so soon before the election.
Throughout the litigation, the General Assembly argued their case based on the independent state legislature theory (ISL). This theory is based on language from the Elections Clause in the Article One of the U.S. Constitution, stating: "The Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for Senators and Representatives, shall be prescribed in each State by the Legislature thereof." The theory is based on the reading that Article I implies that only state legislatures may make any decisions related to election law and prevent any actions from courts or the executive branch from challenging it. This would allow the state legislature to fully control redistricting as well as other voting laws. While the Supreme Court and other courts had already rejected this concept, including as late as Smiley v. Holm (1932), the theory gained more traction with Republicans and conservatives since Bush v. Gore (2000), thus making it a potentially landmark case according to legal experts. ISL proponents also pointed to Bush v. Palm Beach County Canvassing Board (2000) in support of their arguments.
 Supreme Court 
The North Carolina speaker of the House, president pro tempore of the Senate, and other members of the General Assembly subsequently filed a petition for a writ of certiorari. The Court granted review on June 30, 2022, to be heard in the October 2022–23 term.
Oral arguments were held December 7, 2022. Court observers stated that it appeared that the ISL theory argued by David H. Thompson was rejected by the three liberal justices (Sotomayor, Kagan, and Jackson) alongside Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Kavanaugh and Barrett. While Roberts looked to overturn the North Carolina Court decision, he sought to do it in a way that did not embrace ISL. Justices Alito, Thomas, and Gorsuch appeared to still embrace concepts of the ISL as to rule in favor of the state legislature.
The Court had agreed to hear the case in June 2022 at the request of North Carolina legislators after the state's Supreme Court, then with a 4-3 Democratic majority, set aside the new redistricting maps. In the November 2022 elections, Republicans gained a 5-2 majority on the state court, and in February 2023 they agreed to reconsider the prior court's ruling. In March 2023, the United States Supreme Court asked the involved parties to submit 10-page briefs within days to assess whether the state court's decision to rehear the case rendered the high court's consideration of the case moot, such that Moore might be dismissed. Parties on both sides of the case wrote in their briefs that the Court should dismiss the case given the state's new review.
 Impact 
Moore v. Harper has been described as one of the most high-profile cases the Supreme Court has taken up in recent years; former federal judge Michael Luttig called it the "single most important case on American democracy — and for American democracy — in the nation's history". The case is expected to have a significant impact on future federal elections in the U.S. should the court support ISL, and affect efforts to make gerrymandering illegal or remove restrictions on voting. Three of the current justices — Alito, Gorsuch, and Thomas — had stated in the dissent to the Court's March 2022 order denial that they believed the state argued correctly on employing ISL. Should the court rule in the state's favor, the ruling would likely impact the 2024 United States elections.
 See also 
 Democratic backsliding in the United States
 Arizona State Legislature v. Arizona Independent Redistricting Commission (2015)
 Texas v. Pennsylvania (2020)
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
 Audio of oral argument, December 7, 2022
 Transcript of oral argument, December 7, 2022
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States federalism case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Moore v. Texas (2017)" ==> """
Moore v. Texas, 137 S. Ct. 1039 (2017), is a United States Supreme Court decision about the death penalty and intellectual disability. The court held that contemporary clinical standards determine what an intellectual disability is, and held that even milder forms of intellectual disability may bar a person from being sentenced to death due to the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment. The case clarified two earlier cases, Atkins v. Virginia (2002) and Hall v. Florida (2014).
 Background 
 Case background 
On April, 1980, Bobby James Moore committed armed robbery in Houston, Texas. He shot and killed James McCarble, and was subsequently charged for capital murder – a crime punishable by death. He was found guilty by a jury and sentenced to death; in 2001, after an appeal, he was again sentenced to death by a jury. He presented an appeal in 2014, and a hearing was held to determine the existence and scope of his intellectual disability; he had an IQ of just over 70, and the court recommended that his death sentence be either vacated or turned into a life in prison sentence. The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA) instead affirmed his death sentence based on the factors laid out in Ex parte Briseno.
 Legal background 
In Ford v. Wainwright, 477 U.S. 399 (1986), the Supreme Court invalidated the use of capital punishment for those deemed insane. Sixteen years later, in Atkins v. Virginia, 536 U.S. 304 (2002), the Supreme Court held that the Eighth Amendment prohibits the use of capital punishment for those with intellectual disabilities. They ruled in that case that it constituted cruel and unusual punishment, and it allowed individual states to define intellectual disability. States mostly relied on the definitions provided by the American Psychological Association and the American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, which generally required for a finding of intellectual disability: that the person has measurable deficit in intelligence; that this deficit impairs certain kinds of social life; and that the deficit emerged prior to adulthood. 
In 2014, the court invalidated rigid cutoff schemes for defining intellectual disabilities in Hall v. Florida, 572 U.S. 701. The lower courts of appeals disagreed on the meaning of Hall; one circuit found that there was no legal definition of intellectual disability, while another said the legal definition was the same as the clinical one.
 Decision 
In a 5–3 decision, Associate Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg delivered the court's opinion. The court held that the Briseno factors violated both Atkins and Hall, and subsequently, that they violated the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment. In particular, it held that an IQ of 70 was not a rigid cutoff, and that even those with an IQ just above 70 (like Moore) may also be intellectually disabled. It also held that contemporary and "prevailing clinical standards"—not those from 1992, when Texas created its definition—are those at issue in deciding whether a defendant is eligible for the death penalty, and that mild forms of intellectual disability can preclude a death sentence. It remanded the case back to the CCA.
Chief Justice John Roberts dissented, joined by Associate Justices Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito. He stated that Texas had considered the "prevailing clinical standards" when it crafted its death penalty scheme, and that states had a right to determine their own schemata for defining intellectual disability. He also said the court's reliance on clinical standards, and not moral judgments, was at odds with Eighth Amendment jurisprudence.
 Later developments 
On remand in 2018, the CCA again sentenced Moore to death. Moore appealed to the Supreme Court, and they reversed the decision in a per curiam opinion in Moore v. Texas II, 139 S. Ct. 666 (2019). They held that Moore was ineligible for death because of his intellectual disability; Chief Justice Roberts concurred, while Justices Alito, Thomas, and Gorsuch dissented.
As of 2021, there were 28 states that still used the death penalty, and 19 of them cited Moore I or II. Some courts followed Moore I and II clearly, while others did not.
 Notes and references 
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2017 in United States case law
"""

From "Mora v. McNamara" ==> """
Mora v. McNamara, 389 U.S. 934 (1967), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court was asked to rule on the case of a conscientious objector (a member of the Fort Hood Three) who claimed that the U.S. war against Vietnam was an illegal war of aggression. In this case, the court cited only the Kellogg-Briand Pact, Article 39 of the United Nations Charter and the Treaty of London (which established the Nuremberg War Crimes Tribunal) as the relevant body of international law regarding cases of war.
Certiorari was denied over the dissents of Justices Stewart and Douglas.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 389
 Gunn v. University Committee to End the War in Viet Nam
 Lloyd Corp. v. Tanner
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States foreign relations case law
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:Bell County, Texas
Category:Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War
Category:Aggression in international law
"""

From "Moragne v. States Marine Lines, Inc." ==> """
Moragne v. States Marine Lines, Inc., 398 U.S. 375 (1970) is a United States Supreme Court case addressing the remedies under federal maritime law for tortious deaths on state territorial waters. 
Facts
The petitioner's husband was a longshoreman on board the vessel Palmetto State when a hatch beam became disengaged and fell, striking the decedent in the head and causing his death. The petitioner brought suit as his widow and representative to recover damages for wrongful death from States Marine Lines, Inc., the owner of the vessel. The petitioner's based her claims upon negligence and the unseaworthiness of the vessel, alleging that a defective locking arrangement caused the hatch to fall.  The Federal District Court for the Middle District of Florida determined that the applicable Florida wrongful death statute did not include the concept of unseaworthiness and dismissed the petitioner's claims. The Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed the District Court's dismissal, and the United States Supreme Court granted certiorari.  
Opinion
In a unanimous opinion delivered by Justice John M. Harlan II, the Supreme Court overruled the prior controlling case of The Harrisburg (1886), which denied recovery under general maritime law for wrongful death on navigable waters. In The Harrisburg the court had  held that the common law doctrine of no recovery would be incorporated in toto into maritime law, which meant that no remedy was allowed for wrongful death in general maritime law unless there was some statute that specifically granted such a remedy. Moragne eliminated many of the disparities of maritime death law and allowed claimants to assert wrongful death claims based on unseaworthiness by authority of general maritime law independent of statutory reliance.
A companion case, Raskin v. P. D. Marchessini, Inc., was vacated and remanded to the Court of Appeals for reconsideration in light of Moragne.399 U.S. 519 (1970).
References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Morey v. Doud" ==> """
Morey v. Doud, 354 U.S. 457 (1957), was a case where Doud and two partners sold 'Bondified' brand money orders in Illinois, directly or through agents such as drug and grocery stores. A state law required any seller or issuer of money orders to secure a license and submit to state regulation, except that the statute, by name, explicitly exempted the American Express Company from these requirements. 
Doud, his partners and one of his agents, fearing prosecution under the law, sued the state, arguing the law was unconstitutional. The Supreme Court agreed, finding the special exemption only for American Express violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.Morey v. Doud, .
Overruled by City of New Orleans v. Dukes (1976)
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 354
 References 
External links
Category:1957 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:American Express
"""

From "Morgan v. Hamlet" ==> """
Morgan v. Hamlet, 113 U.S. 449 (1885), was a bill in equity filed by the appellants, September 3, 1879.
Facts
The complainants are the administrator de bonis non of Samuel D. Morgan, deceased, and the children and heirs at law and widow of the intestate, citizens of North Carolina. The female defendants are the children and heirs at law of John G. Morgan, deceased, sued with their husbands, and all citizens of Arkansas.Morgan v. Hamlet, 113 U.S. 449 (1885) Justia.com
In 1860, a partnership was formed between two brothers, Samuel D. Morgan and John G. Morgan, the former advancing the means, the latter being bankrupt, for stocking and cultivating a cotton plantation in Arkansas, purchased in the name of the firm, but paid for only in part. Samuel D. Morgan continued to reside in North Carolina. John G. Morgan lived on the plantation in Arkansas, and personally conducted its operations. This he did during several years, including the year 1865, when the plantation was sold, under judicial proceedings, to pay the unpaid purchase money. Samuel D. Morgan died in January 1864.
John G. Morgan died in 1875, the defendants, his heirs at law, having come into possession of the property in his possession at his decease, more than sufficient to satisfy the claim of the complainants.
Of the complainants, Samuel T. Morgan became of age September 8, 1876, and William W. Morgan in May 1878. They never had a guardian, and allege their ignorance of the frauds charged to have been practiced against them by John G. Morgan until in 1879.
The answer of the defendants, though admitting the fact of such a partnership as alleged, denies that any profits were made and denies all the allegations of fraud. It also shows that John G. Morgan died in April 1875, leaving him surviving Emma S. Morgan, his widow, and the defendants, Alice R. Hamlet and Emma G. Abell, and Lula Morgan, an infant, his only children; that letters of administration were issued on his estate by the Probate Court of Chicot County, Arkansas, in which he lived at the time of his death, on August 6, 1875, to his widow, who acted as administratrix of his estate until October 13, 1875, when she resigned, and the defendant John C. Hamlet was appointed by the same court administrator de bonis non, and qualified and acted as such. And it is relied on as a defense that the demands made in the bill were not authenticated and presented to the administratrix or the administrator de bonis non of John G. Morgan, deceased, according to law, within two years of the granting of letters of administration on his estate.
On final hearing the bill was dismissed. From this decree the complainants brought this appeal.
Judgment
In Arkansas, it appears that there is a special statute of limitations governing claims against estates of deceased persons, commonly called the "Statute of Nonclaim." It is as follows:
It has been decided that the statute runs against all creditors, whether resident or nonresident. Erwin v. Turner, 6 Ark. 14.
And that all claims fall within the provisions of the statute that are capable of being asserted in a court of law or equity existing at the death of the deceased or coming into existence within two years after the grant of administration, whether due or not, if running to a certain maturity.
And the effect of a failure to present the claim as prescribed in the statute is not to let it in against the heirs or devisees, but it is to bar is forever as against all persons. Bennett v. Dawson, 18 Ark. 334; Brearly v. Norris, 23 Ark. 771.
In  84 U. S. 530, in a like case, it was held by this Court that the failure to present the claim is, in the absence of circumstances constituting an excuse, fatal to the bill for relief in equity.
It is sought in argument on behalf of the appellants to distinguish their case—at least the case of the two infant children of Samuel D. Morgan—from any case within the statute of nonclaim on the ground that at the death of their father, his title to the real estate, which constituted the plantation, descended to them as his heirs at law, and thereafter, as to the operations conducted by John Morgan in 1864 and 1865, having no guardian, the latter was in equity their representative and guardian de son tort and trustee, so that upon his death and until they arrived at age, there was no one competent to make a demand against his administrator, within the terms of the statute.
But we are unable to appreciate the force of this supposed distinction. The statute in question contains no exception in favor of claimants under disability of nonage or otherwise; the claim of the complainants against John G. Morgan was adverse to his administrator, although it may have originated in consequence of a relation of trust, and there is no ground that we are able to understand on which it can be excepted out of the operation of the statute in question. Their claim was equally against the administrator of John G. Morgan whether the latter be considered as the defaulting partner of themselves or of their father. Whatever its description, it was a claim against the estate of John G. Morgan, and for which his personal representative was in the first instance liable, and the statute is a bar to every such claim unless presented within the time prescribed.
On this ground the decree of the circuit court was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States trusts case law
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "Morgan v. Illinois" ==> """
Morgan v. Illinois, 504 U.S. 719 (1992), is a case decided by the United States Supreme Court. The case established the right of defendants to challenge for cause any juror that would automatically impose the death penalty in all capital cases.
Background
In an elaboration of the Witherspoon v. Illinois (1968) doctrine, the Rehnquist Court considered challenges to the selection of jurors who would automatically vote to impose the death penalty on a defendant convicted of a capital offense. In a 6–3 decision, Justice White wrote for the majority that a defendant facing the death penalty may challenge for cause a prospective juror who would automatically vote to impose the death penalty in every case. Just as a juror who is unalterably opposed to the imposition of the death penalty must be excluded because he or she cannot conscientiously fulfill the oath to follow the law and the instructions to the jury pursuant thereto, so should one who would automatically vote to impose the death penalty be excluded for the same reason. Such a juror, he emphasized, would lack the qualities of impartiality and indifference required by due process. Furthermore, Justice White noted, jurors who would automatically vote to impose the death penalty would not "in good faith ... consider evidence of aggravating and mitigating circumstances" as may be required by law and included in jury instructions.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 504
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Further reading 
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:Capital punishment in Illinois
Category:1992 in United States case law
"""

From "Morgan v. United States (1885)" ==> """
Morgan v. United States, 113 U.S. 476 (1885), was a case involving several judgments of the United States Court of Claims in four cases against the United States for the payment of United States bonds known as "five-twenty bonds."Morgan v. United States, .
Consols of 1865, issued in pursuance of the authority conferred upon the Secretary of the Treasury by the Act of Congress approved March 3, 1865, entitled "An act to provide ways and means for the support of the government." Twenty bonds of the denomination of $1,000 each and sixteen of $500 each were embraced in the suits. The controversy relates to the title only, all of them being claimed by the Manhattan Savings Institution, and ten of each denomination by J.S. Morgan & Co., and the others, being ten of $1,000 each and six of $500 each, by L. Von Hoffman & Co. The bonds having been called in for redemption, were presented at the Treasury for that purpose by the holders, respectively, J.S. Morgan & Co. and L. Von Hoffman & Co., but payment was refused by the United States on account of the adverse claim of the Manhattan Savings Institution, and the claims of the several parties to the proceeds were Treasury, March 12, 1880, pursuant to § 1063, Revised Statutes. Judgments were rendered by that court in favor of the Manhattan Savings Institution, and against the other claimants respectively. 18 Ct.Cl. 386. The several appeals bring up all the cases as they stood in the Court of Claims; the United States appealing from the judgment in favor of the Manhattan Savings Institution, the other parties from the judgments dismissing their respective petitions. The controversy is wholly between the claimants, the United States being merely in the position of a stakeholder, not denying its liability to pay to the true owners of the bonds.
The act of Congress in pursuance of which the bonds in question were issued, being "An act to provide ways and means for the support of the government," approved March 3, 1865, 13 Stat. 468, c. 77, provided:
The bonds issued under this act were called the consolidated debt or consols of 1865, because, in addition to the loan of six hundred millions of dollars authorized by it, the Secretary of the Treasury was empowered to permit the conversion, into any description of bonds authorized by it, of any Treasury notes or other obligations, bearing interest, issued under any act of Congress.
The bonds were only different only in numbers and denomination, and were in the following form:
~165,120] [165,120
"[Consolidated debt. Issued under act of Congress approved March 3, 1865. Redeemable after five and payable twenty years from date.]"
"1,000] [1,000"
"It is hereby certified that the United States of America are indebted unto the bearer in the sum of one thousand dollars, redeemable at the pleasure of the United States after the first day of July 1870, and payable on the first day of July 1885, with interest from the first day of July 1865, inclusive at six percent per annum, payable on the first day of January and July in each year, on the presentation of the proper coupon hereunto annexed. This debt is authorized by act of Congress approved March 3, 1865."
"Washington, July 1, 1865."
"J. LOWERY"
"For Register of the Treasury"
"Six months' interest due July 1, 1885, payable with this bond."
"(Thirteen coupons attached from and including coupon for interest due January 1, 1879, to and including coupon for interest due January 1, 1885.)"
The bonds were known as "five-twenty bonds," because they were redeemable after five years but not payable until twenty years after July 1, 1865. 
The Act of July 14, 1870, "to authorize the refunding of the national debt," 16 Stat. 272, authorized the issue of three classes of bonds, according as they bore interest at the rates of five percent, 4½ percent, and 4 percent per annum, amounting in the aggregate to $1,500,000,000, which the Secretary of the Treasury was, by the second section of the act, authorized to sell and dispose of at not less than their par value in coin, and "to apply the proceeds thereof to the redemption of any of the bonds of the United States outstanding, and known as five-twenty bonds at their par value," or, the act continues, "he may exchange the same for such five-twenty bonds, par for par."
By the fourth section of this act, it was provided:
By an Act passed January 20, 1871, 16 Stat. 399, the foregoing act was amended so as to authorize the issue of five hundred millions of five percent bonds instead of two hundred millions, as limited by the Act of July 14, 1870, but not so as to permit an increase of the aggregate of bonds of all classes thereby authorized.
On March 1, 1871, the nearest date prior to the commencement of operations under the Refunding Act of 1870, the following amounts of six percent five-twenty bonds were outstanding: 
Five-twenties of 1862 . . . . . . . . . . $493,738,350
Five-twenties of March, 1864. . . . . . . 3,102,600
Five-twenties of June, 1864 . . . . . . . 102,028,900
Five-twenties of 1865 . . 182,112,450
Act March 3, Consols of 1865 . . . . . 264,619,700
1865 Consols of 1867 . . . . . 338,832,550
Consols of 1868 . . . . . 39,663,750
"The National Loans of the United States," by Bailey, Washington, 1882, p. 94
Of these, large amounts were held abroad by investors in foreign countries, and had been dealt in by bankers in the principal money centers of the world. It was expected and desired by Congress that this should be so, as the Secretary of the Treasury had been expressly authorized by law to dispose of any of the bonds of the United States, "either in the United States or elsewhere." Act March 3, 1865, § 2. And under the Refunding Act of July 14, 1870, as we have already seen, the Secretary of the Treasury established an agency in London for the purpose of delivering the bonds sold under that act and receiving in exchange therefor the outstanding securities of the United States agreed to be received in payment therefor. The object of this great exchange was to reduce the annual interest on the public debt of the United States from six to the lower rates of five, four and one-half, and four percent. To have called in the redeemable debt and paid for it in gold coin, and to have obtained the gold coin for that purpose by sales of the new securities, would have been awkward, circuitous, and impracticable, involving the needless export and import of a mass of the gold coin distributed by the necessities of the world's commerce throughout its markets, the attempt to do which would have produced disturbances of market values, certain to have defeated it. Any transfer of specie in large amounts to meet balances occasioned by these operations would have been almost as serious in its effects, and was therefore by every consideration of public and private interests to be avoided. The difficult practical question was how to avoid it—how to substitute in the markets of the world one loan for the other by an exchange of securities without any serious and disturbing movement of coin. Congress had placed it within the power of the Secretary of the Treasury to accomplish this by authorizing him to receive the five-twenty bonds, to be redeemed in exchange at par for the bonds to be issued at a lower rate of interest. This he was enabled to do by calling in the five-twenty bonds for redemption, by which they were made equal in value as money to par and interest then due and by agreeing to treat and receive them as money in the exchange. This created a demand for the "called bonds" to be used for that purpose, and they were bought from the holders by bankers and agents of the syndicates who had contracted to place the new loans under the act of 1870. This transaction could only have been successfully effected upon the assumption that the call for redemption did not affect the negotiable quality of the bonds, nor impose upon them any disability except the cessation of interest after the maturity of the call, nor deprive them of any other immunity which had previously belonged to them. On the contrary, it must have been within the contemplation of the Treasury Department and of those with whom it was dealing that the "called bonds," until finally absorbed by payments into the Treasury in exchange for new bonds, which constituted the fact of redemption, were equivalent in all legal qualities to money itself or to those usual equivalents of money which circulate, without question as such, like Treasury notes, payable on demand. And this view, we have already seen, the parties were authorized and justified in adopting by the language and purposes of the statutes under which the transactions were accomplished. By this means, an enormous public debt was shifted and converted, so as largely to reduce the burden of its interest; the agents of the government were facilitated in the great work they had undertaken; the individual holders of the securities of the United States, scattered throughout the countries of Europe, received the money due them on the bonds for which they subscribed at their own domiciles, and this series of great financial operations was successfully accomplished without interference with the usual course of the business of the world, without disturbing the fixed distribution of currency which commerce had apportioned to its appropriate markets, and without unsettling the value of property or labor either at home or abroad. These beneficial results were greatly facilitated, if not made feasible, by the unquestioned negotiability of the called bonds, which, when subjected to the right of redemption reserved by their terms, were thereafter considered and treated as the equivalent of money. This could not have been if the principles which protect bona fide purchasers for value, in the due course of trade, without actual notice of a defect in the obligation or title, had not been practically adopted. The practice as found to have existed was in our opinion well warranted by law.
This confidence was invited by the convenience of the government itself, and certainly promoted its interests and advanced its purposes. The practice it engendered on the part of the public dealing in its securities had been expressly sanctioned by formal recognition and approval by the Treasury Department long prior to the negotiation of the war loans, which commenced in 1862. In 1860, Attorney General Black officially advised the Secretary of the Treasury, 9 Opinions 413, that Treasury notes, redeemable after one year from date, interest thereon to cease at the expiration thereafter of sixty days' notice of readiness to pay and redeem the same, were intended to be a continuing security and to pass by delivery, after the period of redemption equally as before, as money or banknotes not liable to any equities between the original or intermediate parties.
It was by force of such a custom declared by Lord Selborne
The several judgments of the Court of Claims in these cases were reversed, and the causes are remanded to that court with directions to render judgments in accordance with this opinion.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "Morgan v. Virginia" ==> """
Morgan v. Virginia, 328 U.S. 373 (1946), is a major United States Supreme Court case. In this landmark 1946 ruling, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 7–1 that Virginia's state law enforcing segregation on interstate buses was unconstitutional. 
The case was argued by William H. Hastie, the former governor of the U.S. Virgin Islands and later a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. Thurgood Marshall of the NAACP was co-counsel; he later was appointed as a US Supreme Court justice."Milestones," August 27, 2007 edition of TIME Magazine at p. 23. Hastie and Marshall used an innovative strategy to brief and argue the case. Instead of relying upon the Equal Protection clause of the 14th Amendment, they argued successfully that segregation on interstate travel violated the Interstate Commerce Clause of the U.S. Constitution."Jim Crow Stories: Richard Wormser, "'Morgan v. Virginia' (1946)" , The Rise and Fall of Jim Crow, 2002, PBS, accessed 5 February 2013 Virginia and other Southern states ignored the ruling, and continued with their practice of enforcing racial segregation in interstate transportation vehicles and facilities.
Background
"If something happens to you which is wrong, the best thing to do is have it corrected in the best way you can," said Irene Morgan, the African-American plaintiff who was arrested in Virginia for refusing to move from the  "White" to the "Colored" section on a Greyhound interstate bus. "The best thing for me to do was to go to the Supreme Court." 
In 1944, at the time of the incident, she was working at a defense contractor, the aircraft manufacturer Glenn L. Martin Company, based in Baltimore, Maryland. She worked on the production line making B-26 Marauders. She had traveled to Virginia to visit her mother.Margot Lee Shetterly, Hidden Figures, William Morrow, 2016, p. 44 Morgan was arrested in Middlesex County on her return trip to Baltimore, after refusing to move at the direction of the bus driver.
Aftermath
In 1960, in Boynton v. Virginia, the Supreme Court extended the Morgan ruling to bus terminals used in interstate bus service. But the Southern states refused to comply and continued to eject or arrest African Americans who tried to use restrooms, waiting areas and cafeterias or lunch counters reserved for whites in such facilities, as Southern states refused to obey Morgan v. Virginia."Equal Access to Public Accommodations" – The Civil Rights Movement in Virginia , Virginia Historical Society
The efforts of the Freedom Riders in 1961 were undertaken in part to challenge the ineffectual adherence to this ruling in a number of the states in the Deep South.
References
External links
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:Thurgood Marshall
"""

From "Morissette v. United States" ==> """
Morissette v. United States, 342 U.S. 246 (1952), is a U.S. Supreme Court case, relevant to the legal topic of criminal intent. It described two classes of crimes, those requiring a mental state, and those that do not. It did not delineate a precise line between them. In one class are traditional crimes, some of which have been around since before laws existed, such as stealing. This first class of crimes required a jury to find both an act, a harm, and an intent to act against the law. The second class, public welfare offenses, did not require a criminal mental state such as intent or knowledge. These included regulatory laws necessary for the public health and welfare, such as relating to food and drug safety.
Morissette was a recycler who collected spent bomb casings from an Air Force practice bombing range, thinking they were abandoned, then sold them as scrap metal for $84.00. He was charged and convicted of "knowingly" converting government property to himself or the junk dealer. He defended that he honestly believed the casings were abandoned, and appealed. The Supreme Court reversed the conviction on the basis that "an injury can amount to a crime only when inflicted by intention", that the person must intend to commit a crime.
The court wrote that it is "universal... in mature systems of law", that if there is to be punishment for a harmful act, there must be "some mental element". Crime is a "compound concept, generally constituted only from the concurrence of an evil-meaning mind with an evil-acting hand... As the states codified the common laws of crimes [wrote specific criminal laws], even if enactments were silent on the subject" of intention, and omitted to include it in the code, the state courts assumed the omission did not mean the legislature meant to exclude the requirement that a jury find criminal intent. Rather, it was evidence that "intent was so inherent" in the meaning of the concept of what constitutes a "crime", that it did not need to be mentioned in the statute.
At the same time, the Morissette opinion acknowledges that the category of criminal legislation encompassing the statute in question must be distinguished from a different category of criminal statutes applicable to public welfare offenses. The Court notes that public welfare offenses, unlike common law crimes, do not intrinsically involve harm to the State, persons, property, or public morals, but are typified only by "neglect where the law requires care, or inaction where it imposes a duty."Id. at 255. Public welfare offenses — examples of which include public health laws, building codes, or food and drug safety laws — do not require a mental state or awareness on the part of the defendant.Id. at 256, 261.
Background 
The defendant, a part-time scrap metal dealer, entered an Air Force bombing range near Oscoda, Michigan, from which he collected spent bomb casings.Morissette v. United States, 187 F.2d 427 (6th Cir. 1951) These casings had been lying around for years.  The defendant sold the casings at a junk market, earning a profit of $84. For this, the defendant was charged with violating  which made it a crime to "knowingly convert" government property. The defendant conceded he had done the act. His sole defense was that he believed that the casings were abandoned property, and therefore there was no crime in taking them.
After the trial, the trial judge instructed the jury with regard to the law, rejecting the defense. With regard to the intent requirement, "knowingly," the trial judge assumed Congress had meant for the statute to operate under a tort law definition of intent. The jury was instructed to find only that the defendant "intentionally exercised dominion over the property."Id. at 238.
Thus, the jury was permitted to find the defendant guilty solely on the basis of his having taken government property. They need not have found, and were not entitled to consider, any belief he may have had with respect to the abandonment of the bomb casings - that is, whether it was government property (which is clearly defined by the plain language of the statute as a crime), or abandoned property (which is not a crime). Were this reading of the statute correct, Congress would have created a strict liability crime.
The Court of Appeals affirmed the decision of the lower court. However, the Supreme Court, as final arbiter of federal law, heard an appeal and reversed the decision of the trial court, concluding that the defendant must be proven to have had knowledge of the facts that made the conversion wrongful, that is, that the property had not been abandoned by its owner. Justice Robert Jackson, writing for a unanimous Court, emphasized the importance of individual criminal intent (mens rea) in the Anglo-American legal tradition, stating famously that crime was "generally constituted only from concurrence of an evil-meaning mind with an evil-doing hand."342 U.S. 246, 251.
At the same time, the Morissette opinion acknowledges that the category of criminal legislation encompassing the statute in question must be distinguished from a different category of criminal statutes applicable to public welfare offenses. The Court notes that public welfare offenses, unlike common law crimes, do not intrinsically involve harm to the State, persons, property, or public morals, but are typified only by "neglect where the law requires care, or inaction where it imposes a duty." Public welfare offenses — examples of which include public health laws, building codes, or food and drug safety laws — do not require a mental state or awareness on the part of the defendant.
Andrew J. Transue was the attorney for the plaintiff.Morrissette v. United States Library of Congress
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 342
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States federal criminal case law
Category:1952 in United States case law
"""

From "Morris v. Schoonfield" ==> """
redirectWilliams v. Illinois#mw-head
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Morris v. United States" ==> """
Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196 (1899), is a 5-to-2 ruling by the United States Supreme Court which held that the bed under the Potomac River between the District of Columbia and the Commonwealth of Virginia belonged to the United States government rather than nearby private landowners on the District of Columbia side.
Background
On June 20, 1632, Charles I, King of England, made a land grant in North America to Cecil Calvert, 2nd Baron Baltimore which became the Province of Maryland (later the state of Maryland).Brugger, Robert J. Maryland, a Middle Temperament, 1634-1980. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, p. 4-5. This grant set the boundary of Maryland at the low-water mark of the southern bank of the Potomac River.Scott, James Brown. Judicial Settlement of Controversies Between States of the American Union. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 1919, p. 473; Risjord, Norman K. Jefferson's America, 1760-1815. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 2002, p. 217. On September 27, 1688, King James II made a land grant in North American to Thomas Colepeper, 2nd Baron Colepeper which became the Colony of Virginia (later the state of Virginia).Harrison, Fairfax. Virginia Land Grants: A Study of Conveyancing in Relation to Colonial Politics. Westminster, Md.: Willow Bend Books, 1998, p. 75. This grant designated "the Potomac River" as the boundary of Virginia.Whyte, W. Pinkney and Jones, Isaac D. Boundary Line Between the States of Maryland and Virginia. Before the Honorable Jeremiah S. Black, Honorable William A. Graham, and Honorable Charles J. Jenkins, Arbitrators Upon the Boundary Line Between the States of Virginia and Maryland. Baltimore, Md.: 1874, p. 75. The conflicting grants led to a long-running border dispute between Maryland and Virginia.Cutright, W.B.; Maxwell, Hu; Sayre, R.H.; and Brooks, Earle Amos. The History of Upshur County, West Virginia: From Its Earliest Exploration and Settlement to the Present Time. Baltimore, Md.: Genealogical Pub. Co., 1996, p. 59. The two states settled navigational and riparian water rights in the Maryland–Virginia Compact of 1785, but the boundary dispute continued.Scott, James Brown. Judicial Settlement of Controversies Between States of the American Union. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 1919, p. 484.Zimmerman, Joseph F. Interstate Disputes: The Supreme Court's Original Jurisdiction. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York, 2006, p. 131-132.The success of the compact led directly to calls for hold a series of meetings to improve the Articles of Confederation, then the constitutional document of the United States. This meeting turned into the Philadelphia Convention, which subsequently drafted the United States Constitution. See: Dellapenna, Joseph W. "Transboundary Water Allocation in the Twenty-First Century: Colloquiam Article: Interstate Struggles Over Rivers: The Southeastern States and the Struggle Over 'Hooch." New York University Environmental Law Journal. 12:828 (2005), p. 867, n.216.
In 1788, the United States Constitution was ratified. The Constitution established an independent zone known as the District of Columbia for the seat of the new government. The Residence Act of 1790 provided for the new capital to be located on the Potomac River, and President George Washington was authorized by the United States Congress to determine the exact location (which he did a year later).Furer, Howard B. Washington, A Chronological and Documentary History, 1790-1970. Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Oceana Publications, 1975, p. 62. The District of Columbia Organic Act of 1801 formally established Congressional jurisdiction over the new District.diGiacomantonio, William C. "'To Make Hay While the Sun Shines': D.C. Governance As An Episode in the Revolution of 1800." In Establishing Congress: The Removal to Washington, D.C., and the Election of 1800. Kenneth R. Bowling and Donald R. Kennon, eds. Columbus, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 2005, p. 39-56. The Virginia retrocession of 1846-1847 returned that portion of the District of Columbia on the Virginia site of the Potomac River to the state of Virginia.Tindall, William. Origin and Government of the District of Columbia. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1908, p. 102-108. This left in doubt the exact position of the District's border with Virginia (just as Maryland's southern border remained in doubt).
thumb|left|150px|Chief Justice John Marshall, whose heirs were party to the suit.
Shortly after the creation of the District of Columbia, the United States government sold certain plots of land to James M. Marshall; his brother, John Marshall (later Chief Justice of the United States); John L. Kidwell; the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Company; and several others.Gutheim, Frederick A. and Lee, Antoinette J. Worthy of the Nation: Washington, D.C., From L'Enfant to the National Capital Planning Commission. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006, p. 95-96.
Maryland and Virginia agreed to arbitrate their dispute, and in 1877 the Black-Jenkins Award (as the decision of the arbitration panel is known) placed Virginia's boundary with Maryland at the low-water mark on the Virginia side of the Potomac River.
In 1882, Congress passed legislation providing for the dredging of the Potomac River, and for the dredged material to be used to fill in various tidal basins, marshes, and shores. This created extensive new land along the northern shore of the Potomac River—land which adjoined that of the heirs of James Marshall, John Marshall, and John Kidwell, and the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Company.  Congress passed legislation in August 1886 directing the Attorney General of the United States to protect the interests of the United States to the new land, and giving the courts jurisdiction over these claims.
The heirs and other claimants sued to win title to the lands.
Decision
Majority opinion
Associate Justice George Shiras, Jr. wrote the majority opinion for the Court, joined by Chief Justice Melville Fuller and Justices John Marshall Harlan, David Josiah Brewer, and Henry Billings Brown.
Justice Shiras first laid out the facts of the case in a lengthy syllabus, and established various classes of claimants.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 198-223. The first issue Justice Shiras confronted was whether any of the parties could lay claim to the bed of the Potomac River (and thus the reclaimed lands built by the government).Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 222-223. Shiras held that none of the heirs on the Virginia side of the river could make any claim to the riverbed.  Neither Lord Colepeper, his heir Thomas Fairfax, 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron, nor any of Fairfax's heirs had ever seriously asserted title to the riverbed, and the Black-Jenkins Award clearly re-established that the boundary of Virginia ended at the low-water mark and did not extend to the riverbed.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 226. Relying on the Supreme Court's previous decision in Martin v. Waddell, 41 U.S. 367 (1842), Justice Shiras argued that none of the Maryland landholders could claim title to the riverbed, either.  The majority held the original landholders were to hold the river and its bed in trust for the public, and that after the American Revolution these public trusts passed into the possession of the state (in this case, Maryland and in due time the District of Columbia).Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 227-228. Shiras distinguished Fairfax's Devisee v. Hunter's Lessee, 11 U.S. 603 (1813) by noting that Fairfax's Devisee did not involve Maryland or any Marylander claimant.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 230. Even if the riverbed had been assigned to Lord Fairfax and his heirs, Shiras concluded, the logic of Martin v. Waddell still held and delivered the lands into the control of the federal government.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 231.
The majority dismissed the Kidwell heirs' claim to the newly created land under the same reasoning applied to the Marshall heirs.  However, Kidwell's heirs noted that Congress had conveyed the property to Kidwell under a resolution adopted on February 16, 1839. The majority held, however, that Congress did not intend by that resolution to convey the riverbed.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 234. The majority relied heavily on the discussion in Illinois Central Railroad v. Illinois, 146 U.S. 387 (1892), Shively v. Bowlby, 152 U.S. 1 (1894), and Mann v. Tacoma Land Company, 153 U.S. 273 (1894),Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 236-238. and from the express language of the resolution (which withheld from the grant any lands for public purposes).Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 242. Shiras produced a highly detailed history of the establishment of the boundaries of the District of Columbia, the plots within its boundaries, and how these plots were conveyed to the private landowners.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 246-266. He concluded that none of the survey reports conveyed an interest in any riverbed. Shiras also noted that in Potomac Steam-Boat Co. v. Upper Potomac Steam-Boat Co., 109 U.S. 672 (1884), the Supreme Court had held that public streets were not part of any plot, and that Water Street (which bounded the Kidwell land to the south) distinctly separated the private land not only from the street itself but also from the newly created lands beyond it.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 266-269.
As for the canal company's claims, the majority held that since none of the private landowners held riparian rights, the company could not obtain such rights from the private landowners.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 271-272. Nor was there any evidence that Congress was relinquishing its rights to Water Street or the river.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 273. The court dismissed the claims of the last landowners, whose property lay between Water Street and the shore, as being improperly based on unofficial land recordsMorris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 276. and for being based on maps and other documents which did not accurately reflect the physical land.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 277-288.
The judgment was affirmed.
Dissent
Justice Edward Douglass White, joined by Justice Rufus Wheeler Peckham, dissented.
Justice White concluded that nothing in the record showed that the United States intended to withdraw the riparian water rights of the landholders when it built Water Street and cut the landholders off from the Potomac River.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 292-293. White also engaged in a lengthy discussion of the laying out of the city's boundaries, and the conveyance of private property to the federal government.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 295-300. There could be no doubt, White argued, that the private landowners intended to give all of their riparian rights to the federal government, and there could be no doubt that the federal government intended to give all riparian rights to those to whom it sold the land.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 300-301. The majority's argument led to a tautology in which no riparian rights existed.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 307.
Justice White also examined the conveyance of the federal government's land to the new private landowners in depth as well.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 311-343. In his discussion, White interpreted the "incorrect" maps as indicating the riparian rights to which the new private landowners were entitled (rather than a problem of inaccurate mapping). White concluded several times that the federal government fully intended to convey riparian rights to the new landowners because the government and its agents repeatedly indicated in letters, memoranda, contracts of sale, and other documents and statements its expectation that the waterside landowners were to build and maintain docks, wharves, and quays and improve the riparian rights they enjoyed. To assume otherwise, White concluded, was nonsensical.  Either the federal government intended to convey riparian rights, or the government deceptively contemplated building Water Street and cutting the new landowners off from their access.  "...the first hypothesis is the one naturally to be assumed."Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 343. "The contracts for the sale of water lots with riparian rights attached, the reports of the surveyors, and the action of the commissioners, all blend into a harmonious and perfect whole, working from an original conception to a successful consummation of a well-understood result. The contrary view produces discord and disarrangement..."Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 311-347.
White also discussed the District of Columbia's lengthy history regarding the regulation of wharves and docks.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 348-357. In his view, the city's treatment of the wharves demonstrated that the wharves were private property on private riverbed land, not private property licensed to be emplaced on a riverbed held in the public trust.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 357. White interpreted Potomac Steam-Boat Co. as superimposing an easement on top of existing riparian water rights.Morris v. United States, 174 U.S. 196, 358. It was not, as the majority held, the government's purpose all along to bound the plots of land with Water Street.
Justice White would have overturned the judgment of the lesser court for determination of the riparian rights of the landowners in question.
Assessment
In Morris v. United States, the Supreme Court dealt with what was known as a "top common," a tract of land between a river and the land intended to be occupied and sold to private landowners.Martin, Thomas C. "Haunted By History: Colonial Land Trusts Post National Threat." William & Mary Law Review. 48:303 (October 2006), p. 311, n.54. Such practices were common in colonial America. Morris v. United States is considered an important case in the evolution of the law of rivers, streams, lakes, and other bodies of water, for it established that such bodies of water and their beds belonged to the public in common and were held in trust by the state for its citizens.Schultz, Jr., Warren M. "Property—Classifying Bodies of Water as Lakes or Streams." Tulane Law Review. 49:208 (November 1974), p. 213.Wilkinson, Charles F. "Symposium on the Public Trust and the Waters of the American West: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow: Introduction and Overview: The Headwaters of the Public Trust: Some Thoughts on the Source and Scope of the Traditional Doctrine." Environmental Law. 19:425 (Spring 1989), p. 455, n.122. The Supreme Court further developed this public trust doctrine in Illinois Central Railroad v. Illinois in 1892 and more recently in Utah Division of State Lands v. United States, 482 U.S. 193, 203 (1987).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 174
 Maryland v. West Virginia
Further reading
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:United States public land law
Category:United States water case law
Category:Property law in the United States
Category:1899 in United States case law
Category:Internal territorial disputes of the United States
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:Legal history of Maryland
Category:Legal history of the District of Columbia
Category:Potomac River
"""

From "Morrison v. National Australia Bank" ==> """
Morrison v. National Australia Bank, 561 U.S. 247 (2010), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning the extraterritorial effect of U.S. securities legislation.  Morrison extinguished  two species of securities class-action claims that had proliferated in preceding years: "foreign-cubed" claims, in which foreign plaintiffs sued foreign issuers for losses on transactions on foreign exchanges, and "foreign-squared" claims, brought by domestic plaintiffs against foreign issuers for losses on transactions on foreign exchanges.
 Background 
The case concerned the 1998 purchase by National Australia Bank of a mortgage servicing company, HomeSide Lending, headquartered in Florida. In July 2001, NAB announced a USD 450 million write-down in assets due to losses associated with HomeSide Lending; and a further USD 1.75 billion write-down in September of that year. The root cause of the write-down was that the modelling done by HomeSide Lending to determine future revenues from mortgage fees was based on overly optimistic assumptions. The plaintiffs claimed that this was part of an intentional scheme to defraud committed by HomeSide's management. By the time the case reached the US Supreme Court, only Australian investors remained as plaintiffs, although a US investor (Morrison, for whom the case was named) participated in earlier proceedings, but his case was thrown out for unrelated reasons.
The plaintiffs argued that the fact the alleged fraud occurred in Florida meant that it should be subject to US securities laws. The defendants argued that, since the alleged fraud related to trading in Australian securities, US securities laws did not apply.
 Opinion of the Court 
The decision was unanimous in favour of the defendants (albeit with Justice Sotomayor recusing herself, given that she had been involved in the case at the Second Circuit). However, different reasons were given. The majority opinion, by Scalia, held that since the plain language of section 10(b) only applies to US securities, it should not be read to apply to non-US securities, despite long-standing precedent, originating in the 2nd Circuit, and since adopted by other circuits also, that 10(b) also applies to non-US securities.
The Court clarified a "longstanding principle of American law that legislation of Congress, unless a contrary intent appears, is meant to apply only within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States." It noted that “the Second Circuit believed the Exchange Act’s silence about §10(b)’s extraterritorial application permitted the court to ‘discern’ whether Congress would have wanted the statute to apply. This disregard of the presumption against extraterritoriality has occurred over many decades in many courts of appeals and has produced a collection of tests for divining congressional intent that are complex in formulation and unpredictable in application. The results demonstrate the wisdom of the presumption against extraterritoriality. Rather than guess anew in each case, this Court applies the presumption in all cases, preserving a stable background against which Congress can legislate with predictable effects.”Morrison v. National Australia Bank syllabus 2
Stevens filed a partial concurrence, which Ginsburg joined, rejecting the overturning of the existing jurisprudence on section 10(b); at the same time, he held that in this particular case, the defendants should prevail, since both the plaintiffs and defendants were Australian, and the case would be better dealt with by the Australian court system – but unlike the majority, he would apply 10(b) to cases involving non-US securities, where there was a closer connection to the US (e.g. US plaintiffs).
 Aftermath 
The Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of July 21, 2010, in its section 929P(b), allowed the SEC and DOJ extraterritorial jurisdiction, but this interpretation remains contested in the courts. In its section 929Y, the Act commissioned the SEC to study extending the permission to private actors. The study indicated a number of options for action to be taken by Congress, which in varying degrees would mitigate the decision.
In late 2010, Fabrice Tourre of Goldman Sachs asked for dismissal of an SEC suit against him based on the repercussions of the decision in this case, claiming his deals were outside the US and thus not subject to certain US laws.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 561
 US corporate law
 Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
 Extraterritorial jurisdiction
Notes
External links
 Entry at SCOTUSBlog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:United States securities case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:National Australia Bank
Category:Extraterritorial jurisdiction
"""

From "Morrison v. Olson" ==> """
Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654 (1988), was a Supreme Court of the United States decision that determined the Independent Counsel Act was constitutional. Morrison also set important precedent determining the scope of Congress's ability to encumber the President's authority to remove Officers of the United States from office. In Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2020), the Supreme Court distinguished Morrison as a narrow exception applying only to inferior officers.
Over the years, the case has become at least as well known for its lone dissent by Justice Antonin Scalia.
Facts
The case involved subpoenas from two subcommittees of the United States House of Representatives that directed the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to produce documents relating to the efforts of the EPA and the Land and Natural Resources Division of the Justice Department to enforce the Superfund law. President Ronald Reagan ordered the Administrator of the EPA to withhold the documents on the grounds that they contained "enforcement sensitive information." This led to an investigation by the House Judiciary Committee that later produced a report suggesting that Theodore Olson, the Assistant Attorney General for the Watergate-era Office of Legal Counsel, had given false and misleading testimony before a House subcommittee during the early parts of the investigation.
The Chairman of the Judiciary Committee forwarded a copy of the report to the Attorney General with a request that he seek the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate the allegations against Olson and two others. Alexia Morrison was named independent counsel and given jurisdiction to investigate whether Olson had violated federal law. Olson moved to quash the subpoenas and sued Morrison in her official capacity.
Olson argued that the Office of the Independent Counsel took executive powers away from the office of the President of the United States and created a hybrid "fourth branch" of government that was ultimately answerable to no one. He argued that the broad powers of an independent counsel could be easily abused or corrupted by partisanship. Morrison in turn argued that her position was necessary in order to prevent abuses by the executive branch, which historically operated in a closed environment.
Holding
The Court held that the independent counsel provision of the Ethics in Government Act did not violate the principle of separation of powers because it did not increase the power of one branch at the expense of another. Instead, even though the President (an executive office) cannot fire Independent Counsel, he still counts as an officer of the Executive branch, i.e. that is, he is not under the control of either the U.S. Congress or the courts.
Justice Scalia's dissent
 Opinion 
Justice Scalia, the lone dissenter, said that the law should be struck down because (1) criminal prosecution is an exercise of "purely executive power" and (2) the law deprived the president of "exclusive control" of that power.Morrison, 487 U.S. at 705-06 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
In his opinion, Scalia predicted how the law might be abused in practice, writing, "I fear the Court has permanently encumbered the Republic with an institution that will do it great harm."Morrison, 487 U.S. at 733 (Scalia, J., dissenting). His discussion of the separation of powers affected by Morrison v. Olson is famous for its rhetorical comparison to other Supreme Court cases on separation of powers:
Scalia's dissent in Morrison is frequently cited as one of his most memorable and rhetorically powerful opinions, and it is considered by many to be at the top of the list. Over time, Scalia's lone dissent has become far more widely accepted as the correct view and likely helped lead to the 1999 Congressional vote to scuttle the independent counsel statute.
 Agreement with the dissent from politicians and commentators 
Conservatives like Senator Bob Dole shared similar concerns when Lawrence Walsh announced the re-indictment of former defense secretary Caspar Weinberger on charges related to the Iran–Contra affair four days before the 1992 U.S. presidential election. Critics also sensed partisan politics when Walsh's office leaked a note suggesting President Bush Sr. had lied about his connections to the affair.
Concerns were also raised, in line with Scalia's dissent, when independent counsel Kenneth Starr spent $40 million and more than four years investigating President Clinton's land deals and extramarital affairs. Many believed the investigation was partisan.
Aftermath
Congress let the Independent Counsel Act expire in 1999. Then-Judge Samuel Alito said the decision hit the separation of powers doctrine 'about as hard as heavy-weight champ Mike Tyson usually hits his opponents.'" It seemingly "drove a stake into the heart of" Myers v. United States, the controlling case on presidential removal powers at that time. In 2013, Justice Scalia described Morrison v. Olson as the most wrenching case in which he had participated:
Probably the most wrenching was Morrison v. Olson, which involved the independent counsel. To take away the power to prosecute from the president and give it to somebody who's not under his control is a terrible erosion of presidential power. And it was wrenching not only because it came out wrong—I was the sole dissenter—but because the opinion was written by Rehnquist, who had been head of the Office of Legal Counsel, before me, and who I thought would realize the importance of that power of the president to prosecute. And he not only wrote the opinion; he wrote it in a manner that was more extreme than I think Bill Brennan would have written it. That was wrenching."In April 2006, a court citing Morrison rejected I. Lewis "Scooter" Libby's argument that Special Counsel Patrick J. Fitzgerald lacked the legal authority to bring charges against him.http://justoneminute.typepad.com/main/files/Libby_060427_Fitz_Constitutional.pdf  Morrison was distinguished in Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2020) as being an exception to the President's generally unencumbered authority to remove officers of the United States at will. The Court held that Morrison's holding was a narrow exception only applying to inferior officers.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 487
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1988 in the environment
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:United States Environmental Protection Agency
"""

From "Morrissey v. Brewer" ==> """
Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471 (1972), was a United States Supreme Court case that provided for a hearing, before a "neutral and detached" hearing body such as a parole board, to determine the factual basis for parole violations. This hearing is colloquially known as a "Morrissey hearing."
The hearing can take place with the defendant in or out of custody. If applicable, a victim may be ordered to testify at a hearing. During the hearing, a member of the Parole Hearing Division reviews the evidence of the violation. 
The parolee is usually present and can present witnesses and documentary evidence and ask the victim questions. But in extreme cases the victim can be interviewed outside the parolee's presence. If this happens, the parolee can leave a list of questions for the victim to answer. Evidence including letters, affidavits, and other material that would not be admissible in an adversary criminal trial can be allowed in a Morrissey hearing.
After the hearing, the factfinders issue a written statement as to the evidence relied upon and reasons for revoking parole. The victim can be notified about the outcome.
Brennan and Marshall noted in their concurrence, "The only question open under our precedents is whether counsel must be furnished the parolee if he is indigent."
References
External links
Appellate Defenders, Inc., Legal Lingo
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:Parole in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Morse v. Frederick" ==> """
Morse v. Frederick, 551 U.S. 393 (2007), is a United States Supreme Court case where the Court held, 5–4, that the First Amendment does not prevent educators from suppressing student speech that is reasonably viewed as promoting illegal drug use at or across the street from a school-supervised event.. 
In 2002, Juneau-Douglas High School principal Deborah Morse suspended student Joseph Frederick after he displayed a banner reading "BONG  4 JESUS" across the street from the school during the 2002 Winter Olympics torch relay. Frederick sued, claiming his constitutional rights to free speech were violated. His suit was dismissed by the federal district court, but on appeal, the Ninth Circuit reversed the ruling, concluding that Frederick's speech rights were violated.  The case then went on to the Supreme Court. 
Chief Justice John Roberts, writing for the majority, concluded that the school officials did not violate the First Amendment. To do so, he made three legal determinations: first, that "school speech" doctrine should apply because Frederick's speech occurred "at a school event"; second, that the speech was "reasonably viewed as promoting illegal drug use"; and third, that a principal may legally restrict that speech—based on the three existing First Amendment school speech precedents, other constitutional jurisprudence relating to schools and a school's "important, indeed, perhaps compelling interest" in deterring drug use by students.
One scholar noted that "by its plain language, Morses holding is narrow in that it expressly applies only to student speech promoting illegal drug use." She adds, however, that courts could nonetheless apply it to other student speech that, like speech encouraging illegal drug use, similarly undermines schools' educational missions or threatens students' safety. "Further, Morse arguably permits viewpoint discrimination of purely political speech whenever that speech mentions illegal drugs—a result seemingly at odds with the First Amendment."
Background and procedural history
thumb|left|The original banner hung in the Newseum in Washington, DC.
On January 24, 2002, students and staff at Juneau-Douglas High School in Alaska were permitted to leave classes to watch the Olympic Torch pass by as part of the 2002 Winter Olympics torch relay. Joseph Frederick, who was late for school that day, joined some friends on the sidewalk across from the high school, off school grounds.Morse, 551 U.S. at 397. Frederick and his friends waited for the television cameras so they could unfurl a banner reading "BONG  4 JESUS". Frederick was quoted as saying he had first seen the phrase on a snowboard sticker. When they displayed the banner, then-principal Deborah Morse ran across the street and seized it.
Morse initially suspended Frederick for five days for violating the school district's anti-drug policy, but increased the suspension to ten days after Frederick quoted Thomas Jefferson. Frederick administratively appealed his suspension to the superintendent who denied his appeal but limited it to the time Frederick had already spent out of school prior to his appeal to the superintendent (eight days). Frederick then appealed to the Juneau School Board, which upheld the suspension on March 19, 2002.
District court
On April 25, 2002, Frederick filed a civil rights lawsuit (under 42 U.S.C. § 1983) against Morse and the school board, claiming they violated his federal and state constitutional rights to free speech. He sought a declaratory relief (for a declaratory judgment that his First Amendment rights had been violated), injunctive relief (for an injunction to remove the reference to the ten-day suspension from his school records), and monetary awards (compensatory damages, punitive damages, and attorney's fees).Morse, 551 U.S. at 399.
The United States District Court for the District of Alaska dismissed Frederick's case on summary judgment.Frederick v. Morse, No. J 02-008 CV(JWS), 2003 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 27270 (D. Alaska May 27, 2003). The district court reasoned that Bethel School District No. 403 v. Fraser, as opposed to Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District, governed Frederick's school speech. Under this premise, the Court ruled that, given the stipulated facts, Morse and the school board had not infringed Frederick's First Amendment rights, because Morse had reasonably interpreted the banner as contravening the school's policies on drug abuse prevention.The Court also ruled that, if Frederick's constitutional rights had been violated, Appellees had qualified immunity.
Ninth Circuit
The Ninth Circuit reversed the decision of the District Court. The unanimous panel decision was written by Judge Andrew Kleinfeld.Frederick v. Morse, 439 F.3d 1114.
First, the Court decided that the incident should be interpreted under school-speech doctrines, even though Frederick was standing across the street, and not on school grounds.
Thus, for Judge Kleinfeld, "the question comes down to whether a school may, in the absence of concern about disruption of educational activities, punish and censor non-disruptive, off-campus speech by students during school-authorized activities because the speech promotes a social message contrary to the one favored by the school. The answer under controlling, long-existing precedent is plainly 'No.'"Frederick v. Morse, 439 F.3d at 1118. To reach this determination, the Court inquired whether Frederick's constitutional rights were violated.. The Court, in holding (contra the District Court) that Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District provided the controlling analysis, distinguished Bethel School District No. 403 v. Fraser and Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier.
Public response
Juneau school district superintendent Peggy Cowan stated, "My concern is that [the court's ruling] could compromise our ability to send a consistent message against the use of illegal drugs."
Certiorari and oral arguments
The school board petitioned the Supreme Court to review the Ninth Circuit's decision. On December 1, 2006, the Court accepted the case.127 S. Ct. 722.
Oral arguments were heard on the morning of March 19, 2007.[ Transcript of Oral Argument], Morse v. Frederick (No. 06-278). Kenneth Starr first spoke on behalf of the petitioning school principal. He described the rule in Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District,  as "that there is a right to political speech subject to disruption—that the speech not be disruptive".Transcript of Oral Argument at 4, Morse v. Frederick (No. 06-278). He defined the disruptiveness in general terms as behavior inimical to the educational mission of the school, and in specific terms as a violation of the school's announced policy to enforce and support laws with respect to the control of marijuana (and other laws in general). Starr also cited the cases of Bethel School District v. Fraser,  and Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier, .
Starr noted that in Tinker there was no written policy; it was an issue of "standardless discretion" being exercised.Transcript of Oral Argument at 10, Morse v. Frederick (No. 06-278). That case was said to be concerned with school disciplinary actions "casting a pall of orthodoxy to prevent the discussion of ideas".Transcript of Oral Argument at 11, Morse v. Frederick (No. 06-278). Justice Souter remarked that 'Bong Hits 4 JESUS' "sounds like just a kid's provocative statement to me".Transcript of Oral Argument at 17, Morse v. Frederick (No. 06-278). Starr responded by saying "the key is to allow the school official to interpret the message as long as that interpretation is reasonable."Transcript of Oral Argument at 18, Morse v. Frederick (No. 06-278).
Deputy Solicitor-General Edwin Kneedler spoke on behalf of the U.S. government in support of the petitioner. He said: "The First Amendment does not require public school officials to stand aside and permit students who are entrusted to their supervision and care to promote or encourage the illegal use of drugs."Transcript of Oral Argument at 19, Morse v. Frederick (No. 06-278). He cited the cases of Board of Education v. Earls and Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier in his favor.
Douglas K. Mertz, of Juneau, Alaska, for the respondent opened, "This is a case about free speech. It is not about drugs." Chief Justice John Roberts responded: "It's a case about money. Your client wants money from the principal personally for her actions in this case." Mertz emphasized that the torch relay was not school-sponsored; that he had not stepped on school property at all before presenting the banner; that "BONG HiTS 4 JESUS" was intended to be—and was regarded as—a purely humorous message; and that the unfurling of the banner did not cause any disruption. Based on these facts, he concludes, his case "does not present the issue of school authority over student expressions on campus or in a school-sponsored activity".
Starr rebutted. He cited Vernonia School District 47J v. Acton and Board of Education v. Earls as cases demonstrative of the Court's strong past stances on matter related to combating the "scourge of drugs". In closing and in summary, he said:
Opinions
Opinion of the Court
Chief Justice Roberts, writing for a majority of five justices, concluded that the school officials did not violate the First Amendment by confiscating the pro-drug banner and suspending the student responsible for it. After reciting the background in Part I of the opinion, in Part II he determined that "school speech" doctrine should apply because Frederick's speech occurred "at a school event"; Part III determined that the speech was "reasonably viewed as promoting illegal drug use"; and Part IV, inquired whether a principal may legally restrict that speech, concluding that she could—under the three existing First Amendment school speech precedents, other Constitutional jurisprudence relating to schools, and a school's "important—indeed, perhaps compelling interest" in deterring drug use by students.
Speech falls under school speech jurisprudence
First, Roberts determined that the Court should analyze Frederick's speech under the comparatively strict doctrine of "school speech"—rejecting "at the outset" Frederick's contention that the case should instead be considered under ordinary free-speech jurisprudence.Morse, 551 U.S. at 400-01. While conceding that past precedent reflects "some uncertainty at the outer boundaries as to when courts should apply school-speech precedents",Here the court provided the following string citation:Porter v. Ascension Parish School Bd., 393 F. 3d 608, 615, n. 22 (CA5 2004) Roberts added: "but not on these facts". Roberts reiterated the circumstances, then explained: "Under these circumstances, we agree with the superintendent that Frederick cannot 'stand in the midst of his fellow students, during school hours, at a school-sanctioned activity and claim he is not at school.'"
Principal reasonably interpreted speech
Next, Roberts determined that the principal's conclusion that Frederick's banner "advocated the use of illegal drugs" was reasonable. Acknowledging that the banner's message was "cryptic", nevertheless it was undeniably a "reference to illegal drugs".Morse, 551 U.S. at 402. In reaching this conclusion, Roberts contrasted "the paucity of alternative meanings the banner might bear" against the fact that the two immediately available interpretations of the words support this conclusion:
And even if that second interpretation does not support the principal's conclusions that the banner advocated the use of illegal drugs,
Wrapping up this discussion, Roberts rejected the two alternative accounts for Frederick's speech provided in the dissent: first, the dissent noted that Frederick "just wanted to get on television", which it characterized as a "credible and uncontradicted explanation for the message". Roberts rejoined: "But that is a description of Frederick's motive for displaying the banner; it is not an interpretation of what the banner says." Second, the dissent emphasized the importance of political speech and the need to foster "national debate about a serious issue". Roberts rejoined that "not even Frederick argues that the banner conveys any sort of political or religious message"; "this is plainly not a case about political debate over the criminalization of drug use or possession."
First Amendment permits schools to restrict such speech
Finally, Roberts inquired whether a principal may restrict such speech. He concluded that she can.Morse, 551 U.S. at 403.
He began by reviewing the court's school speech jurisprudence:
 First, Roberts recapitulated that student expression may be suppressed only if school officials reasonably conclude that it will "materially and substantially disrupt the work and discipline of the school"—observing however that this doctrine came from a case (Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School Dist.) in which the students were engaging in "political speech" in "a silent, passive expression of opinion, unaccompanied by any disorder or disturbance" (wearing armbands, to express "disapproval of the Vietnam hostilities and their advocacy of a truce, to make their views known, and, by their example, to influence others to adopt them". Id., at 514), and in which "[t]he only interest the Court discerned underlying the school's actions was the "mere desire to avoid the discomfort and unpleasantness that always accompany an unpopular viewpoint", or "an urgent wish to avoid the controversy which might result from the expression". Roberts commented on this opinion with a quote from Virginia v. Black—that political speech is "at the core of what the First Amendment is designed to protect". 538 U.S. 343, 365 (2003).
 Second, Roberts cited Bethel School Dist. No. 403 v. Fraser. The jurisprudence of Fraser is controversial, but Roberts declined to apply or resolve the disputed holding of that case ("We need not resolve this debate to decide this case"); instead, he explained that "[f]or present purposes, it is enough to distill from Fraser two basic principles":
that "the constitutional rights of students in public school are not automatically coextensive with the rights of adults in other settings" ("in light of the special characteristics of the school environment").Here, Roberts cited .
that the "substantial disruption" analysis prescribed by Tinker "is not absolute" (i.e., it is flexible/optional).Here, Roberts cited , 271, n. 4 (1988) (disagreeing with the proposition that there is "no difference between the First Amendment analysis applied in Tinker and that applied in Fraser", and noting that the holding in Fraser was not based on any showing of substantial disruption).
 Third, Roberts cited the most recent student speech case, Hazelwood School Dist. v. Kuhlmeier. In that case, the Court permitted a school to "exercise editorial control over the style and content of student speech in school-sponsored expressive activities" (declining to publish articles in the school paper that "the public might reasonably perceive to bear the imprimatur of the school") "so long as their actions are reasonably related to legitimate pedagogical concerns". Roberts found that this case, though factually distinct, was "nevertheless instructive because it confirms both principles cited above".
Roberts then cited cases that cited Tinker in the course of interpreting the qualified status that other Constitutional rights acquire in schools—Vernonia School Dist. 47J v. Acton, New Jersey v. T. L. O., Board of Ed. of Independent School Dist. No. 92 of Pottawatomie Cty. v. Earls. In light of these concerns, Roberts devoted his lengthiest analysis to the government's "important — indeed, perhaps compelling interest" in deterring drug use by students.Morse, 551 U.S. at 394-95. To this point, the opinion cited statistics illustrating the problems of youth drug abuse. It further noted that part of a school's educational mission is "to educate students about the dangers of illegal drugs and to discourage their use".Morse, 551 U.S. at 398-99. The District Court also noted "peer pressure is perhaps 'the single most important factor leading school children to take drugs.'"Morse, 551 U.S. at 408. The Court's interpretation of Frederick's banner deemed the banner as a type of peer pressure. Based on these concerns, the opinion concluded that the principal's actions were motivated by a "serious and palpable" danger of drug abuse quite different from the amorphous fears of anti-war sentiment at play in Tinker.
In Tinker, the school principal had punished students for wearing black anti-war armbands based on his "undifferentiated fear or apprehension of disturbance" or "mere desire to avoid ... discomfort and unpleasantness". Here, however, the concern about student drug abuse "extends well beyond an abstract desire to avoid controversy". Principal Morse's failure to act against the banner "would send a powerful message to the students in her charge, including Frederick, about how serious the school was about the dangers of illegal drug use".Morse, 551 U.S. at 410. The First Amendment, concluded the opinion, "does not require schools to tolerate at school events student expression that contributes to those dangers".
Concurrences
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a concurrence that argued that students in public schools do not have a right to free speech and that Tinker should be overturned. Thomas wrote, "In my view, the history of public education suggests that the First Amendment, as originally understood, does not protect student speech in public schools."Morse, 551 U.S. at 410-11 (Thomas, J., concurring). He praised Hugo Black's dissenting opinion on Tinker and called it "prophetic". Thomas cited the doctrine of in loco parentis, meaning "in place of the parent", in his opinion. He traced the history of public education in America back to its colonial roots. According to Thomas, because originally public schools were intended to substitute for private tutors, public schools could discipline students as they liked and had a far stronger hand in what happened in the classroom. "In short", he continues, "in the earliest public schools, teachers taught, and students listened. Teachers commanded, and students obeyed."Morse, 551 U.S. at 412 (Thomas, J., concurring). He opined that because parents entrusted the care of their children to teachers, teachers have a right to act in the place of parents during school hours. Therefore, teachers should be able to discipline students if necessary. Thomas lambasted Tinker for "usurping [the local school district as a] traditional authority for the judiciary".Morse, 551 U.S. at 421 (Thomas, J., concurring). Thomas believed that Frederick was neither speaking gibberish nor openly advocating drug use, but granting such an impertinence constitutional protection "would ... be to 'surrender control of the American public school system to public school students.'"
Justice Samuel Alito, joined by Justice Anthony Kennedy, wrote a concurrence indicating that he agreed with the majority opinion to the extent that:
Alito agreed that Morse did not violate Frederick's First Amendment rights and emphasized in his concurrence that the holding only applies to students who advocate illegal drug use. He opposed the "educational mission" and in loco parentis analysis in favor of a "special characteristic" of schools that he identifies to be ensuring the physical safety of the students. Alito concluded that an exception must be made to the First Amendment free speech guarantee to protect the students; since according to Alito, advocating illegal drugs possibly leads to violence. But Alito insisted that this small reduction of what is protected by the First Amendment is "at the far reaches of what the First Amendment permits".Morse, 551 U.S. at 426 (Alito, J., concurring).
Concurrence in part and dissent in part
Justice Stephen Breyer concurred in the judgment in part and dissented in part, arguing that the Court should not have directly answered the First Amendment question in the case, but rather decided it based on qualified immunity. Qualified immunity is an affirmative defense that requires courts to enter judgment in favor of a government employee accused of violating individual rights unless the employee's conduct violates "clearly established statutory or constitutional rights of which a reasonable person would have known".Morse, 551 U.S. at 429 (Breyer, J., concurring). Because it was not clear whether the school principal's actions in taking down the banner violated the First Amendment, Breyer would have simply issued a narrow decision indicating that she was shielded by qualified immunity and gone no further.Morse, 551 U.S. at 425-26 (Breyer, J., concurring).
Dissent
Justice John Paul Stevens, in a dissent joined by Justice Souter and Justice Ginsburg, argued that "the Court does serious violence to the First Amendment in upholding—indeed, lauding—a school's decision to punish Frederick for expressing a view with which it disagreed."Morse, 551 U.S. at 435 (Stevens, J., dissenting). Stevens wrote:
Stevens criticized the majority decision as one that "trivializes the two cardinal principles upon which Tinker rests", because it "upholds a punishment meted out on the basis of a listener's disagreement with her understanding (or, more likely, misunderstanding) of the speaker's viewpoint".Morse, 551 U.S. at 437 (Stevens, J., dissenting). Moreover, he noted, "Encouraging drug use might well increase the likelihood that a listener will try an illegal drug, but that hardly justifies censorship". "[C]arving out pro-drug speech for uniquely harsh treatment finds no support in our case law and is inimical to the values protected by the First Amendment."Morse, 551 U.S. at 438-39 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
Stevens also took issue with the majority's interpretation of the banner as being a serious incitement to drug use:
Stevens argued that it would be "profoundly unwise to create special rules for speech about drug and alcohol use", pointing to the historical examples of both opposition to the Vietnam War and resistance to Prohibition in the 1920s.Morse, 551 U.S. at 446-47 (Stevens, J., dissenting). Pointing to the current debate over medical marijuana, Stevens concluded, "Surely our national experience with alcohol should make us wary of dampening speech suggesting—however inarticulately—that it would be better to tax and regulate marijuana than to persevere in a futile effort to ban its use entirely."Morse, 551 U.S. at 448 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
Academic commentary
 Melinda Cupps Dickler 
Melinda Cupps Dickler, in her article "The Morse Quartet: Student Speech and the First Amendment" in the Loyola Law Review, provided a survey of commentary that followed in the immediate aftermath of the case: Some commentators have suggested that Morse both demonstrated a division among the Justices on student speech rightsSee, e.g., Linda Greenhouse, "Vote Against Banner Shows Divide on Speech in Schools", The New York Times, June 26, 2007, at A18, available at 2007 WLNR 12010165 (describing the Court as "deeply split"). and continued Fraser's and Kuhlmeier's erosion of students' First Amendment rights.For example, compare: National Review Online, A Bong Hit to Free Speech, Posting of David French to Phi Beta Cons, https://web.archive.org/web/20110805202813/http://www.nationalreview.com/phi-beta-cons/44149/bong-hit-free-speech (June 25, 2007, 12:19 P.M. EST) (arguing that although Morse seems narrow, it "dramatically expands the scope of state authority over the speech of school children"), and Julie Hilden, The Supreme Court's "Bong Hits 4 Jesus" First Amendment Decision: How Its Betrayal of Free Speech Principles May Have Influenced a Recent Federal Appellate Decision, FindLaw, July 9, 2007, http://writ.news.findlaw.com/hilden/20070709.html (arguing that Morse will influence courts to further curtail student speech rights), with Opinio Juris, "On Winning, Losing, and Things InBetween: A (Preliminary) Comparative Legal Analysis of Morse v. Frederick", posting of Ronald Krotoszynski to  (July 18, 2007, 0021 EST) (noting that the media has generally regarded Morse as "a loss for advocates of student speech rights", but arguing that Morse is "more about the culture wars over drugs, sex, and rock and roll than a fundamental rethinking of whether Tinker makes sense in the contemporary public schools"). She regards this suggestion as "not surprising" given the outcome of the decision, the plain language of the holding, and the dissenting Justices' charge that the opinion did "serious violence to the First Amendment".Morse, 127 S. Ct. at 2629 She adds that other commentators have asserted that while Morse did not dramatically change the law regarding student speech, it failed to answer any of the questions left by the Tinker trilogy.Clay Calvert & Robert D. Richards, "Opinion Morse v. Frederick: A Narrow Win For Schools", National Law Journal, Aug. 2007, at 26, available on Westlaw at 8/1/2007 Nat'l L.J. 26. She notes that these questions—what First Amendment protection is owed to student speech, and how courts should analyze its censorship—are currently significant as schools struggle with the issues of discriminatory student speech or hate speech, and student speech threatening violence. Further, "such questions are always paramount because schools are the training grounds for our nation's citizens and future leaders."
Kenneth Starr
Kenneth Starr, former Dean at Pepperdine University School of Law, and who argued for Morse before the Supreme Court, introduced a symposium about the case"Symposium: Speech and the Public Schools After Morse v. Frederick: How Will Morse v. Frederick Be Applied?" 12 Lewis & Clark Law Review, 1 noting that Chief Justice Roberts "sought to keep the decision quite narrow", limiting the case "to the issue of public school administrators' ability to keep the educational process free from messages about illegal drugs" and drawing from the Court's existing student speech jurisprudence that "permitted school administrators broad discretion to keep out of the educational environment antisocial messages celebrating drug use".
Erwin Chemerinsky
Leading constitutional law scholar Erwin Chemerinsky participated in the same symposium, exploring how this decision would be understood and applied by school officials, school boards, and lower court judges. He suggested that the opinion was misguided and—from a First Amendment perspective—highly undesirable, arguing that the decision cannot be justified under existing First Amendment principles, that it could be seen as authorizing punishment of students for speech that is deemed distasteful or offensive, even just juvenile. However, he noted Justice Alito's concurring opinion, which suggests that the majority opinion might be exceedingly narrow and based on a very unusual factual context; Chemerinsky noted that if Justice Alito's opinion is seen as defining the scope of the holding, then the case establishes only the power of schools to punish speech encouraging illegal drug use rather than giving school officials great discretion to punish student speech. Thus, despite the fact that Morse v. Frederick is consistent with decisions from the Supreme Court and lower federal courts over the last two decades, his hope is that Chief Justice Roberts's majority opinion will be read through the prism of Justice Alito's concurring opinion, thereby having little effect on the already very limited First Amendment rights of students.
Subsequent judicial interpretation
Melinda Cupps Dickler noted that "The few courts that have discussed Morse have disagreed about the breadth of its holding,"Melinda Cupps Dickler (Visiting Assistant Professor at Chicago-Kent College of Law, Illinois Institute of Technology), "The Morse Quartet: Student Speech And The First Amendment", 53 Loyola Law Review, 355.  supporting this claim with the following citations:
Compare Lowery v. Euverard, 497 F.3d 584, 602 (6th Cir. 2007) (Gilman, J., concurring) (noting that Morse's holding is narrow), and Layshock v. Hermitage Sch. Dist., 496 F. Supp. 2d 587, 596-97 (W.D. Pa. 2007)Layshock v. Hermitage Sch. Dist., 496 F. Supp. 2d 587, 596-97 (W.D. Pa. 2007), aff'd, 650 F.3d 205 (3d Cir. 2011). (iterating that Morse did not alter the Tinker framework), with Boim v. Fulton County Sch. Dist., 494 F.3d 978, 9984 (11th Cir. 2007) (holding that Morse's holding is broad). The Layshock court stated that Morse did not change the basic framework established by the Tinker trilogy, which it described as a scheme in which Fraser and Kuhlmeier are exceptions to Tinker's general rule. Layshock, 496 F. Supp. 2d at 596. Significantly, however, the court cited to both Morse and Tinker as requiring courts to defer to school officials' decisions about punishing student speech. Id. at 597. On the other hand, the court also accepted Justice Alito's concurring argument in Morse when it held that Morse does not permit school officials to regulate student speech merely on the basis that it is incompatible with the schools' educational missions. Id. at 599.
By contrast, the Eleventh Circuit extended Morse's rationale about illegal drugs to the context of student speech that is "construed as a threat of school violence". Boim, 494 F.3d at 984 (upholding the suspension of a high school student for a story labeled as a "dream" in which she described shooting her math teacher). Moreover, the court concluded that Morse supports the idea that student speech can be regulated where "[in] a school administrator's professional observation ... certain expressions [of student speech] have led to, and therefore could lead to, an unhealthy and potentially unsafe learning environment". Id. at 983 (quoting Scott v. Sch. Bd., 324 F.3d 1246, 1247 (11th Cir. 2003)). Some commentators predict that courts will extend Morse to further restrict protection for student speech. See, e.g., Hilden, supra note 12 (discussing Wisniewski v. Bd. of Educ. of Weedsport Cent. Sch. Dist., 494 F.3d 34 (2d Cir. 2007)); see also infra text accompanying note 17 (providing further discussion of Wisniewski, in which the Second Circuit cited to Morse, but applied Tinker).
Groups involved
The American Civil Liberties Union directly participated in this case on the side of Joseph Frederick. The Center for Individual Rights, National Coalition Against Censorship, and other groups that advocate First Amendment protection filed amici curiae in support of Frederick. Students for Sensible Drug Policy also noted that banning drug-related speech would undermine their ability to have chapters in public schools. The American Center for Law and Justice, and Rutherford Institute, and several other Christian right groups also filed briefs on the side of Frederick, reasoning that if schools could ban "offensive" speech they would also be able to prohibit religious speech with which administrators disagree. On this point, the Christian right groups prevailed, as the Supreme Court explicitly declined to hold that school boards could discipline "offensive" speech, noting that "much political and religious speech might be perceived as offensive to some" and the concern is "not that Frederick's speech was offensive, but that it was reasonably viewed as promoting illegal drug use".
The National School Boards Association supported Morse and the Juneau school district, arguing that schools should be able to regulate controversial speech. U.S. Solicitor General Paul Clement filed an amicus brief in support of the school district's decision to prohibit controversial speech.
On March 19, 2007, Students for Sensible Drug Policy organized a free speech rally at the Supreme Court during oral arguments. The Drug Policy Alliance and the National Youth Rights Association assisted with the rally which brought dozens of students from across the country to the court steps.
Aftermath
The U.S. Supreme Court decision did not resolve all of the issues in the case. Frederick claimed his speech rights under the Constitution of Alaska were violated, and the issue was argued in front of the Alaska Court of Appeals in September 2008. However, the school district agreed to settle out of court before the judges reached a decision. In November 2008, the district paid Frederick $45,000 to settle all remaining claims and agreed to hire a neutral constitutional law expert to lead a forum on student speech at Juneau-Douglas High School by the end of the school year. Frederick later said that while he was proud of himself for standing up for his rights, he regretted "the bad precedent set by the ruling".
The original "BONG HiTS 4 JESUS" banner hung in the First Amendment gallery of the now-defunct Newseum in Washington, D.C.
See also
 Cannabis in the United States
 Censorship of student media in the United States
 Legal history of cannabis in the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 551
Explanatory notes
References
Further reading
External links
 Bong Hits 4 Jesus Toke Two - The Washington Post Opinion, Emil Steiner
 [ Supreme Court Oral Argument Transcript]
 Video of March 19 free speech demonstration at the U.S. Supreme Court
 Analysis of the Supreme Court ruling by Andy Carvin
 Opinion of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals
 Yale Law Journal commentary
 MSNBC article on the incident
 Starr Goes From Cigars to Bongs - Wall Street Journal - Washington Wire blog article
 9th Circuit: 'Bong Hits 4 Jesus' Banner Was Free Speech - Law.com case overview (archived)
 'Bong Hits' Banner Gives Supreme Court Chance to Clear the Air on Student Speech - Law.com certiorari candidate (archived)
 Bong Hits 4 Jesus Toke Three - The Washington Post Opinion, Emil Steiner
 Student Press Law Center on the Appeals Court decision
 San Francisco Gate on the appeal
 List of briefs filed in the case, including several amicus briefs
 Analysis of the semantics of Bong hits 4 Jesus
 Video of Bong Hits 4 Jesus song about the case
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:History of drug control in the United States
Category:Juneau, Alaska
Category:Student rights case law in the United States
Category:United States children's rights case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Morton Salt Co. v. G.S. Suppiger Co." ==> """
Morton Salt Co. v. G.S. Suppiger Co., 314 U.S. 488 (1942), is a patent misuse decision of the United States Supreme Court. It was the first case in which the Court expressly labeled as "misuse" the Motion Picture Patent/Carbice tie-in defense to a charge of patent infringement and created the present blanket remedy in infringement cases of unenforceability of the misused patent. ("Equity may rightly withhold its assistance from such a use of the patent by declining to entertain a suit for infringement, and should do so at least until it is made to appear that the improper practice has been abandoned and that the consequences of the misuse of the patent have been dissipated.") The decision re-emphasized that misuse can be found without finding an antitrust violation.314 U.S. at 494 ("It is unnecessary to decide whether respondent has violated the Clayton Act, for we conclude that, in any event, the maintenance of the present suit to restrain petitioner's manufacture or sale of the alleged infringing machines is contrary to public policy, and that the district court rightly dismissed the complaint for want of equity.")
Background
thumb|right|300px|Salt dispensing machine at issue in Suppiger case
Facts
G.S. Suppiger Co. operated a canning company which had a subsidiary "devoted to making and leasing a patented tablet depositing machine and to making and selling salt tablets of a particular design and configuration." The salt tablets were unpatented, common salt (NaCl) but they had a particular shape to fit the patented salt tablet depositing machine that Suppiger made ("a particular configuration which is required for use in plaintiff's depositing machines for continuous, untroubled use"). Suppiger's leases to canners of tomatoes and other vegetables "included a license to use the patented machine, upon the condition and agreement by the lessee that plaintiff's and its predecessor's salt tablets be used exclusively in said patented, leased machines."
Morton Salt Co. was in the same business and made and leased salt tablet depositing machines alleged to infringe the patent, as well as salt tablets for the machines. Morton also provided in its "leases that the lessee shall use only salt tablets made by it." The facts were undisputed.117 F.2d at 970.
Proceedings in lower courts
Morton sued Suppiger and the district court dismissed the complaint on summary judgment because of "plaintiff's use of its patent to develop a monopoly of an unpatented article, to-wit, salt tablets." The Seventh Circuit reversed because Suppiger controlled only a small amount of the salt market by its tie-in:
The volume of all the salt business is large. The amount used in the canning field is so small that its complete control would not result in a monopoly of the salt industry. It is not the salt tablet as such but the salt which goes into the salt tablet which must determine the monopolistic tendency of plaintiff's lease contracts.117 F.2d at 972.
Section 3 of the Clayton Act, 15 U.S.C. § 14, makes certain tie-ins unlawful. "However, unlawfulness is made to depend upon a provision which is here important, where the effect of such lease or such condition may be substantially to lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly in any line of commerce." The record did not support a conclusion that Suppiger's tie-in had such an effect.117 F.2d at 971.
Morton appealed to the Supreme Court.
Ruling of the Supreme Court
thumb|right|200px|Chief Justice Harlan Fiske Stone
Chief Justice Harlan Stone delivered the opinion of the Court, unanimously reversing the judgment of the Seventh Circuit. He began by stating that the court of appeals misunderstood the relevant issue: "The question we must decide is not necessarily whether respondent has violated the Clayton Act, but whether a court of equity will lend its aid to protect the patent monopoly when respondent is using it as the effective means of restraining competition with its sale of an unpatented article."314 U.S. at 490. Moreover, "nothing turns on the fact that petitioner also competes with respondent in the sale of the tablets, and we may assume for purposes of this case that petitioner is doing no more than making and leasing the alleged infringing machines" subject to a tie-in as to the salt tablets.314 U.S. at 491.
On these facts, Suppiger "is making use of its patent monopoly to restrain competition in the marketing of unpatented articles, salt tablets, for use with the patented machines, and is aiding in the creation of a limited monopoly in the tablets not within that granted by the patent." Suppiger has a patent on the tablet dispensing machine, not on salt tablets. The patent gives it a monopoly "to make, use, and vend the particular device described and claimed in the patent. But a patent affords no immunity for a monopoly not within the grant."
The policy of the patent system "includes inventions within the granted monopoly [but] excludes from it all that is not embraced in the invention. It equally forbids the use of the patent to secure an exclusive right or limited monopoly not granted by the Patent Office and which it is contrary to public policy to grant." It is well recognized that "courts of equity may appropriately withhold their aid where the plaintiff is using the right asserted contrary to the public interest."314 U.S. at 492.
The proper rule in such cases, the Court said, is:
Where the patent is used as a means of restraining competition with the patentee's sale of an unpatented product, the successful prosecution of an infringement suit, even against one who is not a competitor in such sale, is a powerful aid to the maintenance of the attempted monopoly of the unpatented article, and is thus a contributing factor in thwarting the public policy underlying the grant of the patent. Maintenance and enlargement of the attempted monopoly of the unpatented article are dependent to some extent upon persuading the public of the validity of the patent, which the infringement suit is intended to establish. Equity may rightly withhold its assistance from such a use of the patent by declining to entertain a suit for infringement, and should do so at least until it is made to appear that the improper practice has been abandoned and that the consequences of the misuse of the patent have been dissipated.314 U.S. at 493.
The reasons for invoking the "clean hands" doctrine to bar the prosecution of an infringement suit against even one who is not a competitor with the patentee in the sale of the unpatented product (here, salt tabletsThe Court assumes here that the relevant market is salt tablets rather than salt, which the Seventh Circuit considered the relevant market.) are fundamentally the same as those which bar an infringement suit against a licensee who has violated a condition of the license by using with the licensed machine a competing unpatented article, as in the Motion Picture Patents case: "It is the adverse effect upon the public interest of a successful infringement suit in conjunction with the patentee's course of conduct which disqualifies him to maintain the suit, regardless of whether the particular defendant has suffered from the misuse of the patent.314 U.S. at 493-94.
These considerations made it unnecessary, the Court added, to decide whether Suppiger had committed an antitrust violation "for we conclude that, in any event, the maintenance of the present suit to restrain petitioner's manufacture or sale of the alleged infringing machines is contrary to public policy, and that the district court rightly dismissed the complaint for want of equity."
Subsequent development of unenforceability defense
The Suppiger case expanded the patent misuse defense from its original rule that a contractual provision considered patent misuse could not be enforced, as in the Motion Picture Patents tie-in case, to a defense in third party infringement suits, as in Suppiger, where the patentee's use of a tie-in disabled it from enforcing its patent against infringement by Morton. The disability continues until the misuse has been fully "purged" and its effects have fully dissipated.See ; see also Suppiger, 314 U.S. at 493. B.B. Chemical was a companion case to Suppiger that developed more fully the requirement for "purgation" before misuse would stop preventing grant of relief against infringement or collection of royalties.
Some critics have argued that this remedy is too harsh,See, e.g., Mark A. Lemley, Comment, The Economic Irrationality of the Patent Misuse Doctrine, 78  1599 (1990). and that it should be enough to require the patentee to stop engaging in the abusive conduct. The Seventh Circuit, in Panther Pumps & Equipment Co. v. Hydrocraft, Inc., effectively limited Suppiger by holding that violations of the rule in Lear, Inc. v. Adkins,. against agreements not to challenge patent validity should not lead to the harsh result of making the patent unenforceable against infringement, because such an agreement was "not the kind of misuse which forecloses recovery of damages" from an infringer. On the other hand, such a rule of lenity may encourage patentees to adopt the principle of "nothing ventured, nothing gained."
References
External links
Category:1942 in United States case law
Category:Patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States misuse law
"""

From "Morton v. Mancari" ==> """
Morton v. Mancari, 417 U.S. 535 (1974), was a United States legal case about the constitutionality, under the Fifth Amendment, of hiring preferences given to Indians within the Bureau of Indian Affairs.  The Supreme Court of the United States held that the hiring preferences given by the United States Congress does not violate the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.
 Background 
The appellees were a group of non-Indian employees of the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA).  The Appellees brought this action claiming that the employment preference for qualified Indians in the BIA provided by the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 also known as the Wheeler-Howard Act, 48 Stat. 984, contravened the anti-discrimination provisions of the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972 and deprived them of property rights without due process of law in violation of the Fifth Amendment.  The District Court held that the Indian preference was implicitly repealed by section 11 of the 1972 Act, which prohibited racial discrimination in most federal employment.  The court enjoined appellant federal officials from implementing any Indian employment preferences in the BIA.  The Supreme Court of the United States granted Certiorari.
 Opinion of the Court 
The issue in this case was whether the hiring preference policy within the BIA constituted invidious racial discrimination in violation of the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution.
The policy of the BIA grants preference at both the hiring and the promotion phase.  Given a situation where two individuals are both qualified for a position and one of them is an Indian, the Indian would receive preference over the non-Indian.  The District Court found that any hiring preferences previously given by the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 were implicitly repealed by the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972, 86 Stat. 111, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race in most federal employment.  The Court found that the purpose of the preference was not racially motivated but motivated by the desire to give "Indians a greater participation in their own self-government; to further the Government's trust obligation toward the Indian tribes; and to reduce the negative effect of having non-Indians administer matters that affect Indian tribal life." The goal of the hiring preference was to make the BIA more responsive to the interests of the people it was serving, Indians.  The Court found that Congress was well aware that the policy would create disadvantages within the BIA for non-Indians.  However, the desire to make the BIA more responsive to Indians as well as creating a program of self-government justifiably outweighed this concern.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the first major piece of legislation to prohibit discrimination in private employment on the basis of race, color, religion, sex or national origin, specifically exempted preferential treatment of Indians.  This, the Court said, showed a clear recognition that Indians had a unique legal status, thus giving this hiring preference more justification.
The Court noted that it is a rare occasion when Congress will implicitly repeal an action, and that typically Congress must specifically do so.  The Court went on to find several reasons that Congress did not intend to repeal the hiring preferences for Indians within the BIA.
First:  The exemptions of Indians from the 1964 Civil Rights Act indicated a longstanding policy to give unique legal status to Indians concerning employment on or near the reservation.
Second:  Only three months after Congress enacted the 1972 amendments it also enacted two new Indian preference laws.  The Court thought it unlikely for the same Congress to take away an Indian preference and subsequently create two more.
Third:  Preferences given to Indians have, for many years, been treated as exceptions to Executive Orders forbidding Government Employment discrimination.  The 1972 amendments simply codified existing anti-discrimination provisions, and there is no reason to believe that Congress intended to get rid of these preferences that had previously co-existed with broad anti-discrimination provisions in Executive Orders.
Fourth:  Repeals by implication are not favored.  There is no indication in the legislative history that Congress intended to repeal the preferences previously given to Indians.  The court found that the only occasion where repeal by implication is necessary is where two statutes are irreconcilable.  This is not the case here.
When the court turned to the due process claim it found:
The hiring preference given here was not "racial discrimination" nor was it even a "racial" preference.  The court compared it to the requirement of a Senator being from the state that she represents, or a city council member being required to reside in the area he represents.  The Court said, "The preference, as applied, is granted to Indians not as a discrete racial group, but rather, as members of quasi-sovereign tribal entities whose lives and activities are governed by the BIA in a unique fashion."  Saying also, "the BIA is truly sui generis."  The Court also noted that this preference was reasonably and directly related to a legitimate nonracially based goal, thus preventing it from violating the Constitution.
 Further reading 
External links
 Bureau of Indian Affairs
 U of Tulsa: Morton v. Mancari
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Morton v. Ruiz" ==> """
Morton v. Ruiz, 415 U.S. 199 (1974), was a case heard before the United States Supreme Court affirming the right of Native Americans living on reservations to receive state assistance.
 Background 
Ramon Ruiz and his wife Anita were Papago Indians and U.S. citizens who in 1940 left the Papago reservation in Arizona to seek employment 15 miles away at the Phelps-Dodge copper mines at Ajo. They settled in a community called the "Indian Village" and maintained close ties with the nearby reservation.
On December 11, 1967, Mr. Ruiz applied for general assistance benefits from the Bureau of Indian Affairs and was immediately notified by letter that he was ineligible for general benefits because of a provision in 66 Indian Affairs Manual 3.1.4 (1965) that eligibility was limited to Indians living "on reservations" and certain jurisdictions in Alaska and Oklahoma. The legislation authorizing payment of benefits by the BIA had no express residential criteria.
This policy had not been published in the Federal Register or in the Code of Federal Regulations and its only manifestation was solely an internal-operations brochure at the Bureau of Indian Affairs intended to cover policies that "do not relate to the public."  Even though the Bureau of Indian Affairs was not required to follow the Administrative Procedures Act Section 553 for benefit disbursement, they expressed internal policies that they would follow it. 
 Arguments and ruling 
Ruiz pursued the class action lawsuit, "entitlement to such general assistance as a matter of statutory interpretation". 
The Supreme Court, in an opinion written by Justice Blackmun, held that the internal Section 553 procedures were not followed, and thus benefits could not be limited.
The Supreme Court further said, "[In] order for an agency interpretation to be granted deference, it must be consistent with the congressional purpose. It is evident to us that Congress did not itself intend to limit its authorization to only those Indians directly on, in contrast to those 'near,' the reservation, and that, therefore, the BIA's interpretation must fail."
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:1974 in United States case law
"""

From "Moseley v. V Secret Catalogue, Inc." ==> """
Moseley v. V Secret Catalogue, Inc., 537 U.S. 418 (2003), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States holding that, under the Federal Trademark Dilution Act, a claim of trademark dilution requires proof of actual dilution, not merely a likelihood of dilution. . This decision was later superseded by the Trademark Dilution Revision Act of 2006 (TDRA).
Background
Trademark law in the United States was adopted from the common law of England and is part of the law of unfair competition. In 1925, an influential law review article described the dilution of trademarks through blurring where a product uses a name that is similar to a trademark and causes an erosion of its uniqueness. Starting in 1946, various states began to adopt anti-dilution provisions in their trademark statutes. The federal government followed suit in 1995 with the Federal Trademark Dilution Act (FTDA). This federal legislation applied to famous marks and made a party liable if it used a similar mark that diluted a famous mark's distinctiveness. However, the legislation did not define terms to establish what constituted a famous mark or articulate a clear standard for determining liability. As a result, as trademark cases were litigated in federal courts, a split developed between the different federal circuit appellate courts regarding issues such as what is a famous mark, whether a regional mark could be a famous mark, and whether a dilution claim required proof of economic harm to the trademark holder.
Victoria's Secret, a registered trademark owned by V Secret Catalogue, Inc., was found in 1988 to market moderately priced high quality lingerie in stores designed to look like a woman's bedroom. By 1998 the company spent $55 million in advertising its brand, operated 750 Victoria's Secret stores, including two in Louisville, Kentucky, and distributed 400 million copies of its catalogue.
In 1998 a weekly publication distributed to residents at Fort Knox, Kentucky, contained an ad for the grand opening of a store called Victor's Secret that was owned by Victor and Cathy Moseley which sold lingerie and adult novelties and gifts. An army colonel who saw the ad was offended by what he perceived to be an attempt to use a reputable company's trademark to sell "unwholesome, tawdry merchandise" and contacted Victoria's Secret, which then requested the Moseleys to immediately discontinue the use of the name Victor's Secret and "any variations thereof." In response the Moseleys changed the name of the store to Victor's Little Secret. Unsatisfied with this name change, Victoria's Secret filed suit in the District Court for the Western District of Kentucky alleging, among other claims, a violation of the FTDA. The district court, noting that Moseleys did not dispute that the trademark was famous, found in an unpublished opinion that the two names were sufficiently similar to cause dilution and that the Victor's Secret mark diluted the Victoria's Secret mark through its tarnishing effect. The court prohibited the Moseleys from using the Victor's Little Secret name because it tarnished the Victoria's Secret trademark.
The Sixth Circuit Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the lower court decision, but noted that after the district court's decision the circuit court had adopted standards for determining dilution under the FTDA based on a test accepted in a Second Circuit case.  Under this test, the circuit court determined that it was not necessary to establish that any economic harm had occurred as a result of the dilution. The circuit court in its opinion considered and rejected a Fourth Circuit case which held that proof of actual economic damages was necessary for a trademark dilution claim to prevail under the FTDA. Because of the difference between the circuits on this issue, the Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the legal conflict.
Opinion
thumb|200px|right|A store showing the Victoria's Secret trademark. The Supreme Court held that a claim of trademark dilution requires evidence of actual dilution.
The opinion by Justice Stevens noted that under the FTDA the owner of a trademark may obtain an injunction if another person's commercial use of a mark or trade name "causes dilution of the distinctive quality" of the famous mark. As the definition of dilution in the FTDA is described as the "lessening of the capacity of the famous mark" and "likelihood of confusion, mistake, or deception," the Court held that the FTDA requires proof of actual dilution. However, this proof did not necessarily include actual loss of sales or profit, as the Fourth Circuit had held. Instead, the owner of the trademark could use surveys or other circumstantial evidence of dilution. As Victoria's Secret did not provide evidence of actual dilution, the judgment of the circuit court was reversed.
Justice Scalia joined the majority opinion with the exception of one section which discussed the interpretation of the FTDA.
Justice Kennedy filed a concurring opinion which noted that Victoria's Secret was not foreclosed from obtaining injunctive relief on remand of the case.
Subsequent events
Following the remand of the case to district court, Congress in 2006 passed the Trademark Dilution Revision Act, which essentially overturned the Supreme Court's Moseley decision. The district court applied the new law and granted summary judgment in favor of Victoria's Secret and issued an injunction against the use of the name Victor's Little Secret. This decision was appealed up to the Supreme Court again, but was not granted certiorari. After an injunction in 2000, the name of the store was changed to Cathy's Little Secret and maintained that name.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 537
List of trademark case law
 References 
External links
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States trademark case law
Category:Victoria's Secret
"""

From "Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Construction Corp." ==> """
Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Construction Corp., 460 U.S. 1 (1983), commonly cited as Moses Cone or Cone Hospital, is a United States Supreme Court decision concerning civil procedure, specifically the abstention doctrine, as it applies to enforcing an arbitration clause in a diversity case. By a 6–3 margin, the justices resolved a complicated construction dispute by ruling that a North Carolina hospital had to arbitrate a claim against the Alabama-based company it had hired to build a new wing, even though it meant that it could not consolidate it with ongoing litigation it had brought in state court against the contractor and architect.
Justice William Brennan wrote for the majority that a district court's stay of the contractor's petition to compel arbitration was an "abuse of discretion". It had not properly applied the Court's prior ruling in Colorado River Water Conservation District v. United States. Since the net effect of the stay was to force the contractor to litigate in state court, Mercury's appeal to the Fourth Circuit was proper, and the appeals court properly reversed the stay. Since the contract was covered by the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA), the hospital had no way to avoid arbitration, which the contractor could not be assured of getting under existing state law.
William Rehnquist's dissent, joined by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger and Sandra Day O'Connor, accused the majority of misreading the case in order to get the contractor into arbitration. He argued that another case, Will v. Calvert Fire Insurance Co., permitted the district court's action, which in any case was routine docket management practiced by many district judges.
While arbitration was not the main issue in the case, it had a profound effect on future cases concerning the FAA. Two of Brennan's passing dicta, that the FAA applied to actions in state court and that it enacted a national policy in favor of arbitration, became the central holdings of Southland Corp. v. Keating the following year, a case from which O'Connor and Rehnquist dissented. Those holdings have been challenged, even by some other justices, as fundamentally at odds with the language and legislative history of the FAA, even as the Court has continued to expand its scope since then.
Source of the dispute
In 1975 Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital in Greensboro, North Carolina, contracted with Mercury to build a new wing. The contract, drafted by the hospital's attorneys, vested most dispute resolution authority, relating to aesthetic matters, in the project's architect, J.N. Pease Associates of Charlotte, with the opportunity to go to arbitration if the architect did not rule on the dispute within ten days of the evidence being presented, or if they disagreed with its decision.
The project was scheduled to completed by October 1977, but due to change orders and some other problems the hospital and Mercury agreed on a two-year extension, provided Mercury withhold its claim for delay and impact costs until after the work was done. By February 1979 the wing was substantially complete, except for some punch list items.
In January 1980, Mercury submitted its claim for up to $2 million in additional costs to the architect. Over the next several months, Mercury and the architect went over the claim, apparently with the goal of reducing it. The hospital contended later it was unaware of these negotiations until April of that year, and that the architect exceeded its contractual powers by delaying and allowing the claims to be presented after completion. By the time it was aware, the claim had been reduced to $600,000–1.2 million.
When it was presented with the claim, the hospital asked for time to have its own expert review it. Mercury, the hospital and the architect met in August in Birmingham, Alabama. Mercury offered the hospital access to its files. The hospital asked that the copies be mailed to its expert, who was unable to attend the meeting due to a scheduling conflict. The parties agreed to meet again in October.
Litigation
A week before that meeting, Mercury's lawyer called the hospital's lawyer to confirm the meeting date. The hospital's lawyer said he would be able to do so the next day. Instead, when he called, it was to inform Mercury's lawyer that the hospital did not intend to pay as its expert found that none of the delays were its fault and was filing for a declaratory judgment in North Carolina state court to the effect that it did not have to arbitrate and owed Mercury nothing (and that even if it did, the architect would owe the hospital the judgment).
The hospital filed the next morning in Guilford County Superior Court, naming Mercury and the architect as defendants, charging negligence and breach of contract, but not alleging a conspiracy between the two. It said that Mercury had, through its delays, forfeited any right to arbitration. Mercury filed a demand for arbitration the following day. A week later, the hospital filed ex parte in state court for an injunction, which it received, barring Mercury from proceeding with arbitration. Mercury objected and two weeks later the injunction was lifted.
In the interim it had initiated an action in the Middle District of North Carolina federal court to compel the hospital to arbitrate under the Federal Arbitration Act and asking that the state court action be removed to federal court. The hospital responded by asking for the case to be removed back to state court, and that the federal case be stayed pending resolution of the state court action. The district court agreed, finding that there was not diversity and that the state court action was similar enough to the action before it.
Appeal
Mercury filed for an interlocutory appeal with the Fourth Circuit. Citing the circuit rule that such appeals are permitted when the practical effect of the district court's ruling is to put an end to the action, it decided to hear the case. An en banc panel of nine judges heard arguments in June 1981 and ruled in Mercury's favor two months later.In Re Mercury Construction Corporation v. Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital, 656 F. 2nd 933 (1981).
Judge Donald S. Russell wrote for a majority of seven that Mercury was entitled to its arbitration order based on a variety of precedents. The action did not meet the FAA's requirement that arbitration can be avoided only through standard defenses to contract formation, nor had previous appeals courts allowed pending state-court action to prevail. Federal law was controlling, overriding North Carolina law that held contracts such as the one between Mercury and the hospital not to be in interstate commerce and thus under the domain of state law, which in this case would have allowed the hospital to avoid arbitration. He called the hospital's contention that its designation of the architect, also based in North Carolina, as the dispute-resolution authority and the latter's status as a defendant in its lawsuit "a novel theory for avoiding arbitration".
He distinguished the case from Will v. Calvert Fire Ins. Co., in which the Supreme Court had sustained a federal court's abstention in favor of a state court, by saying there were no exceptional circumstances. In that case, the state action had long preceded the federal action, and unlike Colorado River the parties were few and located near each other. He dismissed the hospital's claim that Mercury's petition for an arbitration order was a delaying tactic, calling the hospital's behavior more clearly contrived.
Nor was he moved by the hospital's desire to avoid piecemeal litigation, part of the justification for Colorado River. "Even assuming there is some controversy between the Hospital and the Architect, to which Mercury is not a party," Russell wrote, "why should Mercury be delayed in its right to a prompt resolution by arbitration, without the expense of long and protracted litigation, as the parties had solemnly agreed, because of some controversy between the Hospital and its Architect? Such a maneuver plainly prejudiced Mercury in its right to arbitration under the Federal Act." He also doubted the hospital's claim that Mercury faced no greater burden pursuing arbitration in state court, since while North Carolina's arbitration law was similar to the federal statute, it had rarely been interpreted by that state's courts. "Until a statute has been given an authoritative judicial construction by the enacting state's own courts, its application and reach are uncertain."
The two dissenting judges were H. Emory Widener, Jr. and Kenneth Keller Hall. They pointed out that existing case law in other circuits had required that state courts rule on the arbitrability of issues under dispute. "The action of the district court is nothing more nor less than the exercising of control of its own docket, in which matter it should be allowed rather wide latitude instead of being strictly circumscribed as the majority would have it", Widener wrote. He defended the North Carolina courts, quoting the Supreme Court in Sumner v. Mata to the effect that state judges were also required to swear to uphold the Constitution and should be presumed capable of doing so despite differences of interpretation.
He concluded by casting doubt on the majority's imputation that the hospital had been manipulating the system to avoid arbitration. It seemed a more reasonable conclusion to Widener that the hospital, distrusting both its architect and contractor, had decided it was better to have all the parties in one forum. Accusing the majority of "bootstrap logic", he said "The treacherous motives attributed to these acts is more likely a conjecture stemming from the majority's hindsight than the reasoned product of the Hospital's foresight."
Before the Court
The Court granted certiorari to hear the case due to the procedural issues involved. Its decision to hear the case allowed the consideration of a third issue: was the district court's stay properly appealable? After the 1981 term had intervened, it heard oral arguments on the abstention, appealability and arbitrability questions in November 1982.
Jack Floyd, arguing for the hospital, called Mercury's petition for an arbitration order "curious". He reiterated that the contract stipulated that North Carolina law applied to it, and that other circuits faced with similar questions had ruled state arbitration law governed in that situation. There were always exceptions, he added. "To say 'I agree to arbitrate' does not mean that I agree to arbitrate every conceivable dispute." Mercury had brought its claim beyond the original time frame of five years from the execution of the contract, so the hospital was not bound to arbitrate that.
Confronted with the issue of whether there would be a different outcome in federal court, since the federal court would have to follow North Carolina law as well, he maintained that "Mercury has no right to select its court". The stay should not have been appealed, he said, since Mercury could have gone back to district court at any time if it felt the state court proceeding was not fair and asked that the stay be lifted. As to abstention, he argued that "the circumstances compelled stay more clearly" than they had in Colorado River or Will.
"Generally," A.H. Gaede said for Mercury, "the federal courts are far more familiar with the interpretation and enforcement of the Federal Arbitration Act." He reiterated the facts of the case — his client had been asked to withhold its claims until after completion of the project, and the architect had concluded they were entitled to at least some of them. Only after the hospital had told them of its intention to sue did they have standing to request an arbitration order.
As to the finality of the stay, he noted that the district court had more evidence in its possession to make a determination of arbitrability than the state court did. Yet, by ruling that the action was to be stayed not just pending a state court determination of arbitrability but until the final resolution of the state court action, "the order that was entered by the district court effectively stopped that case forever". Even if it reconsidered its stay in the face of inaction by the state court, Mercury had been denied the speedy resolution of its demand for arbitration as guaranteed in the FAA.
In concluding he addressed the stay itself. "I think that what Mr. Floyd and the hospital are suggesting here turns Colorado River upside down," he said. "What the hospital is really arguing, we think, is that the mere fact of the prior filing of the case in the state court system requires that the case be referred back to the state court system." The facts of the cases were totally different, he continued. Colorado River had a federal statute explicitly requiring state courts to hear cases like the one at issue, actual property interests at stake, and the practical problem of multiple defendants over a large area.
Decision
Two months later, in February 1983, the Court announced its decision. Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. wrote for himself and justices Blackmun, Marshall, Powell, Stevens and White that Mercury was entitled to arbitrate and the district court, by staying the request, had "abused its discretion." William Rehnquist dissented, along with Chief Justice Warren Burger and Sandra Day O'Connor. His opinion considered the district court's stay to have been entirely proper and unappealable.
Majority
Brennan first considered the appealability question. He looked to Idlewild Liquor Corp. v. Epstein, a 1962 decision where the Court had upheld an appellate ruling that a stay was a final action since it effectively put the plaintiff in that case out of court. "Here, the argument for finality of the District Court's order is even clearer ... this stay order amounts to a dismissal of the suit".Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Constr. Corp., 460 U.S. 1, 10-11, Brennan, J.
It also came under two of the three exceptions to the finality rule laid out in Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp.. The stay had resolved an important issue completely separate from the merits of the case, since once the state court had decided the arbitrability question a federal court would be bound by it as res judicata. Had it not been appealed then, the stay would have thus been entirely unreviewable, another of the Cohen criteria.Brennan, at 12–13.
The justice agreed with the hospital that the other criterion was not met, that the decision did not conclusively determine the disputed question. "But this is true only in the technical sense that every order short of a final decree is subject to reopening at the discretion of the district judge", Brennan responded. He doubted that the district judge did not expect all the issues to be resolved in state court.
Having settled that question, Brennan began a lengthy discussion of the abstention issue. He revisited the Colorado River opinion he had written, emphasizing its reliance on "wise judicial administration". Here he clarified that "the decision whether to dismiss a federal action because of parallel state court litigation does not rest on a mechanical checklist, but on a careful balancing of the important factors as they apply in a given case, with the balance heavily weighted in favor of the exercise of jurisdiction."Brennan, at 14–16.
The hospital had been wrong in its claim that Will allowed the stay, according to Brennan, because it relied on Rehnquist's plurality opinion in that case, which had the support of only three other justices. On remand, the appeals court had relied on Blackmun's concurrence, which taken along with Brennan's own dissent for the four justices in that case required that the appellate court allow the district court to decide based on Colorado River as it was originally decided, whether the same exceptional circumstances existed. Therefore Colorado River was still controlling. Will also differed from the instant case in that it did not involve a mandamus writ, Brennan observed.Brennan, at 17–18.
Applying Colorado River directly, Brennan found "it is clear that there was no showing of the requisite exceptional circumstances to justify the District Court's stay". The hospital had conceded that there was no res or property interest at stake, nor was federal court a less convenient forum. "The remaining factors—avoidance of piecemeal litigation, and the order in which jurisdiction was obtained by the concurrent forums—far from supporting the stay, actually counsel against it."Brennan, at 19.
The district court could decide the dispute was not arbitrable, Brennan observed, which would put all the parties in state court as the hospital hoped. If it had to be arbitrated, then it would be arbitrated. "But neither of those two outcomes depends at all on which court decides the question of arbitrability" which was separate in any event from the underlying issues.Brennan, at 20.
It did not matter that the hospital had filed in state court first, the justice said, as Mercury could not, under the FAA, arbitrate until the other party had declined to do so, and it had not been aware of the hospital's intent to litigate and not arbitrate until the night before the papers had been filed. Thus it could not possibly have filed first, a situation further complicated by the injunction briefly in place. Calling the hospital's reading of Colorado River "too mechanical", Brennan also noted that the federal action had been closer to resolution than the state action.Brennan, at 21–22.
"This refusal to proceed was plainly erroneous in view of Congress' clear intent, in the Arbitration Act, to move the parties to an arbitrable dispute out of court and into arbitration as quickly and easily as possible", Brennan began as he addressed the last of the three questions. "Federal law in the terms of the Arbitration Act governs that issue in either state or federal court ... [It] is a congressional declaration of a liberal federal policy favoring arbitration agreements". For that reason, courts should resolve any doubts about arbitrability in favor of arbitration, he wrote. Among those were the lack of clarity as to whether state courts, bound by the FAA as they might be to enforce stays, were equally bound to compel arbitration.Brennan, at 24–27.
Dissent
"In its zeal to provide arbitration for a party it thinks deserving," Rehnquist began, "the Court has made an exception to established rules of procedure. The Court's attempt to cast the District Court's decision as a final judgment fails to do justice to the meaning of the word 'final,' to the Act of Congress that limits the jurisdiction of the courts of appeals, or to the district judges who administer the laws in the first instance."Moses Cone, at 30, Rehnquist, J., dissenting.
He observed that a state court finding that the dispute was not arbitrable would have been binding on a federal court as res judicata whether or not the stay had been granted, if the state court action had concluded first. Stays could occur for a number of reasons, he added–a judge may want a short recess, or a longer period in order that the parties could prepare for additional briefs or argument. Yet the possibility that a state court hearing the same case might render a judgment in the meantime "did not magically change that character of the order the District Judge entered in this case."Rehnquist, 30–31.
The decision amounted to "an unwarranted limitation upon the power of district courts to control their own cases", Rehnquist wrote. He felt it would invite further interlocutory appeals "in cases which the ingenuity of counsel disappointed by a district court's ruling can analogize to this one." In 1978's Coopers & Lybrand v. Livesay, he noted, the Court had upheld the decertification of a class by a district court over the respondent's objection that it effectively ended their case since there was no longer enough economic incentive for a single plaintiff to continue as a practical matter. The justices had unanimously agreed that that was true but held that that circumstance did not justify creating an exception to the rule.Rehnquist, 31–32.
After justifying the stay, he attacked the holding that it was appealable. "The Court has not given any sound, principled justification for permitting the Court of Appeals to thrust itself into the trial process in this case". Idlewild was not controlling since the circumstances had been no pending state legislation in that case, and thus Mercury was in a better position than Idlewild had been. He also felt Coopers & Lybrand complicated Idlewild considerably.Rehnquist, 32–33.
"Furthermore, I am not as certain as is the Court that, by staying this case, the District Court resolved 'an important issue,'" Rehnquist continued. "An issue should not be deemed 'important' for these purposes simply because the court of appeals or this Court thinks the appellant should prevail." He said the stay could be seen as final only if one believed, as the majority did not, that there was a possibility the state court might not decide the arbitrability issue correctly.Rehnquist, 35.
Lastly he noted that the majority was following the appeals court in deciding the case on an issue the district court had not considered, overstepping the bounds of appellate jurisdiction:
Subsequent jurisprudence
Brennan's dicta that the FAA applied to state court proceedings and made it national policy to encourage arbitration became the central holdings of Burger's majority opinion the next term in Southland Corp. v. KeatingSouthland Corp. v. Keating, , Burger, C.J. in which the former question was the main issue of the case. Since then the Court has widened the scope of the FAA to cover arbitration of many issues.
The 1984 term brought another arbitration case resting on Cone, Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. v. Byrd. A Southern California dentist had brought federal and state securities fraud claims against the brokerage. The trial court denied the defense motion to arbitrate the state-law claims, and the Ninth Circuit upheld since the two actions were based on the same set of facts. On appeal, Thurgood Marshall wrote for a unanimous Court that, as in Cone, Congress's intent to promote arbitration prevailed over the respondent's desire to avoid bifurcated dispute resolution.Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. v. Byrd, .
In Volt Information Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees of Leland Stanford Junior Univ., a few years later, the Court upheld a California appeals court's finding that the contract was governed by state arbitration law which permitted a court to stay arbitration pending the resolution of litigation. Rehnquist wrote for a majority of six that Cone's declaration of a policy favoring arbitration did not also encompass a specific set of arbitral rules. Brennan, in dissent joined by Stevens, felt that declaration was broad enough to encompass cases where it was not clear that the parties intended to have the case under state law.Volt Information Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees of Leland Stanford Junior Univ., .
In the 1996 case Quackenbush v. Allstate Ins. Co., the justices were asked to consider whether a remand in an abstention case was as effectively final as the stay had been in Cone. O'Connor wrote for a unanimous Court that it was, upholding the Ninth Circuit. Her opinion also admitted that Cone partially overruled the earlier Thermtron Products, Inc. v. Hermansdorfer.Quackenbush v. Allstate Ins. Co., .
The appeals courts have taken the decision as a clarification and extension of the Colorado River doctrine, sometimes referring to it as the Colorado River-Moses Cone doctrine, governing the "exceptional circumstances" under which a federal district court may decline jurisdiction in the face of parallel state litigation. The individual circuits have applied it differently, at least when reviewing declaratory judgments.See USF&G Co. v. Murphy Oil USA, CA8, 21 F 3d. 259, (1994) 262n4. Its holding that a district court's stay is final when the sole effect is to surrender jurisdiction to a state court has become precedent.General Reinsurance Co. v. CIBA-Geigy Corp., CA2, 853 F 2d 78 (1988), at 80. State and federal appeals courts have also cited its holding that doubts about arbitrability should be resolved in favor of arbitration,Matthews v. Rollins Hudig Hall Co., 72 F.3d 50 (1995) CA7, 53; Wise v. Tidal Constr. Co., 583 SE 2d 466 (2003), Georgia Court of Appeals, 468. and that the degree of progress of an action should be considered as much as whether the state or federal action was filed first.Cruz v. Melecio, 204 F.3d 14 (2000), CA1, 24. In 1998 the Eleventh Circuit similarly vacated a district court dismissal in favor of a parallel state action to compel arbitration in a case where it noted the strong similarities save for less ambiguity about state law.First Franklin Financial Corp. v. McCollum, 144 F.3d 1362 (1998), CA11.
Analysis and commentary
Linda Hirshman of Chicago-Kent College of Law called Cone the first case of the Second Arbitration Trilogy, alluding to the Steelworkers' Trilogy of cases in the 1930s that established arbitration as the preferred dispute resolution tool in industrial relations. Together with Southland and Byrd, they completed a federalization of arbitration law.Hirshman, Linda; "The Second Arbitration Trilogy: The Federalization of Arbitration Law", 71 Va. L. Rev. 1305 (1985).
Margaret Moses of Loyola University Chicago School of Law finds Cone a key error along the road to Southland's holding that the FAA applies to state courts, a holding she finds in explicit contradiction to the act's legislative history. In the key 1967 arbitration case Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & Conklin Mfg. Co., which held that the validity of contracts themselves was to be determined by the arbitrator in the first instance unless the arbitration clause itself was at issue, the Court had had to resolve a conflict over the statute created in the years since its passage when Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins prohibited federal courts from applying federal common law and Guaranty Trust Co. v. York distinguished between procedural and substantive law. Federal courts could not apply the latter, which the FAA seemed to be, to the states in diversity cases like Prima Paint. If they could not, it seemed to frustrate the act's purpose in promoting the use of arbitration.Moses, Margaret; , 34 Fla State Univ Law Rev 99, 114–121, Fall 2006.
The Court solved that problem by relying on the reasoning of a Second Circuit decision, Robert Lawrence Co. v. Devonshire Fabrics, which had found the FAA grounded not in Congress's Article I powers to regulate federal courts but the Dormant Commerce Clause. While she called that decision "pragmatic", she criticized Prima Paint for failing to limit its scope. As a result, Brennan was able to make his unsupported assertions in his Cone dicta, which the appellees preparing for Southland took as a settled matter of law and didn't contest much in their arguments, leading to an erroneous holding in that case.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 460
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States abstention case law
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:Cone Health
"""

From "Mossman v. Higginson" ==> """
Mossman v. Higginson, 4 U.S. (4 Dall.) 12 (1800), was an 1800 decision of the United States Supreme Court asserting that "The parties to an equity suit must be so described on the record as to show that the court has jurisdiction. It is not enough that an alien is a party; the other party must be a citizen. A writ of error may be amended by filling the blank left for the return day, there being enough on the writ to amend by."Reports of decisions in the Supreme Court of the United States: with notes and a digest, Volume 1 (Little, Brown, 1887), pg. 313 
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
Category:1800 in United States case law
"""

From "Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Manufacturing Co." ==> """
Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Mfg. Co., 243 U.S. 502 (1917), is United States Supreme Court decision that is notable as an early example of the patent misuse doctrine. It held that, because a patent grant is limited to the invention described in the claims of the patent, the patent law does not empower the patent owner, by notices attached to the patented article, to extend the scope of the patent monopoly by restricting the use of the patented article to materials necessary for their operation but forming no part of the patented invention, or to place downstream restrictions on the articles making them subject to conditions as to use..  The decision overruled The Button-Fastener Case,Heaton-Peninsular Button-Fastener Co. v. Eureka Specialty Co., 77 F. 288 (6th Cir. 1896). and Henry v. A.B. Dick Co.,. which had held such restrictive notices effective and enforceable.
Background
300px|thumb|right|Diagram of patented device involved in MPP case
The Motion Picture Patents Company (MPP) was the assignee of a number of patents covering motion picture projectors, including US Pat. No.  707,934, on a part of the mechanism used in motion picture Projectors to  feed a film through the machine with a regular, uniform, and accurate movement. MPP granted to the Precision Machine Company (PMC) a license to manufacture and sell machines embodying the patented invention. The license provided that every machine PMC sold must be sold subject to a restriction and condition that the machine "shall be used solely for exhibiting or projecting motion pictures" embodying "the inventions of reissued letters patent No. 12,192"This patent was Thomas Edison's patent on motion picture film, which expired in 1914. and leased by a licensee of [MPP]." The license also provided that the machine must have a plate attached to it stating, "The sale and purchase of this machine gives only the right to use it solely with moving pictures" embodying "the inventions of reissued letters patent No. 12,192" and leased by a licensee of [MPP]."243 U.S. at 506.
PMC made and sold one of the patented machines to the owner of the Seventy-Second Street Playhouse (a movie house on 72nd Street in New York City), with a plate containing the required notice. Prague Amusement Company (Prague) then leased the Seventy-Second Street Playhouse, and acquired the machine in question as a part of the equipment of the leased playhouse. Also, at that time, the Universal Film Manufacturing Company (now known as Universal Pictures) made two films that were supplied to Prague for use on the machine. Prague used the machine to exhibit the films.243 U.S. at 507.
MPP sent letters protesting the alleged infringement of its patent, and then sued Universal, Prague, and the owner of the movie house. It was established at trial that 40,000 of the MPP machines are now in use in the US, and that the patented mechanism is the only one with which motion picture films can be used successfully. The district court held that the post-sale limitation on the use of the machine attempted to be made by the notice attached to it was invalid, and that the purchaser and its lessee had an implied license to use the machine as it had been used. The district court dismissed the case and the Second Circuit affirmed the district court.243 U.S. at 508.
Ruling of Supreme Court
The Supreme Court, in an opinion written by Justice Clarke affirmed the judgment. Justice Holmes, joined by Justices McKenna and Van Devanter, dissented.
Majority opinion
thumb|right|150px|Justice Clarke delivered the opinion of the Court
The patent statute
Justice Clarke began his analysis by observing that the patent statute does not provide for and thus authorize notices of the type involved here. Therefore, "whatever validity it [the notice] has must be derived from the general, and not from the patent, law."243 U.S. at 509. The statute gives the patentee the exclusive right to make, sell, and use the patented article. In interpreting the statute, three important rules have been declared by the Court:
 "The scope of every patent is limited to the invention described in the claims." The patentee "can claim nothing beyond them."
 The statute gives the patentee nothing but the power "to restrain others from manufacturing, using, or selling that which he has invented."
 "Since Pennock v. Dialogue, 2 Pet. 1, was decided in 1829, this Court has consistently held that the primary purpose of our patent laws is not the creation of private fortunes for the owners of patents, but is 'to promote the progress of science and the useful arts.' "243 U.S. at 510-11.
Accordingly:
These rules of law make it very clear that the scope of the grant which may be made to an inventor in a patent, pursuant to the statute, must be limited to the invention described in the claims of his patent, and, to determine what grant may lawfully be so made, we must hold fast to the language of the act of Congress providing for it.
This patent is only on the film projector mechanism described and claimed in the patent, the Court said. By the same token:
It is not concerned with, and has nothing to do with, the materials with which or on which the machine operates. The grant is of the exclusive right to use the mechanism to produce the result with any appropriate material, and the materials with which the machine is operated are no part of the patented machine or of the combination which produces the patented result. The difference is clear and vital between the exclusive right to use the machine, which the law gives to the inventor, and the right to use it exclusively with prescribed materials to which such a license notice as we have here seeks to restrict it.243 U.S. at 511-12.
The rise of the inherency doctrine
Until recently, the Court said, this plain meaning of the statute was generally understood as the law. But with the growth of corporations the idea had arisen "of gathering great profits in small payments, which are not realized or resented, from many, rather than smaller or even equal profits in larger payments" and so patentees have come to seek to assert "the right to restrict the use of [patented machinery] to materials or supplies not described in the patent, and not, by its terms, made a part of the thing patented." A majority of the Supreme Court had accepted that principle several years earlier in Henry v. A.B. Dick Co.
The Court traced the evolution of this idea and explained why a majority of the Court rejected it:
The construction of the patent law which justifies as valid the restriction of patented machines, by notice, to use with unpatented supplies necessary in the operation of them, but which are no part of them, is believed to have originated in Heaton-Peninsular Button-Fastener Co. v. Eureka Specialty Co. (which has come to be widely referred to as the Button-Fastener Case), decided by . . . the Sixth Circuit in 1896.
. . . This decision [Button-Fastener] proceeds upon the argument that, since the patentee may withhold his patent altogether from public use, he must logically and necessarily be permitted to impose any conditions which he chooses upon any use which he may allow of it. The defect in this thinking springs from the substituting of inference and argument for the language of the statute, and from failure to distinguish between the rights which are given to the inventor by the patent law and which he may assert against all the world through an infringement proceeding, and rights which he may create for himself by private contract which, however, are subject to the rules of general as distinguished from those of the patent, law. While it is true that, under the statutes as they were (and now are), a patentee might withhold his patented machine from public use, yet, if he consented to use it himself or through others, . . . he is thereby restricted to the use of the invention as it is described in the claims of his patent, and not as it may be expanded by limitations as to materials and supplies necessary to the operation of it, imposed by mere notice to the public.
The . . . obvious possibilities for gain in the method which it approved led to an immediate and widespread adoption of the system, in which these restrictions expanded into more and more comprehensive forms until at length the case at bar is reached, with a machine sold and paid for, yet claimed still to be subject not only to restriction as to supplies to be used, but also subject to any restrictions or conditions as to use . . . which the company which authorized its sale may see fit, after the sale, from time to time to impose. The perfect instrument of favoritism and oppression which such a system of doing business, if valid, would put into the control of the owner of such a patent should make courts astute, if need be, to defeat its operation. If these restrictions were sustained, plainly the plaintiff might, for its own profit or that of its favorites, . . . ruin anyone unfortunate enough to be dependent upon its confessedly important improvements for the doing of business.243 U.S. at 514-15.
Justice Clarke denied the legitimacy of this doctrine, because it extended the power of the patent monopoly from the claimed and patented invention—the mechanism described in the patent—to the unpatented supplies used with the mechanism, which were no part of the statutory monopoly:
[F]or the reasons stated in this opinion, we are convinced that the exclusive right granted in every patent must be limited to the invention described in the claims of the patent, and that it is not competent for the owner of a patent, by notice attached to its machine, to in effect extend the scope of its patent monopoly by restricting the use of it to materials necessary in its operation, but which are no part of the patented invention, or to send its machines forth into the channels of trade of the country subject to conditions as to use or royalty to be paid, to be imposed thereafter at the discretion of such patent owner. The patent law furnishes no warrant for such a practice, and the cost, inconvenience, and annoyance to the public which the opposite conclusion would occasion forbid it.243 U.S. at 515-16.
The Court therefore concluded, first, that Henry v. A.B. Dick must be overruled. Second, the notice on the plate affixed to the machine contains an invalid restriction that the machine must be used only with film embodying the invention of the Edison patent that expired in 1914. "[S]uch a film is obviously not any part of the invention of the patent in suit." Therefore, the notice "is an attempt, without statutory warrant, to continue the patent monopoly in this particular character of film after it has expired," and to enforce it "would be to create a monopoly in the manufacture and use of moving picture films wholly outside of the patent in suit and of the patent law as we have interpreted it." This notice restriction is contrary to public policy:
A restriction which would give to the plaintiff such a potential power for evil over an industry which must be recognized as an important element in the amusement life of the nation, under the conclusions we have stated in this opinion, is plainly void because wholly without the scope and purpose of our patent laws, and because, if sustained, it would be gravely injurious to that public interest, which we have seen is more a favorite of the law than is the promotion of private fortunes.243 U.S. at 518-19.
Holmes dissent
thumb|right|150px|Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes dissented
Justice Holmes had been part of the majority of the Court that endorsed the inherency doctrine in Henry v. A.B. Dick, and he strongly dissented from its rejection and overruling in the Motion Picture Patents case.Holmes was "the most consistent defender of" this doctrine "since its inception." Note, 4  40, 42 (1918). Justices McKenna and Van Devanter, also in the majority in A.B. Dick, joined the Holmes dissent here. Holmes reasoned that a patentee may keep his invention out of use for the term of the patent, for whatever reason he may choose. "So much being undisputed, I cannot understand why he may not keep it out of use unless the licensee, or, for the matter of that, the buyer, will use some unpatented thing in connection with it." He added, "Non debet, cui plus licet, quod minus est non licere."He who is permitted to do the greater, may with greater reason do the less. This maxim does not take into account whether the public has an interest that is disserved by the acceptance of the condition. See, e.g., Lear, Inc. v. Adkins, 395 U.S. 653 (1969) (holding agreement not to challenge patent validity unenforceable because contrary to public interest in eliminating spurious patents from economy). It does not take into account whether the other party agrees to the condition because it is imposed in a contract of adhesion. See, e.g., West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379, 398 (1937) (upholding minimum wage law for women because they were the lowest paid class, with relatively weak bargaining power and the "ready victims" of those who would take advantage of their status).
thumb|left|200px|"If the owner prefers to keep the pot unless you will buy his tea, I cannot see, in allowing him the right to do so, anything more than an ordinary incident of ownership."
Holmes did allow, however, "No doubt this principle might be limited or excluded in cases where the condition tends to bring about a state of things that there is a predominant public interest to prevent." But he was quick to add that in his view "there is no predominant public interest to prevent a patented teapot or film feeder from being kept from the public, because, as I have said, the patentee may keep them tied up at will while his patent lasts." He also saw no problem in the alleged extension of the patent monopoly from the claimed mechanism to the films made the condition of use of the mechanism. That effect occurs "only to the extent of the desire for the teapot or film feeder, and if the owner prefers to keep the pot or the feeder unless you will buy his tea or films, I cannot see, in allowing him the right to do so, anything more than an ordinary incident of ownership."243 U.S. at 519-20.
Subsequent developments
The Motion Picture Patents case is often credited with forming the basis for the Supreme Court's creation of an equitable defense of patent misuse to a claim of patent infringement.See, e.g., Vincent Chiapetta, Living with Patents: Insights from Patent Misuse, 15  1, 4 n.15 ("The first inklings of misuse are found in the Supreme Court's 1917 decision in Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Mfg. Co.) (2011); id. at 15 ("The doctrine's origins trace back to the Court's 1917 decision in Motion Picture Patents Co.); Matthew W. Siegal and Claude G. Szyfer, Supreme Court Relaxes View of Tying Patents, 235 N.Y.L.J. 1, 2 (Mar. 27, 2006). To the extent, however, that the misuse doctrine (at least when it applies to sold patented articles and restricts purchasers' use of the articles) is an aspect or outgrowth of the exhaustion doctrine, it is preceded by such decisions as Adams v. Burke..
Carbice
Im Carbice Corp. v. American Patents Development Corp.,. the Supreme Court considered a case in which a patentee, who had a patent on a "package consisting of a protective casing of insulating material having packed therein a quantity of frozen carbon dioxide ["dry ice"] in an insulating container and a quantity of freezable product in freezing proximity to said frozen carbon dioxide," where the frozen carbon dioxide was placed at the center, surrounded by the freezable product, surrounded on the outside by the packaging material. The patentee's exclusive licensee sold dry ice to its customers with an implied license to use the container invention without the payment of royalty, but subject to the condition that the customers use the dry ice only with containers from a designated source and that they use the containers only with dry ice bought from the licensee. Carbice, the defendant in this case, sold dry ice with knowledge that it would be used by the purchasers in packages like those described in the patent. The patentee and exclusive licensee sued Carbice for contributing to infringement by the purchasers of its dry ice. The Supreme Court said:
The relief here sought is indistinguishable from that denied in the Motion Picture Case. There, it was held that to permit the patent owner to "derive its profit not from the invention on which the law gives it a monopoly, but from the unpatented supplies with which it is used" is "wholly without the scope of the patent monopoly." If a monopoly could be so expanded, the owner of a patent for a product might conceivably monopolize the commerce in a large part of unpatented materials used in its manufacture. The owner of a patent for a machine might thereby secure a partial monopoly on the unpatented supplies consumed in its operation. The owner of a patent for a process might secure a partial monopoly on the unpatented material employed in it.283 U.S. at 31-32.
The Court therefore denied relief for the claimed infringement.
Leitch v. Barber
In Leitch Manufacturing Co. v. Barber Co.,. the Supreme Court extended the doctrine of the Motion Picture Case case. Barber had a patent on a process for improving the curing of concrete pavement by spreading tar on it to inhibit evaporation (thereby giving the water molecules more time to bond to the concrete and make it harder). Leitch sold tar to a road builder, knowing that it was to be used in accordance with the patented method. Barber sued Leitch for contributory infringement. Barber had exploited his patent by selling tar to road builders with the understanding that they could use the patented method with Barber's tar; it granted no written license.
Barber argued that Carbice did not apply because it granted no license on a condition of tying supplies. The Court said that it had adopted "a method of doing the business which is the practical equivalent of granting a written license with a condition that the patented method may be practiced" only with tar purchased from it." Accordingly, "the sole purpose to which the patent is put is thereby to suppress competition in the production and sale of staple unpatented material for this use in road building." The Court held that the doctrine of the Carbice case applied:
By the rule there declared every use of a patent as a means of obtaining a limited monopoly of unpatented material is prohibited. It applies whether the patent be for a machine, a product, or a process. It applies whatever the nature of the device by which the owner of the patent seeks to effect such unauthorized extension of the monopoly.
Morton Salt
Morton Salt Co. v. G.S. Suppiger Co.,. was the first case in which the Court expressly labeled as "misuse" the Motion Picture Patent/Carbice defense to a charge of patent infringement and created the present blanket remedy in infringement cases of unenforceability of the misused patent.The Court stated: "Equity may rightly withhold its assistance from such a use of the patent by declining to entertain a suit for infringement, and should do so at least until it is made to appear that the improper practice has been abandoned and that the consequences of the misuse of the patent have been dissipated." 314 U.S. at 493. Suppiger had a patent on a machine for dispensing salt tablets into food cans in the canning process. It leased the patented machines to canners and required lessee/licensees of its patent to buy their salt tablets used in the machines from its subsidiary. Morton leased machines to the canners that Suppiger charged infringed its patent.
Based on these facts, the Court said, "It thus appears that [Suppiger] is making use of its patent monopoly to restrain competition in the marketing of unpatented articles, salt tablets, for use with the patented machines, and is aiding in the creation of a limited monopoly in the tablets not within that granted by the patent." Citing Motion Picture Patents, Carbice, and Leitch, the Court stated, "It is the established rule that a patentee who has granted a license on condition that the patented invention be used by the licensee only with unpatented materials furnished by the licensor may not restrain as a contributory infringer one who sells to the licensee like materials for like use."
Such conduct is contrary to the public policy of the United States:
[T]he the public policy which includes inventions within the granted monopoly excludes from it all that is not embraced in the invention. It equally forbids the use of the patent to secure an exclusive right or limited monopoly not granted by the Patent Office and which it is contrary to public policy to grant.
Courts of equity may withhold their aid from a party that asserts a right that it is using contrary to the public interest. Suppiger argued that Motion Picture Patents, Carbice, and Leitch all involved contributory infringement actions where the patentee sought to restrain a defendant from selling unpatented supplies to licensees, but here, Suppiger said:
 Suppiger does not ask the courts to order Morton to stop competing in the sale of salt. 
 Rather, Suppiger just asks the courts to order Morton to stop directly infringing the patent.
 The equity maxim that a party seeking the aid of a court of equity must come into court with "clean hands" applies only to the plaintiff's wrongful conduct in the particular act or transaction as to which equity enforcement is sought.
 Therefore, the maxim involved in those cases does not apply to the different transaction—direct infringement—involved here.
The Court did not accept the attempted distinction:
[A]dditional considerations must be taken into account where maintenance of the suit concerns the public interest, as well as the private interests of suitors. Where the patent is used as a means of restraining competition with the patentee's sale of an unpatented product, the successful prosecution of an infringement suit, even against one who is not a competitor in such sale, is a powerful aid to the maintenance of the attempted monopoly of the unpatented article, and is thus a contributing factor in thwarting the public policy underlying the grant of the patent.
The Court explained that equity precedent supported denial of relief that would further wrongdoing by the party seeking the relief and thus harm the public interest:
Equity may rightly withhold its assistance from such a use of the patent by declining to entertain a suit for infringement, and should do so at least until it is made to appear that the improper practice has been abandoned and that the consequences of the misuse of the patent have been dissipated.
The reasons for barring the prosecution of such a suit against one who is not a competitor with the patentee in the sale of the unpatented product are fundamentally the same as those which preclude an infringement suit against a licensee who has violated a condition of the license by using with the licensed machine a competing unpatented article [as protection] Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Mfg. Co.  . . . It is the adverse effect upon the public interest of a successful infringement suit in conjunction with the patentee's course of conduct which disqualifies him to maintain the suit, regardless of whether the particular defendant has suffered from the misuse of the patent.
These considerations made it unnecessary, the Court added, to decide whether Suppiger had committed an antitrust violation "for we conclude that, in any event, the maintenance of the present suit to restrain petitioner's manufacture or sale of the alleged infringing machines is contrary to public policy, and that the district court rightly dismissed the complaint for want of equity."
Kimble v. Marvel
In Kimble v. Marvel in 2015, after some years of lower court disapproval and disregard of the patent misuse doctrine developed in Motion Picture Patents, Carbice, and Suppiger, the Supreme Court reaffirmed its principles. In particular, the Court rejected the argument that patent misuse should track antitrust doctrine and insisted that patent misuse is based on patent policy rather than antitrust policy. This is not to say that an antitrust violation will not usually be the basis for holding unenforceable the patents misused in committing the antitrust violation,See United States Gypsum Co. v. National Gypsum Co., 352 U.S. 457 (1957), in which the Court found misuse based on the antitrust violation previously found in United States v. United States Gypsum Co., 333 U. S. 364 (1948), "because patent misuse was the essence of the old antitrust litigation," 352 U.S. at 464. but rather that the misuse doctrine prohibits even conduct that does not rise (or sink) to the level of an antitrust violation,Zenith Radio Corp. v. Hazeltine Research, Inc., 395 U.S. 100 (1969). and where antitrust does not reach challenged conduct patent misuse will do so if patent policy so requires.
Commentary
● A very terse contemporary comment by "A.M.K." in the California Law Review on the Motion Picture Patents case and its overruling of A.B. Dick and the Button-Fastener case stated what the following commentary by Professor Chiapetta explains in greater detail some years later. A.M.K. said:
It by no means follows that because a patentee may withhold the use of the patented article entirely he may license its use with any conditions he chooses. It may be better that the public should not enjoy the article at all than that it should be used under restrictions obnoxious to public policy.Comment, Restraint of Trade: Common Law: Patents, 5  425, 428 (1917).
● A 1918 Note in the Iowa Law Review is critical of the Holmes dissent as well. "Mr. Justice Holmes, who has been the most consistent defender of the restriction theory since its inception, argues in the latest decision that since the patentee may wholly withdraw his invention from the market, he should be permitted to sell it on any terms or conditions he may wish to impose." The Note writer says:
The difficulty with this reasoning is that if it proves anything, it proves too much. If it is true that because a man may withhold a patented article from the market, he may therefore impose any conditions upon its use when he sells, it should be equally true that because a man owns a horse that he need not sell, he may at the time of sale impose any conditions upon its future use.
But that cannot be a valid test, he continues, because it is against the common law. "It is a general rule that covenants do not run with personalty and contracts restricting the use or resale of personalty cannot be annexed to the chattel so as to follow and obligate the purchaser by notice," citing Coke and other authorities.Note, The Right of the Patentee To Control the Use or Price of a Patented Article Upon Resale, 4  40, 42 (1918). Coke on Littleton § 360, for example, gives a restraint accompanying the sale of a horse as an illustration of the invalidity of a post–sale restraint.
● New York patent attorney (later Federal Circuit judge) Giles Rich commented that "the patent law 'went on a spree from 1896 to 1917.' "Giles Rich, The Relation Between Patent Practices and the Anti-Monopoly Laws, 24  85, 88 (1942).
● Professor Chiapetta compares the majority's and Holmes's dissent's respective analyses of the inherency doctrine and concludes that Holmes's analysis ignores the issue of whether the benefits of increased usage of the patented invention under a restrictive license exceed the harms resulting from the restriction. He concedes, for purposes of a "Chicago School" analysis,  that it is true that any increased access produces some efficiency improvement. It is not true, however, he insists, that every increase in access produces a net improvement: "That determination requires examining the harms produced by the terms of access. If those harms exceed the benefits then the transaction reduces efficient market operation overall and should be legally prohibited."
He explains, further, that a patentee's simple refusal to license a patent may lead to loss of efficiency but the costs are those arising from the existence of the patent system. "If that produces net inefficiencies, the problem lies exclusively" in the way the U.S. patent system has been set up, which is a matter of congressional choice, subject only to constitutional limitations. Privately constructed terms of access (licensing conditions) can produce additional costs, which may arise from effects of imposing conditions on the licensee. "As the Motion Picture majority properly observes, such rights must be examined to determine whether their harms outweigh the benefits."Chiapetta at 26-27.
The determination of what constitutes a legally cognizable harm that may be balanced off against the benefits of increased access, to decide what is the net harm or benefit "is the purview of general laws." These include contract, tort, and antitrust laws. Unless the constraints of the general law are taken into account, he argues:
[I]ncreased access may, in efficiency terms, be worse for society than no access at all. While the latter merely produces patent law's internal net system efficiency improvement (additional innovation justifying the costs of reduced access), the former can impose additional costs producing a net overall efficiency decrease. Such transactions must be legally prohibited.
The proper question, Chiapatta insists, is whether the majority's or Holmes's legal doctrine better contributes to accomplishing the goal of net overall efficiency increase.Chiapetta at 27.
See also
 United States v. Motion Picture Patents Co.
References
External links
Category:United States misuse law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:1917 in United States case law
"""

From "Motor Vehicles Manufacturers Ass'n v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co." ==> """
Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., 463 U.S. 29 (1983), is a United States Supreme Court decision concerning regulations requiring passive restraints in cars. In it, the Court struck down an order by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration rescinding regulations that required either airbags or automatic seat belts in new cars..
It held that the same arbitrary and capricious standard for reviewing agency actions applied to rescind regulations as that to enact regulations. It also held that the rescission of the rule requiring some sort of passive restraint was arbitrary and capricious because it failed to consider the alternative of requiring all cars to have airbags. Finally, it held that the agency had too quickly dismissed the safety benefits of automatic seat belts.
The case is noteworthy not only for its effects on car safety but also in clarifying the Court's approach to reviewing agency actions under the Administrative Procedure Act.
 Background 
The National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 directs the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) to issue safety standards that "shall be practicable, meet the need for motor vehicle safety, and be stated in objective terms.". The resulting regulations went through a tumultuous history, with over 60 rulemaking notices having been amended, rescinded, reimposed, and then re-rescinded.
The original rulemaking simply mandated seat belts. However, that soon proved to be ineffective, as more than half of people never wore their seat belt during that time period.463 U.S. at 54, n.19. The NHTSA proposed using passive restraint systems, devices that would protect drivers even if drivers took no action other than that necessary to drive the car. The two main proposed mechanisms were automatic seat belts and airbags. In 1969, the NHTSA proposed a standard requiring installation of some kind of passive restraint for drivers,34 Fed. Reg. 11,148-01 which was later amended to include all front seat passengers.37 Fed. Reg. 3911 The regulations adopted required passive restraints for vehicles built after 1975 and allowed those built between 1973 and 1975 to use a system in which the car would start only if the seatbelt was in use.
This "ignition interlock" option proved unpopular and resulted in Congress passing the Motor Vehicle and Schoolbus Safety Amendments of 1974, which disallowed ignition interlocks and required restraint systems other than seat belts to be approved by congressional resolution before going into effect.
In 1976, the optional alternatives were extended indefinitely by Secretary of Transportation William T. Coleman Jr., and the passive restraint requirement suspended because of expected public resistance. They were then reinstated by Coleman's successor, Brock Adams, and then they were re-rescinded by his successor, Andrew L. Lewis Jr. The last rescission is the action that the Supreme Court reviewed.463 U.S. at 34-38.
The NHTSA justified the rescission by saying that there was no longer sufficient evidence for the efficacy of the regulations. That was because of not a change in judgment about the technology but a change in car manufacturers' plans. Whereas the NHTSA originally estimated that 40% of new cars would have automatic seat belts, it turned out that 99% of cars would use them. In addition, they were going to use a detachable type of automatic seat belt, which could easily be detached, when they would operate like normal seat belts. The NHTSA also worried that the change would be expensive and sour the public's view towards safety regulations, as it would be seen as a wasteful, imposing example of bureaucratic overreach.463 U.S. at 38-39.
Though the DC Circuit found that rescinding a rule has "parallels" to failing to act and agency's failure to act was subject to only "very narrow" review, thus suggesting a narrow review in the case of rescission, it still vacated the rescission partially because of congressional action in response to NHTSA regulations, which it saw as heightening the standard of review. It gave the following reasons for vacating the rescission: there was insufficient evidence to sustain the conclusion that it could not predict an increase in seat belt usage and "only a well-justified refusal to seek more evidence could render rescission non-arbitrary,"680 F.2d at 232. the NHTSA had inadequately considered the possibility of requiring nondetachable automatic seat belts, and it had inadequately considered the possibility of requiring airbags.
 Decision 
Justice White, writing for the majority, disagreed with the DC Circuit and held that the scope of judicial review is the same for rescission as it is for enacting regulations in the first place. The Supreme Court explicitly rejected the view that it should treat rescission the same as a refusal to regulate in the first place: "The Motor Vehicle Safety Act expressly equates orders 'revoking' and 'establishing' safety standards; neither that Act nor the APA suggests that revocations are to be treated as refusals to promulgate standards."463 U.S. at 41.
It also rejected the view that the congressional action, after the enactment of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, had affected the standard of review even if it could inform the Court's interpretation of the statute.463 U.S. at 45.
However, the Court agreed with the DC Circuit that the rescission was arbitrary and capricious for failing to consider the possibility of requiring airbags. Although agencies need not consider every possible alternative, requiring air bags was an obvious option since that was part of the original regulations. The fact that the car companies, which "waged the regulatory equivalent of war" against airbags, would try to evade the regulations was not a reason to repeal them.463 U.S. at 49. The Court also refused to consider rationales that the NHTSA raised in court but had failed to raise in the original order.
Although the Court considered this a "closer issue," it held the rescission to be also arbitrary and capricious, based on the dismissal of automatic seat belts' effectiveness.463 U.S. at 51.
 Concurring opinion 
In a concurrence, Justice Rehnquist defended agencies that changed their minds on policy issues because of a changing political climate. He noted that the NHTSA's change of heart on safety regulations likely reflected the election of President Ronald Reagan but defended that as a reason for agency reconsideration of previously-adopted rules:
 Arbitrary and capricious review 
The decision is notable for laying out the Supreme Court's interpretation of arbitrary and capricious review, also known as "hard look" review, as set out by the Administrative Procedure Act:
Legacy
After this Supreme Court case many cars sold in the United States began to have airbags in them, and also this case became a precedent to help justify legislation requiring seat belt usage among drivers and passengers in many states which became numerous in the 1980s and early 1990s.
 References 
 Further reading 
Wiseman, A., & Wright, J. (2020). "Chevron, State Farm, and the Impact of Judicial Doctrine on Bureaucratic Policymaking." Perspectives on Politics
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:State Farm
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Moyer v. Peabody" ==> """
Moyer v. Peabody, 212 U.S. 78 (1909), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court which held that the governor and officers of a state National Guard, acting in good faith and under authority of law, may imprison without probable cause a citizen of the United States in a time of insurrection and deny that citizen the right of habeas corpus.
Background
The case arose out of a wave of labor disputes, known as the Colorado Labor Wars, in the mining industry in the state of Colorado. In August 1902, the Western Federation of Miners (WFM) organized mill workers in Colorado City, Colorado. The employers planted a spy in the union, and the evidence of union activity gathered by the mole led to the dismissal of 42 union members. Union-employer negotiations over the dismissals began almost immediately, and dragged on into 1903. With the negotiations at a standstill, the WFM struck on February 14, 1903. After the number of miners walking the picket lines grew in March and April, the mine owners decided to seek state aid.
Governor James Peabody was strongly anti-union, and the employers worked with him to craft a response that would break the strike and the union. Although Colorado City was quiet and no public disorders of any magnitude had occurred, the employers and local authorities claimed extensive rioting had occurred and that local and county law enforcement were unable to handle the mobs. Governor Peabody called out the Colorado militia, investing them around Colorado City. Outraged miners in nearby Cripple Creek and the western city of Telluride also walked off the job, and the militia was deployed in those cities as well.
Mass arrests began in September 1903, breaking the strike.Suggs, Colorado's War on Militant Unionism: James H. Peabody and the Western Federation of Miners, 1972.Dubofsky, We Shall Be All: A History of the Industrial Workers of the World, 2000.Foner, History of the Labor Movement in the United States, Vol. 3, 1964. One of those arrested was Charles Moyer.
Moyer had traveled to Telluride to protest the mass arrests and deportation of miners. He lent his signature to a WFM poster (see right) denouncing the arrests. Moyer was arrested on March 28, 1904, for desecrating the American flag. He was released on bail, but re-arrested the following day on the orders of the Adjutant General of the state militia on the grounds of "military necessity."
Moyer's predicament was not unusual. The state militia had detained hundreds of striking workers and union leaders for many weeks in bullpens and had disregarded hundreds of habeas corpus petitions.Forbath, "The Shaping of the American Labor Movement," Harvard Law Review, April 1989.
Moyer petitioned a Colorado state court for a writ of habeas corpus, which was granted. However, the Colorado State Attorney General and the local district attorney refused to honor the writ. Moyer appealed to the Colorado Supreme Court. On June 6, 1904, the Colorado Supreme Court ruled in In re Moyer, that Moyer's constitutional right to due process and habeas corpus had not been violated. The court held that the governor had acted under color of state law and that the courts had no jurisdiction to review the governor's finding that a state of insurrection existed in Colorado.
Moyer appealed to the U.S. District Court in Missouri, and obtained a writ of habeas corpus on July 5, 1904..
Alarmed by the writ, Governor Peabody revoked the finding of insurrection the same day and ordered Moyer released by 3:45 p.m. before the federal writ could be served. Moyer was released but continued to press his case.  The U.S. Supreme Court accepted certiorari, and oral argument occurred on January 5 and January 6, 1909.Historians see Peabody's actions as evidence that the governor knew that no state of insurrection existed and that the "military necessity" of imprisoning Moyer was lacking. See, for example, Suggs, Colorado's War on Militant Unionism: James H. Peabody and the Western Federation of Miners, 1972.
Decision 
thumb|The poster "Is Colorado in America?" with its American flag, with signature by Charles Moyer (bottom, left), which led to Moyer's arrest in 1904 and the Supreme Court case of Moyer v. Peabody.
Associate Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. delivered the opinion for a unanimous court. The decision was seven paragraphs long with the first three paragraphs devoted to determining the jurisdiction of the court.
Holmes began by refusing to question whether a state of insurrection actually existed in Colorado. "It is admitted, as it must be, that the Governor's declaration that a state of insurrection existed is conclusive of that fact," Holmes wrote.Moyer v. Peabody, 212 U.S. 78, 83; emphasis added. "The facts that we are to assume are that a state of insurrection existed and that the Governor, without sufficient reason but in good faith, in the course of putting the insurrection down held the plaintiff until he thought that he safely could release him.Moyer v. Peabody, 212 U.S. 78, 84; emphasis added. Holmes then made what is considered a famous statement about due process: "But it is familiar that what is due process of law depends on circumstances. It varies with the subject-matter and the necessities of the situation."Moyer v. Peabody, 212 U.S. 78, 84.
The existence of the state of insurrection was, therefore, critical. Both the state constitution and the statutes gave the governor the power to call out the militia, put down rebellion, and hold rebels without providing for relief. Holmes incorporated the findings of the Colorado Supreme Court in his opinion andonce more refused to entertain any arguments to the contrary: "In such a situation we must assume that he had a right under the state constitution and laws to call out troops, as was held by the Supreme Court of the State." But Holmes' assumptions were not ironclad. He left open the door for plaintiffs to challenge whether or not a state of insurrection did, in fact, exist.  In this case, however, the plaintiff did not do so."It is not alleged that his judgment was not honest, if that be material, or that the plaintiff was detained after fears of the insurrection were at an end.... But there is nothing... in the allegations of the complaint that would warrant submitting the judgment of the Governor to revision by a jury." Moyer v. Peabody, 212 U.S. 78, 85.
Absent any such challenge by the plaintiff to the factual situation, Holmes concluded that plaintiffs have no recourse under law.  Holmes placed his faith utterly in the democratic process and a citizenry's ability to elect leaders of "good faith:"
So long as such arrests are made in good faith and in the honest belief that they are needed in order to head the insurrection off, the Governor is the final judge and cannot be subjected to an action after he is out of office on the ground that he had not reasonable ground for his belief.Moyer v. Peabody, 212 U.S. 78, 85.
The judgment left plaintiffs one straw to cling to. Holmes suggested in dicta that plaintiffs might have grounds if their imprisonment were lengthy: "If we suppose a Governor with a very long term of office," Holmes hypothesized, "it may be that a case could be imagined in which the length of the imprisonment would raise a different question. However, since Moyer's incarceration had lasted only four months, it was implied that the line had not been crossed.Chertoff, "Judicial Review of the President's Decisions as Commander in Chief," Rutgers Law Review, Summer 2003. 
Moody took no part in the case due to an extensive illness.
Aftermath
Moyer v. Peabody was long moot by the time the case reached the Supreme Court, which accepted the case only because it arose under demurrer, which challenged the legal sufficiency of the government's action. Oddly, although the case was accepted on demurrer, the Court refused to acknowledge that Moyer had in fact contested Peabody's finding that a state of insurrection existed in Colorado in 1904.
Effect on the labor movement
Historians argue that the case radicalized a significant portion of the American labor movement. Moyer himself concluded that the state's use of military power to crush unions could be countered only by a syndicalist union linked to a potent political party. Subsequently, Moyer and the WFM helped found the radical Industrial Workers of the World in 1905. While Samuel Gompers and the American Federation of Labor sought an accommodation with capitalism and the status quo, a large minority of American workers did not, and another three decades of labor unrest was caused, in part, by desperate workers who felt that the courts were closed to them.Fink, Biographical Dictionary of American Labor, 1984.
Legal analysis
Moyer v. Peabody had its foundation in previous court rulings in the United States and spawned a number of subsequent decisions. It was one in a long line of cases extending back through Ex parte Merryman, 17 F. Cas. 144 (1861),Where the president had suspended the writ of habeas corpus "within the vicinity of the military line" during war, held neither the president nor authorize a military officer could suspend the write of habeas corpus absent congressional authority. Ex parte Benedict, 3 F. Cas. 159 (N.D.N.Y. 1862),Where pacifist is arrested and imprisoned during time of war by military officer, held writ of habeas corpus may not be suspended absent statutory authority. and Ex parte Milligan, 71 U.S. 2 (1866).Where, in time of war, plaintiff was accused of planning to steal weapons, liberate prisoners of war, and take over state government, held that suspension of habeas corpus was lawful but military tribunals did not apply to citizens in states that had upheld the authority of the Constitution and where civilian courts were still operating.Vladeck, "The Detention Power," Yale Law & Policy Review, Winter 2004. In this regard, it has a lengthy legal pedigree. But the case also spawned a new line of legal analysis.  For example, one Supreme Court justice called Moyer the foundation of the "'good-faith' analysis…of our modern doctrine of qualified immunity.", Scalia, dissenting, at 572, Footnote 4.
Despite the firm grounding Moyer v. Peabody has in US constitutional law, the case is considered to be controversial. In Luther v. Borden, 48 U.S. 1 (1849), the US Supreme Court had established the "political question" test in which a court may refuse to rule because the issue is political, rather than judicial. Moyer is controversial in part because Justice Holmes took much of the dicta in Luther and made it binding law. The decision is controversial also because despite the analysis in Ex parte Benedict, Moyer allowed states to implement martial law without judicial review.Weida, "A Republic of Emergencies: Martial Law in American Jurisprudence," Connecticut Law Review, Summer 2004.
Although Moyer focused on the immediacy of war, the aspect of the ruling has proven troublesome to the courts. Earlier Supreme Court decisions had emphasized the importance of the existence of open conflict. For example, in Mitchell v. Harmony, 54 U.S. (13 How.) 115 (1851),Where military officer had seized weapons believed to be headed for enemy hands during war but in a peaceful locale, held seizure of weapons must be with probable cause and subject to due process. the Supreme Court upheld the power of military officials to seize property to prevent violence. But the Court limited that power by requiring the danger to be immediate. In some ways, Moyer retreats from the court's ruling in Mitchell: Holmes accepted the case under demurrer, but then refused to consider Moyer's challenge to the finding of a state of emergency. Moyer nevertheless stands in the tradition of Mitchell because the Moyer court recognized that only immediate violence was grounds for suspending the writ.
The vexing problem of immediacy would cause the Supreme Court to later back away from Holmes' ruling in Moyer. Just a quarter of a century later, in Sterling v. Constantin, 287 U.S. 378 (1932), the Court held (contra Moyer) that executive findings of a state of insurrection must be subject to judicial review. In Sterling, the governor of Texas had restricted production of oil from certain wells by claiming that a state of insurrection existed in some areas of his state. The Supreme Court concluded that such claims of insurrection were subject to judicial review, and after review, the Court actually rejected the governor's finding. Citing Mitchell v. Harmony, the Court endorsed "the argument that without judicial review, the boundaries setting apart real emergencies will break down. Chief Justice Hughes explicitly articulated the fear that if emergency powers are beyond court scrutiny then soon all government action will be characterized as an emergency."
For most of the 20th century, Supreme Court jurisprudence ignored Moyer. Prior to 2004, the last decision to rely heavily on Moyer was Scheuer v. Rhodes, 416 U.S. 232 in 1973. In Scheuer v. Rhodes, survivors of the victims of the Kent State shootings of 1970 sued the Ohio Army National Guard for damages. A lower court rejected the suit, using the rationale provided in Moyer. The U.S. Supreme Court unanimously reversed, "emptying the Moyer precedent of most of its residual authority."Quoted in Rostow, McDougal and Reisman, Power and Policy in Quest of the Law: Essays in Honor of Eugene Victor Rostow, 1985.
After the 9/11 attacks, however, Moyer took on new significance. In 2004, the case was thoroughly discussed in the Supreme Court's "illegal enemy combatant" decision, Hamdi v. Rumsfeld.. The Moyer case may take on increasing significance in the future as the "War on Terror" continues:  "The ruling's appeal to present-day government lawyers is obvious. The administration has taken pains to emphasize that the Padilla detention order—like the order establishing the ground rules for military commissions—was signed by President Bush in the exercise of his authority as commander-in-chief. And if a state governor playing commander-in-chief can persuade the courts to rubber-stamp his abusive actions, surely a President can, too."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 212
Notes
References
 Chertoff, Michael. "Judicial Review of the President's Decisions as Commander in Chief." Rutgers Law Review. 55:1289 (Summer 2003).
 Dubofsky, Melvyn. We Shall Be All: A History of the Industrial Workers of the World. Champaign, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 2000. 
 Fink, Gary. Biographical Dictionary of American Labor. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1984. 
 Foner, Philip S. History of the Labor Movement in the United States. Vol. 3: The Policies and Practices of the American Federation of Labor, 1900-1909. New York: International Publishers, 1964. Cloth ; Paperback 
 Forbath, William E. "The Shaping of the American Labor Movement." Harvard Law Review. 102:1111 (April 1989).
 Mariner, Joanne. "Indefinite Detention: Using Outdated Precedents To Defend Unjust Policies." Writ. September 17, 2002.
 Rostow, Eugene V.; McDougal, Myres S.; and Reisman, Michael W. Power and Policy in Quest of the Law: Essays in Honor of Eugene Victor Rostow. Boston: Brill Academic Publishers, 1985. 
 Suggs, Jr. George S. Colorado's War on Militant Unionism: James H. Peabody and the Western Federation of Miners. Tulsa, Okla.: University of Oklahoma Press, 1972. 
 Vladeck, Stephen I. "The Detention Power." Yale Law & Policy Review. 22:153 (Winter 2004).
 Weida, Jason Collins. "A Republic of Emergencies: Martial Law in American Jurisprudence." Connecticut Law Review. 36:1397 (Summer 2004).
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:History of labor relations in the United States
Category:1909 in United States case law
Category:Colorado National Guard
Category:Western Federation of Miners
Category:Governor of Colorado
"""

From "Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle" ==> """
Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle, 429 U.S. 274 (1977), often shortened to Mt. Healthy v. Doyle, was a unanimous U.S. Supreme Court decision arising from a fired teacher's lawsuit against his former employer, the Mount Healthy City Schools. The Court considered three issues: whether federal-question jurisdiction existed in the case, whether the Eleventh Amendment barred federal lawsuits against school districts, and whether the First and Fourteenth Amendments prevented the district, as a government agency, from firing or otherwise disciplining an employee for constitutionally protected speech on a matter of public concern where the same action might have taken place for other, unprotected activities. Justice William Rehnquist wrote the opinion.
The case was first heard in the Southern District of Ohio. In 1971, Fred Doyle, who had been teaching social studies for five years in the Mount Healthy City Schools, learned his contract had not been renewed, not only denying him tenure but any further employment with the district. The superintendent's letter cited both an incident where he had made an obscene gesture to students and his sharing of a district dress code for teachers with a local radio station as displaying a "lack of tact". He took a position with another district and filed suit under Section 1983, arguing his constitutional rights to free speech had been violated, per the Court's 1967 decision in Pickering v. Board of Education, another case involving an untenured teacher fired for speaking out in the media. After the district court ruled in his favor, the school district appealed to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, which partially vacated the decision in a brief per curiam opinion late in 1975.
The Supreme Court took the case and heard oral argument almost a year later. It handed down its decision early in 1977. On the jurisdictional question, Rehnquist held that although the school district had been created by state law, it was primarily a local entity and thus beyond the reach of the Eleventh Amendment, its first ruling in that area in 86 years.Harwood, Anthony J.; "A Narrow Eleventh Amendment Immunity for Political Subdivisions: Reconciling The Arm of the State Doctrine with Federalist Principles"; 55 Fordham L. Rev 101, 105 (1986). Retrieved February 5, 2014. The Court did not, however, decide the question of whether Doyle had been fired legally, since there were other incidents suggesting he had difficulties in his relationships with students and fellow teachers which the district had introduced into the record. Instead, it remanded the case to the district court, ordering it to require the district to show by a preponderance of evidence that Doyle would have been fired regardless if he had not contacted the radio station. The school district was later able to do so, and in 1982 the Sixth Circuit upheld that decision.
The case introduced what has since become known as the "Mt. Healthy test" into similar cases that follow the Pickering line in asserting the First Amendment rights of public employees where the employer claims other, unprotected conduct motivated the adverse action, a two-prong process that shifts the burden of proof from plaintiff to defendant in the course of the action. First, the plaintiff must prove that the activity they were allegedly disciplined for was indeed protected speech. The defendant must then show by a preponderance that the adverse action would have occurred if the protected activity had never happened. This has been criticized as allowing public employers a way to circumvent restrictions on taking adverse action against whistleblowers, and more generally as incompatible with the underlying principles of tort law. The test has also been expanded into mixed motive discrimination cases in employment law.
Underlying dispute
Doyle had begun teaching in Mt. Healthy, Ohio, a suburb of Cincinnati, in 1966. His one-year contract with the school system was renewed three times; in 1969 the contract term was extended to two years. Were it to be renewed, Doyle also expected to be granted tenure and commit to teaching at Mt. Healthy for the long term.Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle, , Rehnquist, J.
During the 1970 school year, he served as president of the school's Teachers' Association, and worked to expand the subjects of negotiations between it and the school board. The following year he was on the association's executive board. During this time relations between the association and the board were reportedly very tense, and Doyle was at the center of several incidents during 1970. As the Court recounted them:
In February 1971 the principal circulated a memo to all employees outlining a new dress code, apparently motivated by the administration's belief that public support for the district's bond issues was in part motivated by the teachers' appearance. Doyle, as an association official, had been aware that the administration was considering such a measure but had been led to believe that the association would have had some input before it was announced. He thus shared the memo with a friend at Cincinnati radio station WSAI, which used it as the basis for an on-air news item.Mt. Healthy at 283.
Doyle later apologized to the principal, saying he should have expressed his concerns over the administration's handling of the issue privately before making the memo public. A month later the district's superintendent made his annual recommendations to the board on whether to renew the contracts of untenured faculty. Doyle was one of nine whom he did not recommend rehiring, and the board accepted the recommendations and voted not to renew the contracts, denying Doyle tenure and terminating his employment with the Mt. Healthy schools.
Doyle asked for a reason he had not been rehired, and later received a short written note. The board cited his "notable lack of tact in handling professional matters which leaves much doubt as to your sincerity in establishing good school relationships." It pointed to two specific instances of this: his obscene gesture to the girls in the cafeteria and his leaking of the dress-code memo which "raised much concern not only within this community, but also in neighboring communities."Mt. Healthy at 283n1.
Lower courts
Shortly after the school year ended Doyle accepted another teaching position, for less pay but with tenure, at Miami Trace High School, midway between Cincinnati and Columbus. He and two of the other fired teachers brought suit in federal court for the Southern District of Ohio, seeking reinstatement, back pay and $50,000 in punitive damages for violations of their civil rights under Section 1983. They named as defendants the board as a governmental entity, its members and the superintendent individually in their official and personal capacities. Judge Timothy Sylvester Hogan heard the case.
The school district's defenses were primarily procedural, in particular challenging whether federal courts had the jurisdiction over it in this case. Doyle relied on the Court's 1968 Pickering v. Board of Education decision, in which it unanimously held in favor of an untenured Illinois teacher fired for writing a letter skeptical of a school tax increase to a local newspaper, to assert his First Amendment rights against similar retaliatory action by the Mt. Healthy board. That case, however, had been appealed to the Supreme Court from the Illinois Supreme Court, having originated in that state's courts.Pickering v. Board of Education, .
For two reasons, the school district claimed, there was no federal jurisdiction. First, as an "arm of the state", under the Eleventh Amendment, it was entitled to the same sovereign immunity since Ohio law did not consent to litigation against school districts for violations of constitutional rights. Second; Since Doyle had taken another job so soon after his dismissal, his lost wages were minimal and thus the amount in controversy was less than the $10,000 required for federal jurisdiction.Mt. Healthy, 276–280.
It raised two other defenses that addressed Doyle's substantive claims. In 1972's Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth, the Court had held that an untenured professor did not have a due process claim over the nonrenewal of his contract (as opposed to a dismissal prior to the expiration of the contract term) without a property or liberty interest at stake.Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth, . Therefore, the district argued, neither did Doyle. And even if he did, his history of misconduct and intemperate outbursts was sufficient justification for his termination.
Hogan ruled in Doyle's favor on every issue; although he dismissed the case against the board members as individual defendants. The statute creating school districts had effectively waived any Eleventh Amendment protection. And since Doyle had filed his suit under the section of the law that creates federal-question jurisdiction, limitations such as the amount in controversy did not apply. He felt Pickering gave him no leeway to decide whether Doyle would have been fired without leaking the memo, an act which he found had played "a substantial role" in the board's decision.Mt. Healthy, 284–286. Doyle was to be reinstated and reimbursed over $5,000 in back pay plus $6,000 in attorney's fees.
The district appealed the verdict to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals. In late 1975, the appellate court affirmed all of Hogan's decisionDoyle v. Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education, 529 F.2d 524 (6th Cir., 1975) save for attorney's fees, which per the Supreme Court's recent decision in Alyeska Pipeline Co. v. Wilderness SocietyAlyeska Pipeline Co. v. Wilderness Society,  it believed were not a permissible award in the case.  The district petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari, and it was granted early the following year.
Before the Court
In their reply brief, the school board raised the issue of whether or nor the district itself was a "person" that could be sued under Section 1983. At trial, Hogan had ruled that since the case had been filed under the statute allowing for federal-question jurisdiction, it was properly a 1983 case as well and was not subject to any limitations of that statute. In a string of cases brought against local governments dating to 1961's Monroe v. Pape, it had held that they were not "persons" and could not be sued under 1983.Monroe v. Pape,  Three years earlier, in a case similar to Doyle's, a district court in Colorado had held that school districts were not persons under those precedents, and it was this case the district relied on.Weathers v. West Yuma County School District, 387 F.Supp. 552 (D.Colo., 1974)
Oral argument was scheduled for late in 1976. Philip Olinger, the school district's lawyer, argued their case. Michael Gottesman appeared for Doyle.
Argument for board
No sooner had Olinger finished his review of the facts of the case when Justice William Rehnquist began questioning him about the nature of school districts in Ohio, using Rehnquist's native Arizona as a point of comparison. Were the boards named as defendants in lawsuits? Who paid verdicts against them? Were they provided for by the state constitution? What was their authority to tax and how much money did the state contribute to them? In his native Virginia, Justice Lewis Powell noted, school board members were "constitutional officers." Olinger told him that was as far as he knew not the case in Ohio.
When he was able to turn to the specifics of the case, Olinger reminded the justices that Hogan had agreed that, other than Doyle's contact with WSAI, the board had ample reason not to renew his contract. The rest of the argument focused on the jurisdictional issues. Olinger said that the difference between Doyle's salaries at Mt. Healthy and Miami Trace was too small to reach the $10,000 threshold. Pressed by one of the justices, he admitted that he was not taking into account the difference it might have made over the course of several years of employment; however he said it was entirely possible that Doyle's potential top salary step at his new school would be higher than it might be at Mt. Healthy.
Olinger explained to the court that language in Ohio's 1912 constitution allowing the legislature to pass laws under which the state could be sued had, shortly after its adoption, raised the question among the state's legal community of whether Ohio had, by doing so, surrendered its sovereign immunity. After a series of cases on this question, the Ohio Supreme Court had held in 1922, following the Court's Hans v. Louisiana decision,Hans v. Louisiana,  that if the state were to do so, it would have to be by a specific act of the legislature.Aldrich v. Youngstown, 106 Ohio St. 342, 140 N.E. 164, 27 A.L.R. 1497 He dismissed Doyle's suggestion that the Court, as it had done with the Fourth Amendment in Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents,Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents,  find an implied cause of action in the Fourteenth Amendment that would allow lawsuits regardless of any statutory provision. Lastly, he reminded the justices that, when Section 1983 was adopted, Congress rejected an amendment explicitly allowing for actions against states and local governments.
Argument for Doyle
While he understood the jurisdictional issue was most important to them and planned to discuss it first, Gottesman told the justices, he hoped to spend some time on the facts of the case. He conceded that the implied cause of action he saw was not necessary to establish jurisdiction. Rather, it had been a response to the school district's late argument that it was not a person under Section 1983, and that he should have cross-appealed Hogan's ruling, in which he dismissed the case against the individual members as defendants, but did not because he did not expect that issue to arise again.
But he begged the Court's indulgence because under Kenosha v. Bruno, another one of the cases following Monroe, if the school district had the same Eleventh Amendment immunity as a municipality Doyle could not seek equitable relief such as his reinstatement against the board as an entity;Kenosha v. Bruno,  he would have had to do it against the members personally. If the case were remanded in its present state, he said, he would be unable to proceed even if he won on all the other issues. Since Congress had changed the federal-question statute since Bivens, he felt that created the implied cause of action from the enabling language in the Fourteenth Amendment.
"It may be the most important civil rights question this court is going to  in the next decade", Gottesman reminded the justices. "The lower courts are deciding this issue by the legions." Nevertheless, he allowed that they might want to wait for a case where the issue was briefed by both parties.
Having devoted most of his time to the jurisdictional arguments, he asked for some time to speak about the merits near the end. "If we only knew what the school board would have done but for the phone call [to WSAI]," Gottesman suggested, "we know how to ... deal with this case." The Court should follow precedent from civil-rights and labor law and put the burden of proving that on the defendant. Otherwise, "every school board that wants to fire someone for a First Amendment reason, well ... no teacher can teach for five years without doing something somebody would find objectionable. Even though their motivation is solely the First Amendment reason, they'll tack on two or three other reasons." At a justice's prompting, he likened it to the harmless error rule in appellate review.
Opinion of the Court
Two months later, early in 1977, the Court handed down its decision. The justices had unanimously ruled in Doyle's favor on all the jurisdictional questions. And on the merits, they said, the school district would have to prove that it would have fired him for reasons unrelated to his leaking the memo to the radio station.Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle, 
Procedural issues
Justice William Rehnquist wrote for the Court. First, he said, the amount in controversy did not defeat Doyle's claim to jurisdiction since "[e]ven if the District Court had chosen to award only compensatory damages and not reinstatement, it was far from a 'legal certainty' at the time of suit that Doyle would not have been entitled to more than $10,000. "Rehnquist agreed with Gottesman that the possibility of an implied cause of action in the Fourteenth Amendment was an important question, yet "one that should not be decided on this record."
Since Doyle had made the suggestion in response to the board's late resurrection of its claim to non-personhood, Rehnquist dealt with that. Had the board properly preserved the issue, he noted, the Court would have been obliged to decide it. But it had not, and since Doyle's claim to federal-question jurisdiction seemed like a legitimate constitutional issue and not one claimed for the sole purpose of obtaining federal jurisdiction, "we leave those questions for another day, and assume, without deciding, that the respondent could sue under § 1331 without regard to the limitations imposed by 42 U.S.C. § 1983."A year later, in Monell v. Department of Social Services of the City of New York, , the Court took up that question and decided that municipalities were persons under Section 1983, overruling Monroe v. Pape.
The Court had chosen a different approach to the Eleventh Amendment question. Rather than agree with Hogan that Ohio had waived sovereign immunity for its school districts through the statute that had created them, "we prefer to address instead the question of whether such an entity had any Eleventh Amendment immunity in the first place, since if we conclude that it had none it will be unnecessary to reach the question of waiver," Rehnquist wrote. Ohio law itself was very clear—the state did not include local "political subdivisions" and the school district was a political subdivision. While it received guidance and some money from the state Department of Education, it was one of many local school districts in the state and had broad authority to levy property taxes and issue bonds financed by those tax revenues. "On balance, the record before us indicates that a local school board such as petitioner is more like a county or city than it is like an arm of the state ... it was not entitled to assert any Eleventh Amendment immunity from suit in the federal courts."
Substantive issues
Rehnquist then turned to the merits of the case. After recounting in some detail Doyle's history of intemperate behavior in his years at Mt. Healthy and the contact with the radio station, he rejected the board's argument that Roth barred Doyle's claim since he did not have tenure. Instead he followed Roth's companion case, Perry v. Sindermann, another case Gottesman had argued, with distinct similarities to Doyle's. In Perry, a Texas public junior college professor who had, like Doyle, been president of a faculty organization that clashed with the administration, challenged the nonrenewal of his contract.Perry v. Sindermann,  In contrast to Roth, the Court had ruled that he had alleged enough facts to make an arguable case that the nonrenewal was retaliatory action for his speech on a matter of public concern, and so it would for Doyle.
Lastly Rehnquist considered Hogan's admission that while he read Pickering as mandating that Doyle be reinstated with tenure and back pay for the board's violation of his constitutional rights, there were certainly other reasons the board could have cited to justify the firing that were not constitutionally actionable. Since under state law the board did not even have to show cause for the nonrenewal, "it is not clear what the District Court meant by this latter statement." The only "plausible" meaning Rehnquist could divine was that the board could have fired Doyle anyway even if he had never called the radio station.
In that case, Rehnquist went on, it would not necessarily have been a constitutional violation for an adverse action to have resulted even significantly from protected activity. The Court did not want to leave that reading in place, since it would allow a misbehaving employee to insulate themselves from adverse action by engaging in protected conduct.
It was, Rehnquist wrote, necessary to establish a test for future such cases. He looked to other areas of the law to formulate one. In two prior criminal cases, Lyons v. OklahomaLyons v. Oklahoma,  and Parker v. North CarolinaParker v. North Carolina,  the Court had allowed the use of later confessions or statements by defendants even where earlier ones had been coercively obtained as long as the later statements appeared otherwise voluntarily given. "While the type of causation on which the taint cases turn may differ somewhat from that which we apply here, those cases do suggest that the proper test to apply in the present context is one which likewise protects against the invasion of constitutional rights without commanding undesirable consequences not necessary to the assurance of those rights." Since Doyle had met his burden of showing that one of the actions for which the board terminated him was constitutionally protected speech, "the District Court should have gone on to determine whether the Board had shown by a preponderance of the evidence that it would have reached the same decision as to respondent's re-employment even in the absence of the protected conduct." The Court could not determine this from the available record, so it vacated the Sixth Circuit and remanded the case to District Court to facilitate that inquiry.Mt. Healthy, 286–87
Subsequent proceedings
On remand, Hogan did as the Supreme Court ordered. He concluded that "the Board has established by a preponderance of the evidence that Doyle would not have been renewed because of the incidents—exclusive of the radio incident—which had occurred during the year or so prior to the nonrenewal" and ruled in its favor. Doyle appealed this finding of fact to the Sixth Circuit.Doyle v. Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education, 670 F.2d 59 (6th Cir., 1982)
A panel composed of the circuit's chief judge at the time, George Clifton Edwards, Jr., Albert J. Engel, Jr. and senior judge John Weld Peck II heard arguments in late 1981. A little over a month later, four years and two days after the Supreme Court's decision in the case, they issued a brief per curiam opinion that largely recounted the history of the case to that point. "We read this record as disclosing that while appellant Doyle had some fine qualities as a teacher, he also had a very quick temper," they wrote. "[W]e cannot find that the district judge's finding of fact on remand is clearly erroneous." They affirmed his decision.
Subsequent jurisprudence
Later cases that rely on Mt. Healthy have largely concerned the eponymous test derived from the case. The Supreme Court expanded its application to other areas of the law, for now leaving it to the appeals courts to wrestle with the specifics.
Supreme Court
Two years later, the Court was able to reinforce the "Mt. Healthy test" in another, very similar case. Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District came on appeal from the Fifth Circuit, which had upheld the firing of a Mississippi teacher for, in part, her regular and vehement complaints to her principal about the racially disparate impact of school-district policies in the wake of court-ordered desegregation. The appeals court distinguished the case from Pickering and Mt. Healthy by noting that her complaints, despite involving a matter of public concern, had been made privately.Ayers v. Western Line Consolidated School District,  555 F.2d 1309 (5th Cir., 1977)
Rehnquist, again writing for a unanimous court, held that the context of the speech made no difference under the First Amendment; it was as protected as Pickering's letter and Doyle's telephone call. The Fifth Circuit, writing before the Supreme Court had decided Mt. Healthy, had been in much the same position with regards to the factual record with regards to the Supreme Court in Mt. Healthy. "while the District Court found that petitioner's 'criticism' was the 'primary' reason for the School District's failure to rehire her, it did not find that she would have been rehired but for her criticism." It remanded the case to the district court again to resolve that issue;Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District,  unlike Doyle, Givhan ultimately triumphed.
Over the course of the 1980s the Court would extend the test to claims alleging other improper adverse employment action in the private sector as well. In National Labor Relations Board v. Transportation Management Co., it unanimously endorsed the board's use of the test in upholding its ruling in favor of a bus-company employee alleging he was fired for his attempts to organize a union, contrary to the other reasons claimed by the company.National Labor Relations Board v. Transportation Management Co.,  Two years later, Rehnquist again wrote for a unanimous Court that, Mt. Healthy "suppl[ies] the proper analysis" in 1985's Hunter v. Underwood, finding Alabama's felony disenfranchisement laws were primarily meant to target black voters even if they also affected poor whites.Hunter v. Underwood, , , Rehnquist, J.
The Court extended the Mt. Healthy test to private-sector mixed motive discrimination claims in 1989 with Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins. There, Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. wrote for a plurality that clarified the language it had used in Givhan: "A court that finds for a plaintiff under this standard has effectively concluded that an illegitimate motive was a 'but-for' cause of the employment decision."Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, , , Brennan, J. The decision's imposition of a shift in the burden of proof from plaintiff to defendant once the former has proved that an improper reason motivated the adverse action was criticized in Anthony Kennedy's dissent as only narrowly applicable to such cases.Hopkins, at 272–295, Kennedy, J., dissenting. "The burden shift properly will be found to apply in only a limited number of employment discrimination cases. The application of the new scheme, furthermore, will make a difference only in a smaller subset of cases," at 290–91.
Appeals courts
By 1992 the Fifth Circuit could assert that "the two-step burden-shifting rule ... has now become standard fare in discrimination cases" in the third and final appeal by a Mississippi newspaper alleging that local government withdrew legal advertising in retaliation for critical coverage.North Mississippi Communications, Inc. v. Jones, 951 F.2d 652 (5th Cir., 1992) The district court had found the first-ever application of the test to a case involving denial of public patronage "strained"; Judge John Robert Brown disagreed, saying it was" broad enough potentially to lend itself to a wide variety of fact patterns" and remanded the case.Jones, at 654.
In a pair of cases, the Seventh Circuit has dealt with how and when to instruct a jury that is given the Mt. Healthy test to apply. In Greenberg v. Kmetko it directed a district court to change its instruction to more closely match the test should the case be heard by a jury, even though it had granted qualified immunity to the defendants.Greenberg v. Kmetko 840 F.2d 467, 475 (7th Cir., 1988) Frank Easterbrook observed in 1992's Gooden v. Neal, where a correctional officer alleged he had been demoted in retaliation for exposing corruption, that "[m]any defendants do not want Mt. Healthy instructions and prefer to ask an either-or question of the jury" since they also contend the activity the adverse action was in retaliation for was not protected by the First Amendment. "Mt. Healthy is something of a misfit in such circumstances." In that case, where the employer denied that the plaintiff's speech was in any way related to the adverse decision, they chose to shift the burden of proof of that to the employer as well,Gooden v. Neal, 17 F.3d 925, 929 (7th Cir., 1994) an approach Donald P. Lay of the Eighth Circuit, sitting by designation, criticized at length in dissent.Gooden at 930–934 In 2002, the Ninth Circuit held that the test still applies when a plaintiff presents only a circumstantial case that the adverse action was retaliatory as opposed to a direct one.Allen v. Iranon, 283 F.3d 1070, 1074–1079 (9th Cir., 2002)
"In the aftermath of Mt. Healthy," wrote Sandra Lynch for the First Circuit in 2004, "confusion still sometimes arises about the issue of causation."Sanchez-Lopez v. Fuentes-Pujols, 375 F.3d 121, 130 (1st Cir., 2004) She was writing in one of several cases it heard in the mid-2000s arising from alleged political retaliation in Puerto Rico, where members of the New Progressive Party (NPP) brought suit claiming that members of the rival Popular Democratic Party (PDP) had improperly forced them out of government jobs after the PDP defeated the incumbent NPP in the commonwealth's 2000 elections. Many of them involved the correctness of jury instructions on the subject. Since the employer's defense largely rested on the illegality of personnel moves by the outgoing NPP so that its members could keep their jobs, Lynch elaborated:
Since the jury instructions had not included a direct question as to whether they found that the defendants would have taken the same action without the political consideration, the First Circuit overturned the jury's finding for the plaintiffs and remanded the case for retrial with a proper jury instruction.Sanchez-Lopez, 136–38.
In Tejada-Batista v. Morales, where a discharged Puerto Rico Special Investigations Bureau agent alleged retaliation by a superior for his contact with a local newspaper, then-Chief Judge Michael Boudin denied defendants' request that a Mt. Healthy instruction be allowed, as it was "not on point" since he did not feel they had introduced enough evidence to support a claim that there were permissible reasons to take adverse action.Tejada-Batista v. Morales, 424 F.3d 97, 102 (1st Cir., 2005) Gene Carter dissented, arguing that the verdict should have been reversed since the evidence suggested one of the named defendants had no knowledge of anything but the domestic violence charge that was the stated reason Tejada had been fired.Tejada-Batista, 103-109.
Judge Juan R. Torruella, in Rodriguez-Marin v. Rivera-Gonzalez, another of the political cases, characterized the Mt. Healthy test as an affirmative defense.Rodriguez-Marin v. Rivera-Gonzalez, 438 F.3d 72, 81 (1st. Cir., 2006) In that case, not only did the court find that it was insufficient for the defendants to merely introduce evidence that would be sufficient for a jury to find that they had other reasons to take action against the plaintiffs, they had to show that a reasonable jury could have found for them. Similarly, the court held that a jury instruction that a finding that the plaintiffs' political affiliations and activities were the "determinative factor" in the defendants' actions against them met the test's requirements.Rodriguez-Marin at 83.
In 2011, the Second Circuit affirmed a successful use of the Mt. Healthy defense in a case where it had found one constitutionally protected speech act was a motivation for the adverse action. The plaintiff in Anemone v. Metropolitan Transportation Authority was the former head of security for the agency, who claimed his attempts to root out corruption in the agency had been ignored or frustrated by his superiors. At one point he had discussed it with a reporter from The New York Times, which eventually published a story about the allegations.Anemone v. Metropolitan Transportation Authority, 629 F.3d 97 (2nd Cir., 2011)
Judge Debra Ann Livingston wrote for a panel that took two years to decide the case. It found that while that act was constitutionally protected, the balancing test established by Pickering v. Board of Education actually improved the MTA's case under Mt. Healthy, since although it was speech on a matter of public concern it was disruptive to the MTA's operations since it breached the confidentiality the plaintiff was required to maintain about security matters and internal investigations as part of his job duties. Even if it had not been so disruptive, the court held, his record of insubordination and deception of several of the defendants was enough reason for him to have been disciplined and fired—indeed he had even admitted he believed his job to be in jeopardy before he had contacted the Times.
Analysis and commentary
Three years after the decision, E. Gordon Gee, then a professor at West Virginia University College of Law, described it as a turning point in First Amendment jurisprudence.
He anticipated the later efforts of the First and Seventh circuits in working out how to implement the Mt. Healthy test: "The major effect of Mt. Healthy will be felt, and struggled with, in the trial courts. [It] provides little guidance ... on the amount and type of evidence required of the plaintiff to shift the burden of proof to the defendant."Gee, 267.
Some tort-law specialists have been very critical of the burden-shifting test. Georgia law professor Michael L. Wells finds it at odds with the fundamental principles of tort law and thus wrongly decided. "It should be replaced by a rule that allows the plaintiff to recover full damages when the constitutional violation was sufficient to cause them." The Court, he wrote in 2000, could have found other causation tests in tort law that were fairer to the plaintiff than but-for, such as suffi.Michael L. Wells. "Three Arguments against Mt. Healthy: Tort Theory, Constitutional Torts, and Freedom of Speech" Mercer Law Review 51.2 (2000): 583-601, 585. Retrieved February 9, 2014. "It is especially ill-suited to constitutional torts charging retaliation for the exercise of First Amendment rights" since it ensures that an employee who speaks out on a matter of public concern will have to consider the possibility that his or her employer will find some plausible reasons for taking action against him apart from his protected speech or other activity.Wells, 596–598.
Sheldon Nahmod of Chicago-Kent College of Law shares Wells's criticism. He points to one case in particular where the Court seemed to recognize the theory that constitutional violations should always be grounds for liability regardless of whatever other issues exist. In Carey v. Phipus, decided a year after Mt. Healthy, the Court held that two students challenging their suspensions were entitled to prove that their due process rights were violated as they alleged even if the suspensions themselves turned out to have been factually justified.Carey v. Phipus,  While not a constitutional claim, he also looks to 1995's McKennon v. Nashville Banner Publishing Co., a case under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, where an age discrimination verdict against a private employer was upheld even though the respondent had concededly met the Mt. Healthy burden with evidence of her wrongdoing because that evidence was discovered subsequent to the employee's termination.McKennon v. Nashville Banner Publishing Co., .Hahmod, Sheldon; "Mt. Healthy and Causation-in-Fact: The Court Still Doesn't Get It!", 51 Mercer Law Review 603–619, 2000. Retrieved February 9, 2014.
Other commentators have focused on the Eleventh Amendment aspects. New York lawyer Anthony J. Harwood reads the decision as establishing, along with the 1979 case Lake County Estates v. Tahoe Regional Planning Board,Lake County Estates Inc. v. Tahoe Regional Planning Board,  a test to determine when a political subdivision is not an arm of the state and thus does not enjoy the state's sovereign immunity.
Despite the existence of this test, however, he notes that lower courts have generally followed Lincoln County v. Luning,Lincoln County v. Luning, . the last case before Mt. Healthy to pose an Eleventh Amendment question to the Court regarding state political subdivisions, regardless of whether the case invokes federal-question or diversity jurisdiction. "This practice is contrary to the balance of state and federal interests that inheres in the Supreme Court's Eleventh Amendment doctrine."Harwood, 118.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 429
Notes
References
Further reading
  Roth, Mitchell; "The Effect of Mt. Healthy City School District v. Doyle upon Public Sector Labor Law: A Union Perspective" 10 J.L. & Educ. 517 (1981).
 Koerner, John; "Between Healthy and Hartman: Probable Cause in Retaliatory Arrest Cases"; 109 Colum. Law Rev. 4, 755–797 (2009).
External links
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States state sovereign immunity case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:United States constitutional torts case law
Category:United States federal question jurisdiction case law
Category:United States due process case law
Category:Education in Hamilton County, Ohio
Category:National Education Association
"""

From "Muehler v. Mena" ==> """
Muehler v. Mena, 544 U.S. 93 (2005), was a unanimous decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution allows detention of an occupant in handcuffs while a search is being conducted, and that it does not require officers to have an independent reasonable suspicion before questioning a subject about their immigration status.
Background
Police officers executed a warrant to search Iris Mena's house for deadly weapons and evidence of gang membership. Mena had rented a room in her house to a gang member who was a suspect in a drive-by shooting. At 7 a.m. on February 3, 1998, petitioners, along with the SWAT team and other officers, executed the warrant. Mena was asleep in her bed when the SWAT team, clad in helmets and black vests, entered her bedroom and placed her in handcuffs at gunpoint. The SWAT team also handcuffed three other individuals found on the property. Mena was then detained in her garage for two to three hours in handcuffs under the guard of two officers.
Mena brought a § 1983 suit against the officers, alleging that she was detained “for an unreasonable time and in an unreasonable manner” in violation of the Fourth Amendment.  In addition, she claimed that the warrant and its execution were overbroad, that the officers failed to comply with the “knock and announce” rule, and that the officers had needlessly destroyed property during the search.  After a trial, a jury found that Officers Muehler and Brill violated Mena's Fourth Amendment right to be free from unreasonable seizures by detaining her so long and awarded Mena $60,000 in actual and punitive damages.  The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed the verdict and the damages.
Decision
The Supreme Court of the United States began its analysis by pointing out that "Mena's detention was, under Michigan v. Summers, plainly permissible."  According to the Court, the fact that Mena was an occupant of the residence being searched was sufficient to justify her detention under Summers.
The Court went on to explain that "[i]nherent in Summers''' authorization to detain an occupant of the place to be searched is the authority to use reasonable force to effectuate the detention."  In this case, the Court said, the governmental interest in applying handcuffs to Mena—who was already being lawfully detained—outweighed the intrusion.  The court noted that the governmental interests were particularly high because this was a search for weapons and a wanted gang member resided on the premises.  The Court acknowledged that the duration of detention does impact the balancing, but held that the two-to-three hour detention in handcuffs did not outweigh the government's safety interest.
The Court's decision in Muehler v. Mena has been criticized by civil rights attorney Amir H. Ali, in his contribution to the Harvard Civil Rights Journal. Ali commented that the decision arguably represents a serious expansion of the personal intrusion that had been permitted in Michigan v. Summers''. He went on to say that had the Court undergone a balancing of the totality of the circumstances, it would have been hard to justify the Mena's prolonged detention in handcuffs.Amir Hatem Ali, Following the Bright-Line of Michigan v. Summers, 45 Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review 483, 504-05 (2010)1 Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure: A Treatise On The Fourth Amendment § 4.9 (4th ed. 2009) (arguing that the Court's justification for the prolonged use of handcuffs was “dubious at best”)  In addition, the Muehler Court's one sentence justification—“this case involved the detention of four detainees by two officers during a search of a gang house for dangerous weapons”—set the bar remarkably low.  Ali also emphasized, "the Court did not address the fact that, although two officers were on guard, there were actually eighteen officers on the scene, or the concurring Justices' observation that 'this 5-foot-2-inch young lady posed no threat to the officers.'"Amir Hatem Ali, Following the Bright-Line of Michigan v. Summers, 45 Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review 483, 505 (2010)
References
External links
Petitioner Brief in Muehler v. Mena
ACLU Amicus Brief in Muehler v. Mena
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Mueller v. Allen" ==> """
Mueller v. Allen, 463 U.S. 388 (1983), was a United States Supreme Court case examining the constitutionality of a state tax deduction granted to taxpaying parents for school-related expenses, including expenses incurred from private secular and religious schools. The plaintiffs claimed that a Minnesota statute, allowing tax deductions for both public and private school expenses, had the effect of subsidizing religious instruction since parents who paid tuition to religious schools received a larger deduction than parents of public school students, who incurred no tuition expenses.
In a 5–4 decision, the Court upheld the statute..  The majority affirmed that the benefit was religiously neutral because the deduction applied equally to sectarian and nonsectarian tuition and that the choice of religious or nonreligious instruction was made by individual parents, not the state. Also, aid was given to parents, not schools.
The dissenting opinion argued that the tax deduction violated the US Constitution because it was an indirect government subsidy of religion, providing a financial incentive to parents to send their children to religious schools.
Background
The First Amendment of the US Constitution prohibits laws advancing the establishment of any religion. Any government-sponsored religious instruction is thus barred. Prior to the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment, the Supreme Court's reviews of First Amendment disputes were minimal because the court maintained jurisdiction to consider only challenges against laws passed at the federal level.
Everson v. Board of Education (1947) was the first case decided by the Court to apply the Establishment Clause prohibition to state laws. The decision in Everson established two criteria to judge state legislation: the action must have a secular purpose, and that purpose must be the primary effect of the action. Following a 1971 decision by the Supreme Court, a third condition was incorporated.  The resulting three-pronged test, called Lemon test, prescribes that for any governmental policy or legislation to satisfy the Establishment Clause, it must have a secular purpose, its primary effect must not the advancement or inhibition of religion, and it must not create an excessive entanglement between religion and government.
In Mueller, the plaintiff claimed that the primary effect of the Minnesota law was the advancement of religion since most taxpayers who benefited from the legislation were parents paying their children's tuition to private religious schools.
Majority opinion
Justice Rehnquist delivered the majority opinion, which affirmed the decisions of the United States District Court for the District of Minnesota and the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit that the Minnesota statute (§ 290.09, subd. 22) was constitutional. The law allowed state taxpayers to a state income tax deduction for any expenses toward their children's school tuition, textbooks, and transportation. The deduction was limited to $500 per student in elementary school and $700 per student in middle school and high school. The statute excluded deducting any expenses for "instructional books and materials used in the teaching of religious tenets, doctrines or worship, the purpose of which is to inculcate such tenets, doctrines or worship."
The plaintiffs were unsuccessful in contending that the tax deduction provided financial assistance to religious schools and that to assure no deduction was made for textbooks containing religious teachings, the state became excessively entangled with religion.
Rehnquist noted that the statute was facially neutral on religion and rejected the plaintiff's argument that its religious partiality was evidenced by the fact that 96% of the private schools in Minnesota were sectarian institutions.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Marshall wrote the dissenting opinion, agreed to by three other justices. The tax credits were available to all parents, but, in practice, the chief benefit went to parents whose children attended parochial schools. "Parents who send their children to free public schools are simply ineligible to obtain the full benefit of the deduction except in the unlikely event that they buy $700 worth of pencils, notebooks, and bus rides for their children." As the First Amendment was concerned, Marshall added, a tax credit did not differ from a direct grant to parents, which had already been found unconstitutional.
Aftermath
Mueller v. Allen marked a turning point for the Establishment Clause, and for the next 20 years the Supreme Court ruled more favorably if governments fostered aid. The Court upheld benefits that were deemed to be religiously neutral and were extended to all equally, even if they were favorable to individuals in exercising their privately-held religious interests. The Court became disinclined to overturn laws that did not disqualify religiously based interests if the direct beneficiaries of the legislation in question were individuals, rather than religiously-affiliated institutions.
Following Mueller, private choice was a key element extended to subsequent Establishment Clause court decisions over government sponsored school vouchers, the most significant one being Zelman v. Simmons-Harris (2002). While direct aid was funneled instead to religious schools, the Court focused instead on whether or not the policies at issue provided sufficient controls to ensure the assistance was not directed to religious instruction and that the policies did not lead to forbidden entanglements between the government and any religious institution.
Related cases
 Everson v. Board of Education (1947)
 Board of Education v. Allen (1968)
 Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971)
 Zelman v. Simmons-Harris (2002)
 Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue (2020)
See also
Free Exercise Clause
Endorsement test
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:1983 in religion
"""

From "Mugler v. Kansas" ==> """
Mugler v. Kansas, 123 U.S. 623 (1887), was an important United States Supreme Court case in which the 7–1 opinion of Associate Justice John Marshall Harlan and the lone partial dissent by Associate Justice Stephen Johnson Field laid the foundation for the Supreme Court's later acceptance and defense during the Lochner era of Justice Field's theory of economic substantive due process under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The companion case was Kansas v. Ziebold & Hagelin.
Background
As part of the burgeoning temperance movement, the people of Kansas amended their state constitution on November 2, 1880:
The Kansas Legislature subsequently enacted an accompanying statute on February 19, 1881 that provided that after May 1, 1881, any person who manufactured or aided in the manufacture of any liquor without an appropriate permit would be guilty of a misdemeanor. First-time violators were to be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 or to be imprisoned in the county jail for not less than 20 nor more than 90 days.
On March 7, 1885, the legislature supplemented the statute by providing that all places in which intoxicating liquors were manufactured, sold, bartered, or given away or kept for sale, barter, or use were a nuisance and subject to abatement where a court judged them so. Courts adjudicating nuisance complaints were to sit in equity; also, the statute required the state meet the burden of proving that the defendant did not possess a permit, in which case the judge must declare the place complained of a nuisance. Offending owners of nuisances were to be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 or to be imprisoned in the county jail for not less than 30 nor more than 90 days.
In 1877, prior to the passage of the Kansas constitutional amendment and its accompanying statute, Peter Mugler had built a brewery in Salina, Kansas. He spent $10,000 on the brewery's construction and had obtained a corporate charter from the state allowing him to operate a brewery. It was completed in 1877 and used for the manufacture of intoxicating malt liquor, commonly known as beer, up until May 1, 1881. Following the enactment of the statute, Mugler did not obtain a permit for the manufacture or sale of alcohol. Further, the brewery-specific design of Mugler's facility allegedly made it difficult to employ in other trades, subsequently dropping the value of the building to only $2500.
Ziebold and Hagelin were operating a brewery in Atchison County, Kansas.
Procedural history
In November 1881, authorities indicted Peter Mugler in the District Court of Saline County, Kansas, for violation of the statutes. The first indictment contained five counts alleging that Mugler had sold, bartered, or given away intoxicating liquors without a permit and a sixth count alleging that his brewery was a public nuisance for being a place used in violation of the statute. The second indictment contained one count alleging Mugler had manufactured intoxicating liquors without a permit.
The District Court found Mugler guilty and fined him $100 and court fees. It subsequently rejected the defendant's motions for a new trial and for an arrest of judgment. The Kansas Supreme Court affirmed on appeal.
In August 1886, authorities filed an information in the District Court of Atchison County, Kansas against Ziebold and Hagelin for operating a brewery. On defendant's motion, the case was removed to the US Circuit Court under its equity jurisdiction. The Circuit Court dismissed the bill of information. The State of Kansas appealed.
Issue
Does a state law prohibiting the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors, subsequently rendering property used for the purposes described of little economic value, deprive the owner of that property in conflict with the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment?
Mugler's attorney posited two arguments:
 A substantive due process argument that, under the Fourteenth Amendment, Kansas lacked any authority to prohibit the manufacture of intoxicating liquors for personal use or for the purpose of export.
 A takings argument citing the devaluation of Mugler's property from $10,000 to $2500 by the statute, the building's brewery-specific design, and the difficulty of employing the building in other lawful trades. Mugler's attorney backed this argument with the holding of Pumpelly v. Green Bay Co., which found the damming of a nearby river in order to improve navigation and had flooded the plaintiff's land, rendering it useless and without value, was a taking requiring compensation.
The attorney for Ziebold and Hagelin echoed Mugler's two arguments but posited an additional argument attacking the nuisance statute, which allowed for the destruction of all property used in keeping and maintaining the nuisance without a trial by jury, as a denial of due process. The state, according to Ziebold and Hagelin's attorney, was using the nuisance provision out of order; instead of trying and convicting the defendants first, and then subsequently declaring the property a nuisance on the fact of their conviction and enabling authorities to destroy the liquors, the state was instead using the nuisance statutes to convict the defendants without trial. The statute removed the presumption of innocence once the state had proved the owners of the alleged nuisance did not have a permit.
Decision
On December 5, 1887, the US Supreme Court upheld 7–1 the ruling of the Supreme Court of Kansas, thus affirming Mugler's convictions. Associate Justice John Marshall Harlan, writing for the majority, held that a state's legislation prohibiting the manufacture of intoxicating liquor within its jurisdiction does not infringe on any right or privilege secured by the Constitution of the United States. Addressing Mugler's first argument, the Court stated its belief that the principle requiring property holders not to use their property so as to be injurious to the community was compatible with the Fourteenth Amendment.
However, the Court decided that it possessed the power to inquire into the intentions of the legislature behind police power regulations to settle disputes over the relatedness of the regulation to a state's use of the police power.
Turning to Mugler's second argument, the Court found the authority for the statute in this case strictly relied upon Kansas's police power. Since the statute dealt with the health, the safety, and the morals of the population, the Court rejected Mugler's reliance on Pumpelly, distinguishing the Pumpelly case as a use solely of the state's power of eminent domain; the Court reasoned that a prohibition on the use of property, by valid legislation, for purposes of protecting the health and safety of the community cannot be deemed a taking or an appropriation of property for public benefit. Since the legislation did not restrict the owners control, right to dispose, or ability to use for lawful purposes, no taking had occurred.
Further, the Court held that states cannot be burdened with the condition that they must compensate individual owners for incidental losses suffered as a result of a prohibition on the use of property. Additionally, property values which depreciate as a result of the state's exercise of the police power is different from taking property for public use. In one case a nuisance is abated; in the other, property is taken away from the owner completely. If public safety requires certain action be taken by the legislature, lawmakers cannot be persuaded from discontinuing such activity because individuals will suffer incidental inconveniences.
See also
 The Slaughterhouse Cases, 
 Munn v. Illinois, 
 Allgeyer v. Louisiana, 
 Lochner v. New York, 
References
External links
Category:1887 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Kansas
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:1887 in Kansas
Category:Criminal cases in the Waite Court
Category:Salina, Kansas
Category:Beer in Kansas
Category:Alcohol law in the United States
"""

From "Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co." ==> """
Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co., 339 U.S. 306 (1950), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States set forth the constitutional requirements for notice of judicial proceedings to a potential party under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution..
Background
Section 100-c of the New York State Banking Law provided for the pooling of small trusts into a large common fund administered by a corporate fiduciary, with the income, expenses, and capital gains and losses shared by the constituent trusts in proportion to their contribution to the common fund.  The purpose of this legislation (and similar laws in other states) was to provide corporate fiduciary services to modestly sized trusts which would be too costly to manage individually, promoting economies of scale in the American trust management industry and better risk management for smaller trusts.  Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co. in New York City was the manager & trustee of one such common trust fund.
Facts and procedural history
The common trust fund at issue in this case was established on January 17, 1946, and §100-c provided for an accounting of each fund to be undertaken twelve to fifteen months after the establishment of a fund, and then for every three years thereafter.
In March 1947, Central Hanover petitioned the New York Surrogate's Court for a settlement of its first account as common trustee.  By this time there were approximately 113 trusts participating in the fund, about half inter vivos trusts and half testamentary trusts, with combined gross capital assets of nearly three million dollars.
The only notice of the settlement proceedings required by §100-c to be given to the trusts' beneficiaries was that after filing such petition for judicial settlement of its account the petitioner shall cause to be issued by the court in which the petition is filed and shall publish not less than once in each week for four successive weeks in a newspaper to be designated by the court a notice or citation addressed generally without naming them to all parties interested in such common trust fund and in such estates, trusts or funds mentioned in the petition, all of which may be described in the notice or citation only in the manner set forth in any related court order and without setting forth the residence of any such decedent or donor of any such estate, trust or fund. When the fund had just been started, however, Central Hanover sent notice by mail of the future proceedings. Subsequent notice in its paper included only the name of the trust, the date of establishment and the estates in the trust. The names of beneficiaries were not included. Appellant Kenneth Mullane was appointed special guardian and attorney for those parties known or unknown who had any interest in the income of the fund, and James N. Vaughan was appointed to represent those parties with interest in the principal.
Mullane  appeared specially  to object to the statutory provision for notice, claiming that it was inadequate to afford the  due process  required by the Fourteenth Amendment.   The Surrogate overruled Mullane's objections,  and entered a  decree  accepting the accounting and terminating any rights the beneficiaries may have had against Central Hanover for mismanagement of the trust.   The New York Supreme Court Appellate Division subsequently affirmed, as did the New York Court of Appeals.  The U.S. Supreme Court then granted certiorari.
Majority opinion
Justice  Jackson  began his examination of the issues of the case by discussing the nature of the jurisdiction which the Surrogate's Court was exercising.    He explained some of the differences in the  service of process  required in in rem,  quasi in rem,  and in personam actions.    Mullane had argued that this was essentially an in personam action,  and that the Surrogate could not exercise jurisdiction on out-of-state residents upon whom personal service had not been made.
Jackson did not explicitly determine what type of jurisdiction was being exercised here, but held  that the Fourteenth Amendment applied to all of them regardless of how the state classified the action.  The beneficiaries' property rights were at stake here, and without proper notice, the "right to be heard" provided by the Fourteenth Amendment was of no practical consequence.  Constructive service via newspaper publication, wrote Jackson, was an unreliable method of giving notice, because newspapers have limited circulation and even then, many people do not examine the legal notices, which are usually in agate type on the back pages.  In this case, the legal notice at issue did not even mention the names of the beneficiaries.  Furthermore, under normal circumstances, property holders are directly aware of legal proceedings regarding their property, either directly or through a caretaker.  But in this case, the caretaker was the beneficiaries' adversary - the trustee itself - which could not be expected to give them reasonable notice, and the special guardian was also not required to give notice.
Jackson held that notice must be "reasonably calculated" to inform known parties affected by the proceedings.  Thus, §100-c(12), the section of the statute which dealt with notice to beneficiaries, was unconstitutional.  He further held that notice by publication was acceptable for missing or unknown parties, for those whose whereabouts could not be ascertained by due diligence, and for those whose future interests were too conjectural to be known with any certainty.  However, Jackson noted that in many cases, notice to the known parties would help the information of the proceedings to reach those who were unknown by the trustee.
Dissent
Justice Burton wrote a brief dissent, remarking that since the states created legislation creating the common trust funds, that the decision of what notice was required in such situations should be left to the states.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 339
References
Further reading
External links
 Case Brief for Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank and Trust at Lawnix.com
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:1950 in United States case law
"""

From "Mullaney v. Wilbur" ==> """
Mullaney v. Wilbur, 421 U.S. 684 (1975), is a criminal case in which a unanimous court struck down a state statute requiring a defendant to prove the defense of provocation to downgrade a murder conviction to manslaughter.Criminal Law - Cases and Materials, 7th ed. 2012, Wolters Kluwer Law & Business; John Kaplan, Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder, ,  Previous common law, such as in Commonwealth v. York (1845), allowed such burden on the defense. 
Maine's statute defined murder as unlawfully killing with malice, with malice defined as deliberate and unprovoked cruelty, and added that killings were presumed to be unprovoked unless the defense proved provocation by a preponderance of the evidence. Justice Powell delivered the opinion for the court that provocation was a crucial part of the charge in that it determined "the degree of culpability attaching to the criminal homicide". 
States were able to circumvent this decision by careful wording, as in Patterson v. New York, in which provocation, or "extreme emotional disturbance", was classified as an allowable defense excuse, not as a listed element. 
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
References
External links
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Mullenix v. Luna" ==> """
Mullenix v. Luna, 577 U.S. ___ (2015), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a police officer who shot a suspect during a police pursuit was entitled to qualified immunity., slip op. at 12 (2015) (per curiam). In a per curiam opinion, the Court held that prior precedent did not establish "beyond debate" that the officer's actions were objectively unreasonable.Mullenix, slip op. at 9 (per curiam) (citing Ashcroft v. al-Kidd, .
Background
Pursuit and death of Israel Leija, Jr.
On March 23, 2010, officers in the Tulia, Texas Police Department engaged Israel Leija, Jr. in a high-speed pursuit where Leija's vehicle reached speeds between 85 and 110 miles per hour.Mullenix, slip op. at 1 (per curiam). During the pursuit, Leija made two telephone calls to the Tulia, Texas police dispatcher stating that he had a gun and that he would shoot officers if they did not abandon the pursuit. The dispatcher relayed these calls to pursuing officers, as well as an additional report that Leija may have been intoxicated. Texas Department of Public Safety trooper Chadrin Mullenix responded to the pursuit and positioned himself on an overpass above the freeway on which Leija was traveling.Mullenix, slip op. at 2 (per curiam). Despite direct orders not to fire from the overpass, Mullenix fired six shots in the direction of Leija's vehicle. Four of those shots struck and killed Leija.Mullenix, slip op. at 2-3 (per curiam).
Trial and appeal to Fifth Circuit
Leija's family sued Mullenix under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, claiming that Mullenix conducted an unconstitutional seizure by using excessive force against Leija.Mullenix, slip op. at 3 (per curiam). Mullenix filed a motion for summary judgment in which he argued that he was entitled to qualified immunity. The district court denied Mullenix's motion, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court's ruling.Mullenix, slip op. at 3 (per curiam) (citing Luna v. Mullenix, 765 F.3d 531 (2014)). The Fifth Circuit held that the "immediacy of the risk posed by Leija is a disputed fact that a reasonable jury could find either in the plaintiffs’ favor or in the officer's favor, precluding us from concluding that Mullenix acted objectively reasonably as a matter of law".Mullenix, slip op. at 3 (per curiam) (citing Luna v. Mullenix, 765 F.3d at 538). Mullenix then petitioned the Fifth Circuit for rehearing en banc, but the court reaffirmed the denial of qualified immunity.Mullenix, slip op. at 4 (per curiam) (citing Luna v. Mullenix, 777 F.3d 221 (2014)). The Fifth Circuit concluded that "the law was clearly established such that a reasonable officer would have known that the use of deadly force, absent a sufficiently substantial and immediate threat, violated the Fourth Amendment".Mullenix, slip op. at 4 (per curiam) (citing Luna v. Mullenix, 773 F.3d 712, 725 (2014)).
Opinion of the Court
On November 9, 2015, the Supreme Court of the United States issued a per curiam opinion that addressed only the qualified immunity question; the Court did not address whether Mullenix's actions violated the Fourth Amendment.Mullenix, slip op. at 4 (per curiam). The Court began its analysis by noting that police officers are entitled to qualified immunity in suits filed under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 as long as the officer's conduct does not violate "clearly established statutory or constitutional rights of which a reasonable person would have known".Mullenix, slip op. at 4 (per curiam) (citing Pearson v. Callahan, ). The Court explained that there need not be "a case directly on point, but existing precedent must have placed the statutory or constitutional question beyond debate".Mullenix, slip op. at 5 (per curiam) (citing Ashcroft v. al-Kidd, . Applying these principles to the facts of this case, the Court held that prior precedent did not establish "beyond debate" that Mullenix's actions were objectively unreasonable.Mullenix, slip op. at 9 (per curiam). Consequently, the Court reversed the Fifth Circuit's determination that Mullenix was not entitled to qualified immunity.Mullenix, slip op. at 12 (per curiam).
Concurring and dissenting opinions
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment; he argued that Mullenix did not actually apply deadly force in this case.Mullenix, slip op. at 1 (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment). Because Mullenix intended only to stop Leija's car by destroying its engine, the gunshots were not "deadly force" because they were not "applied with the object of harming the body of the felon".Mullenix, slip op. at 1-2 (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment). Justice Scalia claimed, "It does not assist analysis to refer to all use of force that happens to kill the arrestee as the application of deadly force". Additionally, Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote a dissenting opinion in which she argued that Mullenix was not entitled to qualified immunity because "it was clearly established under the Fourth Amendment that an officer in Mullenix’s position should not have fired the shots".Mullenix, slip op. at 1 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). She argued, "It is clearly established that there must be some governmental interest that necessitates deadly force" and that in this case, "neither petitioner nor the majority can point to any possible marginal gain in shooting at the car over" other nonlethal alternatives.Mullenix, slip op. at 4-5 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). She wrote, "[b]y sanctioning a 'shoot first, think later' approach to policing, the Court renders the protections of the Fourth Amendment hollow".Mullenix, slip op. at 7 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
 Graham v. Connor
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:Swisher County, Texas
Category:Law enforcement in Texas
"""

From "Muller v. Oregon" ==> """
Muller v. Oregon, 208 U.S. 412 (1908), was a landmark decision by the United States Supreme Court.. Women were provided by state mandate lesser work-hours than allotted to men. The posed question was whether women's liberty to negotiate a contract with an employer should be equal to a man's. The law did not recognize sex-based discrimination in 1908; it was unrecognized until the case of Reed v. Reed in 1971; here, the test was not under the equal protections clause, but a test based on the general police powers of the state to protect the welfare of women when it infringed on her fundamental right to negotiate contracts; inequality was not a deciding factor because the sexes were inherently different in their particular conditions and had completely different functions;Muller, 208 U.S. at 423. usage of labor laws that were made to nurture women's welfare and for the "benefit of all" peopleMuller, 208 U.S. at 422. was decided to be not a violation of the Constitution's  Contract Clause.
The case describes women as having dependency upon men in a manner such that women needed their rights to be preserved by the state; their "rights" were in effect, to have maternal gender roles, again however to the loss of some of their contractual liberties. The quotes for the decision follows:
"in the struggle for subsistence she is not an equal competitor with her brother."
"Though limitations upon personal and contractual rights may be removed by legislation, there is that in her disposition and habits of life which will operate against a full assertion of those rights."
"her physical structure and a proper discharge of her maternal functions — having in view not merely her own health, but the well-being of the race — justify legislation to protect her from the greed as well as the passion of man."
"The limitations which this statute places upon her contractual powers, upon her right to agree with her employer as to the time she shall labor, are not imposed solely for her benefit, but also largely for the benefit of all."
The ruling had important implications for protective labor legislation and was decided just three years after Lochner v. New York,. in which a New York law restricting the weekly working hours of bakers in the state was invalidated.
Background
Curt Muller, the owner of a laundry business, was convicted of violating Oregon labor laws by making a  female employee work more than ten hours in a single day. Muller was fined $10. Muller appealed to the Oregon Supreme Court and then to the U.S. Supreme Court, both of which upheld the constitutionality of the labor law and affirmed his conviction.
Louis Brandeis, the young attorney who used social science to argue that women workers needed special protection due to the inherent difference between women and men. Brandeis wrote a unique legal brief which later became known as the Brandeis brief, in which there were only two pages of legal arguments followed by over one hundred pages of statistics and expert opinions from social scientists who argued that women were physically, mentally, and emotionally unable to work for more than ten hours at a time. His legal strategy paid off.
Judgment
In Justice David Josiah Brewer's unanimous opinion, the Court upheld the Oregon regulation. The Court did not overrule Lochner, but instead distinguished it on the basis of "the difference between the sexes". The child-bearing physiology and social role of women provided a strong state interest in reducing their working hours.
That woman's physical structure and the performance of maternal functions place her at a disadvantage in the struggle for subsistence is obvious. This is especially true when the burdens of motherhood are upon her. Even when they are not, by abundant testimony of the medical fraternity continuance for a long time on her feet at work, repeating this from day to day, tends to injurious effects upon the body, and as healthy mothers are essential to vigorous offspring, the physical well-being of woman becomes an object of public interest and care in order to preserve the strength and vigor of the race.208 U.S. at 412.
"When the constitutionality of the Oregon ten-hour law for women was challenged, Florence Kelley committed the National Consumers League to  defense. As Kathryn Kish Sklar has explained, NCL's research director, Josephine Goldmark, prepared a pathbreaking brief, of which only 2 pages consisted of traditional abstract legal reasoning, and over 100 pages offered sociological evidence. Her brother-in-law, the future Supreme Court Justice Louis D. Brandeis, argued the case in the U.S. Supreme Court. Goldmark and Brandeis's innovation would come to be known as a "Brandeis Brief," and many others would later be modeled on it."415 Protecting Women Wage-Workers, Women's America, Refocusing the Past.
Goldmark and her team were able to assemble 98 out of the 118 pages of the brief, meaning much of the credit for the brief goes to her.Ginsburg, Ruth Bader. "Lessons Learned from Louis D. Brandeis | BrandeisNOW." BrandeisNOW. N.p., 28 January 2016. Web. 28 September 2016.
Significance of the case 
Groups like the National Consumer League (which included Florence Kelley and Josephine Goldmark as feminists) and the state won shorter hours for women.  However, many equal-rights feminists opposed the ruling, since it allowed laws based on stereotyped gender roles that restricted women's rights and financial independence. 
While it provided protection from long hours to white women, it did not extend to women of color, food processors, agricultural workers, and women who worked in white-collar jobs. 
The government interest in public welfare outweighed the freedom of contract that is displayed in the 14th Amendment and the effects of Muller v. Oregon did not change until the New Deal days in the 1930s. It was also a watershed in the development of Maternalist Reforms.Brandeis, L. D. (1907). The Brandeis Brief--in its entirety. Retrieved September 24, 2020, from https://louisville.edu/law/library/special-collections/the-louis-d.-brandeis-collection/the-brandeis-brief-in-its-entiretyWoloch, N. (1996). Muller v. Oregon: A Brief History with Documents. Boston: Bedford Books of St. Martin's Press.Barney, S. L. (1999). "Maternalism and the Promotion of Scientific Medicine during the Industrial Transformation of Appalachia, 1880-1930." NWSA Journal, 11(3), 68–92.Koven, S., & Michel, S. (1993). Mothers of a New World, Maternalist Politics and the Origins of Welfare States (). Routledge.
The ruling was criticized because it set a precedent to use sex differences, and in particular women's child-bearing capacity, as a basis for separate legislation, supporting the idea that the family has priority over women's rights as workers.  Feminist Scholars such as Alice Kessler-Harris opposed the ruling as "an attack on women as workers" cloaked in altruistic labor laws.  Kessler-Harris recognized the admirable motives of the period's protective labor laws but also observed that the Muller case provided justification for not just regulating but possibly prohibiting women from working in certain capacities.  Moreover, the case supported a definition of women in society that according to Joan Hoff was "highly traditional and restrictive."  While many of the criticisms of Muller came by scholars in later decades there were some critics at the time of its ruling.  One such critic was suffragist and editor of the Rose City Woman's' Tribune Clara Colby who commented two years before the case was decided:  "the whole subject is very difficult and it had better be left to woman's own judgement as to what is necessary and desirable.  The State has no right to lay any disability upon woman as an individual and if it does as a mother, it should give her a maternity pension which would tend to even up conditions and be better for the family."
"Until the late 1930s, when the Fair Labor Standards Act created gender-neutral workplace protections, the Equal Rights Amendment championed by the NWP would have demolished the gains for women workers won in Muller. This dispute between feminists who valued protection and feminists who valued equality continued until the latter group gained the upper hand in the 1970s.""Muller v. State of Oregon." Open Collections Program: Women Working,. N.p., n.d. Web. 28 Sept. 2016.
See also
Bunting v. Oregon
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 208
Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S. 45 (1905)
Adkins v. Children's Hospital, 261 U.S. 525 (1923)
West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379 (1937)
Notes
 Further reading 
Bernstein, David E. (2011). Rehabilitating Lochner: Defending Individual Rights against Progressive Reform. Chapter 4. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
External links
Women Working (1800-1930)
Category:1908 in United States case law
Category:History of women's rights in the United States
Category:Louis Brandeis
Category:Sexism
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Working time
Category:Legal history of Oregon
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:History of women in Oregon
Category:1908 in women's history
"""

From "Munaf v. Geren" ==> """
Munaf v. Geren, 553 U.S. 674 (2008), is a United States Supreme Court case where the court unanimously concluded that the habeas corpus statute, (c)(1), extends to U.S. citizens held overseas by American forces subject to an American chain of command, even if acting as part of a multinational coalition. But, it found that habeas corpus provided the petitioners with no relief, holding that "Habeas corpus does not require the United States to shelter such fugitives from the criminal justice system of the sovereign with authority to prosecute them."
The case dealt specifically with the appeals from Mohammad Munaf and Shawqi Ahmad Omar, both naturalized citizens of the United States held by MNF-I, specifically American, forces in Iraq. In its arguments, the US government relied heavily upon Hirota v. MacArthur (1948), a case in which the Supreme Court found it lacked original jurisdiction over citizens of Japan being held by the Allied Powers for the Tokyo War Crimes Tribunal because "the tribunal sentencing [the petitioners] [was] not a tribunal of the United States."
History
This appeal deals with the consolidated cases of Munaf v. Geren (06-1666) and Geren v. Omar (07-394). On December 7, 2007, the U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari, and oral arguments were heard on March 25. Several organizations, such as the Associated Press, the American Bar Association, the Committee to Protect Journalists, the International Federation of Journalists, the PEN American Center, and the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, filed amici curiae on behalf of Munaf and Omar.
Munaf v. Harvey
In 2003, a coalition of American and foreign forces invaded and occupied Iraq. Under United Nations Security Council Resolution 1546 (and subsequent resolutions 1637, 1723, and 1790), the Multi-National Force – Iraq was given authority to "take all necessary measures to contribute to the maintenance of security and stability" and actively took part in security operations in Iraq.
In March 2005, Munaf traveled to Iraq alongside three Romanian journalists to act as their guide and translator. Shortly thereafter, the Romanian journalists were taken hostage and held for approximately 55 days; according to Munaf, he was also held as a hostage. On May 22, 2005, the MNF-I and Iraqi security forces freed the hostages, but Munaf was detained in MNF-I custody due to his suspected involvement in the kidnapping plan. Munaf and his five co-conspirators were tried by the Central Criminal Court of Iraq (CCCI) in Baghdad. A panel of three trial judges at CCCI found Munaf and his co-conspirators guilty in 2006 and sentenced all six to death. In addition, in 2008 Munaf was convicted by a Romanian court of complicity in the kidnapping.
On October 13, 2006, Munaf's lawyers filed a habeas corpus petition in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia seeking his release from then Secretary of the Army Francis J. Harvey's custody and to block the transfer of Munaf to Iraqi custody. On October 19, Judge Royce Lamberth dismissed the petition and denied the motions for the temporary restraining order sua sponte.Case 1:06-cv-01455-RCL Order, U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, October 19, 2006 In the memorandum opinion dismissing the petition, the judge stated that the court lacked jurisdiction because Munaf is being held in MNF-I custody, not US custody, thus failing the  requirements for habeas corpus relief.Case 1:06-cv-01455-RCL Memorandum Opinion, U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, October 19, 2006 Munaf's lawyers appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals, and on October 27, The D.C. Circuit also denied Munaf's motion for injunctive relief, but ordered the US military to refrain from releasing Munaf into Iraqi custody pending an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court. Munaf's attorneys' filed a petition to the Supreme Court on November 6, 2006, and on November 13, 2006 the court refused certiorari. Munaf's attorneys attempted to have the case reconsidered by the D.C. Circuit en banc, but on April 6 the appeal was denied and the District Court's decision upheld.Case No. 06-5324 D.C. Appellate Court Opinion, U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, April 6, 2007
Omar v. Harvey
Omar v. Harvey deals with a petition for a writ of habeas corpus filed on behalf of Shawqi Ahmad Omar, an American citizen, captured and detained in Iraq by United States military forces operating as part of the Multi-National Force-Iraq. Omar had been held under the control of United States forces since October 2004, allegedly without legal process and with no meaningful access to counsel. When the US District Court learned of Omar's imminent transfer to Iraqi authorities for trial on terrorism charges, it issued a preliminary injunction barring transfer in order to preserve its jurisdiction to entertain the habeas petition.
In late October 2004, United States military forces operating in Iraq arrested appellee Shawqi Ahmad Omar, a dual American/Jordanian citizen, at his Baghdad home. Born in Kuwait, Omar became a naturalized American citizen following his marriage to the former Sandra Kay Sulzle. According to Omar, after the overthrow of the Saddam Hussein government, he traveled to Iraq seeking reconstruction-related work. He would have left by November 2004 but for his arrest and detention.
The US government presents the case differently. It says that U.S. military forces, operating in Iraq pursuant to U.N. Security Council Resolutions 1546 (2003) and 1637 (2004) as part of the Multi-National Force-Iraq (MNF-I), captured Omar during a raid on associates of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi. The government concluded that Omar was part of Zarqawi's network and that he facilitated terrorist activities both in and outside of Iraq. Four Jordanian foreign fighters and an Iraqi insurgent were captured along with Omar, and weapons and improvised explosive device (IED)-making materials were found in Omar's home.
Following Omar's arrest, an MNF-I panel of three American military officers conducted a hearing to resolve his status. According to the government, the process employed by the panel exceeded the requirements of Article 5 of the Third Geneva Convention. But, the record reveals little about the panel's operation. The panel permitted Omar to see the evidence against him, to make a statement, and to call "immediately available" witnesses. After the hearing, the panel declared Omar to be a "security internee under the law of war" and an "`enemy combatant' in the war on terrorism." The panel also found that Omar was not a prisoner of war for purposes of the Third Geneva Convention. Since the panel's decision, American MNF-I officials have held Omar at various detention facilities in Iraq. According to Omar, the military has transferred him between Camp Cropper, the Abu Ghraib prison, and Camp Bucca. Omar has been in custody for over six years.
In August 2005, the MNF-I decided to refer Omar to the Central Criminal Court of Iraq (CCCI) for trial. The record indicates neither who made this decision nor what procedures were followed. The CCCI, a Baghdad-based Iraqi court, has national jurisdiction over an array of criminal offenses, including terrorism. According to the US government, during the CCCI investigation and trial phases, the MNF-I maintains physical custody of detainees like Omar, turning them over to the Iraqi Ministry of Justice only after conviction.
On December 12, 2005, Omar's wife, Sandra, and son, Ahmed, filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus as Omar's "next friends". Brought in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, the petition named as respondents Francis J. Harvey, Secretary of the Army; Major General William H. Brandenburg, then-Deputy Commanding General of Detainee Operations and Commanding General of Task Force 134, MNF-I; and Lieutenant Colonel Timothy Houser of the 105th Military Police Battalion, commanding officer at Camp Bucca. The petition claimed that Omar's detention by the United States military violates numerous constitutional provisions, chief among them the right to due process guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment. The petition asked the district court to "[i]ssue a Writ of Habeas Corpus requiring Respondents to release Shawqi Omar from detention, and/or requiring Respondents to bring Shawqi Ahmad Omar before a court of competent jurisdiction in the United States to show just cause for his continued detention." Also alleging that "the United States military may turn Mr. Omar over to the custody of Iraqi authorities in an effort to evade the strictures of United States law," the petition asked the district court to "[e]njoin Respondents from transferring Mr. Omar to the authority of any other government, sovereign, country, or agency until [the district court] has an opportunity to consider and decide the merits of this Petition."
Approximately two months after filing the petition, Omar's attorney received an e-mail from the Department of Justice informing her of the MNF-I's earlier decision to refer Omar to the CCCI. Believing that CCCI proceedings could interrupt American custody of Omar, thereby stripping the district court of jurisdiction, that transfer would amount to an illegal extradition, and that Omar would likely face torture by Iraqi authorities, the attorney sought and received from Judge Ricardo M. Urbina of the District Court an ex parte temporary restraining order requiring that Omar "not be removed from United States custody."
In a memorandum filed shortly after entry of the TRO, the US government challenged the district court's jurisdiction to entertain the petition. The government relied principally on Hirota v. MacArthur(1948), in which the US Supreme Court held that World War II Japanese officials could not invoke habeas to challenge their conviction by a multinational military tribunal. The government also argued that the district court had no authority to issue injunctive relief because doing so would "inject [the court] into an exclusive Executive function" and because adjudication of Omar's potential referral to the CCCI "raises non-justiciable political questions."
Following briefing, Judge Urbina converted the TRO into a preliminary injunction ordering that "the respondents . . . and any persons acting in concert or participation with them, or having actual or implicit knowledge of this Order . . . shall not remove [Omar] from United States or MNF-I custody, or take any other action inconsistent with this court's memorandum opinion." In the accompanying memorandum opinion, the court explained that the jurisdictional issues in the case presented questions "so serious, substantial, difficult and doubtful, as to make them fair ground for litigation and thus for more deliberative investigation." Fearing imminent referral to the CCCI would forever preclude a more deliberative investigation of the weighty jurisdictional questions, the court issued the injunction to freeze the status quo. In doing so, the court credited Omar's contention that transfer could irreparably deprive him of this investigation by "undo[ing the] court's jurisdiction." This, the court concluded, "would abuse the process now put in place for the purpose of adjudicating matters on their merits."
The government appealed, arguing (as it did in the district court) that Hirota controlled and that Omar's challenge presented non-justiciable political questions. The government also pointed out that even if the district court did have jurisdiction, its injunction was improper because, by prohibiting Omar's removal from American or MNF-I custody, it barred the government from providing Omar "all of the relief to which he is entitled through a writ of habeas corpus."Omar v. Harvey, 479 F.3d 1  (D.C.Cir. 2007) In practice, by preventing his transfer to Iraqi judicial custody to stand trial, the petition on Omar's behalf has prolonged his detention and prevented him from having the opportunity to have his case heard on its merits in Iraqi court.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 553
Mohammad Munaf
Hirota v. MacArthur, 
Rasul v. Bush, 
Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 
References
Further reading
External links
[ Argument transcript on the U.S. Supreme Court Web site]
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2008 in United States case law
"""

From "Munn v. Illinois" ==> """
Munn v. Illinois, 94 U.S. 113 (1876), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the power of state governments to regulate private industries that affect "the common good.". 
Facts
The case was developed because in 1871, the legislature of Illinois responded to pressure from the National Grange, an association of farmers, by setting maximum rates that private companies could charge for the storage and transport of agricultural products. The Chicago grain warehouse firm of Munn and Scott was found guilty of violating the law but appealed the conviction on the grounds that the law was an unconstitutional deprivation of property without due process of law that violated the Fourteenth Amendment. A state trial court and the Illinois State Supreme Court both ruled in favor of the State.
Judgment 
The Supreme Court decided the appeal in 1877. Chief Justice Morrison Waite spoke for the majority, which affirmed the constitutionality of state regulation extending to private industries that affect public interests. Because grain storage facilities were devoted to public use, their rates were subject to public regulation. He specified that any such regulation by the state government would not be in violation of the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Chief Justice Waite declared that even if Congress alone is granted control over interstate commerce, a state could take action in the public interest without impairing that federal control.
Justice Field and Justice Strong dissented.
See also
United States constitutional law
Granger Laws
Notes
References
External links
Category:Grain industry of the United States
Category:Legal history of Illinois
Category:Price controls
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1876 in United States case law
Category:Regulation in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Murdock v. City of Memphis" ==> """
Murdock v. City of Memphis, 87 U.S. (20 Wall.) 590 (1875), is a case decided by the United States Supreme Court.
William Tod Otto argued the case on behalf of the City of Memphis.  Because the case was both argued originally and reargued before the appointment of Chief Justice Waite, he took no part in the judgment.
Murdock challenged on several grounds a state court's decision relating to land devised by Murdock's ancestors.  The city's federal claim which was outcome determinative was that a federal statute created a trust for the land.  The state court accepted this claim and the Supreme Court affirmed.  Murdock, however, urged the Supreme Court to review the state court's findings on state law based on the Judiciary Act of 1867.  The Supreme Court interpreted the Act as not conferring jurisdiction over the state claims, but the Court did not decide as a constitutional matter whether conferring such jurisdiction would be constitutional.
The Supreme Court continued to lay some ground rules for appeals of state court decisions, namely the effect of a state court decision resting on an adequate and independent state ground.  While these rules were important in the development of adequate and independent state grounds doctrine in cases like Fox Film Corp. v. Muller and Michigan v. Long, they were merely dicta.  The Court ultimately affirmed the decision of the state court on the federal law and did not decide the two issues of state law.
Murdock v. Memphis is cited today as instrumental in establishing the principle that interpretation of state law is the province of the state courts, and that, in particular, the state Supreme Courts, rather than the federal courts, have final jurisdiction in this area.Erwin Chemerinsky (2014). The Case Against the Supreme Court. Penguin Books. p. 248. .
Further reading
 Collins, Michael G., "Reconstructing Murdock v. Memphis," Virginia Law Review, 98 (Nov. 2012), 1439–1500.
References
External links
Category:1874 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Adequate and independent state ground
Category:Legal history of Tennessee
Category:1874 in Tennessee
Category:History of Memphis, Tennessee
"""

From "Murdock v. Pennsylvania" ==> """
Murdock v. Pennsylvania, 319 U.S. 105 (1943), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that an ordinance requiring door-to-door salespersons ("solicitors") to purchase a license was an unconstitutional tax on religious exercise.
 Facts of the case 
The borough of Jeannette, Pennsylvania, had an ordinance that required solicitors to purchase a license from the borough. Murdock was one of Jehovah's Witness who asked for contributions in exchange for books and pamphlets. The city claimed that it meant that he was selling them, and a license was required. At question was whether the licensing requirement constituted a tax on Murdock's religious exercise.
Decision
Justice William O. Douglas delivered the opinion of the Court. The court held that the ordinance was an unconstitutional tax on the Jehovah's Witnesses' right to freely exercise their religion.
The petitioners used the distribution of pamphlets and brochures as a form of missionary activity with an evangelical purpose. Not all behavior could be allowed by claiming that it was a religious activity. The only hold that spreading one's religious beliefs or preaching the Gospel by distribution of religious literature and personal visitations is an age-old type of evangelism, with as high a claim to constitutional protection as the more orthodox types. If the activity were done to raise money, it would be commercial and could be taxed. However, in this case, although donations were sought, the activity served a religious function.
Religions are not entirely free from facing financial burdens from the government. It is one thing to impose a tax on the income or property of a preacher. It is quite another thing to exact a tax from him for the privilege of delivering a sermon. If the exercise can be taxed, the government is capable of making it prohibitively expensive and could be done only by the wealthy.
The state claimed that argument was unimportant because the tax was not expensive in practice. It is a license tax, a flat tax imposed on the exercise of a privilege recognized by the Bill of Rights. A state may not impose a charge for the enjoyment of a right protected by the federal constitution. The fact that the ordinance was imposed indiscriminately does not save it from being unconstitutional.
The case also established the preferred position doctrine, which states that  of press, freedom of speech, [and] freedom of religion are in a preferred position", indicating that certain fundamental human rights have prerogative.
 Effects 
"The privilege in question exists apart from state authority. It is guaranteed the people by the federal constitution." The state does not have the power to license or tax a right guaranteed to the people.
Although it is not technically correct to say that this decision reversed Jones v. Opelika (1942) because the Court vacated Jones in a per curiam decision handed down the same day, that was nevertheless its effect.
Murdock is a landmark decision that had the effect of allowing Jehovah's Witnesses and other religious groups that sold or gave away literature door-to-door to avoid paying licensing taxes to distribute their literature. The neutral imposition of the tax on solicitation performed by a religious group did not make it constitutionally acceptable. In addition, the Court drew a distinction between commercial activity and religious activity that involves the selling of religious literature.
 Subsequent history 
Subsequent cases such as Texas Monthly, Inc. v. Bullock,  have emphasized that Murdock stands for the proposition that a license or occupation tax designed for commercial salesmen cannot be constitutionally imposed on religious missionaries whose principal work is preaching but also sell religious items for small sums if the tax is far from a negligible burden, and the activity is central the practice of religious faith. However, Murdock does not extend to stand for the broad proposition that a tax can never be imposed upon a missionary and that it necessarily restrains the free exercise of religion.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 319
References
External links
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:1943 in Pennsylvania
Category:History of Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
Category:1943 in religion
"""

From "Murphy v. National Collegiate Athletic Association" ==> """
Murphy v. National Collegiate Athletic Association, No. 16-476, 584 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The issue was whether the U.S. federal government has the right to control state lawmaking. The State of New Jersey, represented here by Governor Philip D. Murphy, sought to have the Professional and Amateur Sports Protection Act (PASPA) overturned, allowing state-sponsored sports betting. The case, formerly titled Christie v. National Collegiate Athletic Association until Governor Chris Christie left office, was combined with NJ Thoroughbred Horsemen v. NCAA No. 16-477.
The pro-betting side characterized the federal government's position as commandeering, declaring federal laws that the states would have the responsibility to enforce. The anti-betting side relied on the Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution to keep PASPA in force. It has been suggested that the outcome of this case is likely to be cited in future cases involving the legalization of marijuana, where a similar state–federal question exists.
On May 14, 2018, the Court reversed lower court findings, favoring New Jersey in deciding that PASPA violated the anticommandeering principle by a 7–2 vote, and declared the entire law unconstitutional by a 6–3 vote.
Background
In 1992, Congress passed the Professional and Amateur Sports Protection Act (PASPA), 28 U.S.C. §§ 3701-3704, to prohibit state-sanctioned sports gambling; the law stated that states may not "sponsor, operate, advertise, promote, license, or authorize by law or compact" sports gambling. The law made exemptions for gambling in four states: Nevada, Delaware, Oregon, and Montana which had established legal sports gambling regulations in place. New Jersey had attempted to apply for the exemption but failed to act in 1991 before this exemption window closed, in part due to state-level political issues.
Since around 2010, New Jersey has sought to challenge the federal law, recognizing the state was losing potential revenue (upwards of , estimated from a 2008 report by financial analysis firm Cantor Fitzgerald) from sports gambling licenses and fees to these four states and illicit offshore entities. State Senators Raymond Lesniak and Stephen M. Sweeney led a lawsuit by the state to challenge the federal law, but it was rejected by the United States District Court in March 2011, stating that only Governor Chris Christie, through his attorney general's office, could file such a suit. At the time, Gov. Christie had been against pursuing any legislation as he believed it would be difficult to bypass the federal ban.
Referendum
New Jersey voters in 2011 voted overwhelmingly in a nonbinding referendum to create a state constitutional amendment that would permit sports gambling. The next year, the New Jersey Legislature enacted the Sports Wagering Act ("2012 Act"), allowing sports wagering at New Jersey casinos and racetracks. In August 2012, the NBA, NFL, NHL, MLB, and NCAA sued under PASPA to enjoin the New Jersey law; they were later joined by the United States Department of Justice; this case was colloquially known as Christie I. In court hearings, the state argued they were aware that the 2012 Act violated PASPA, but they contended that PASPA violated the Tenth Amendment's protection against anti-commandeering federal laws that stripped the power of the state to repeal their own sports gambling ban. In February 2013, Judge Michael A. Shipp of the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey rejected the state's argument, and ruled for the leagues, finding that there was "an undisputed direct link between legalized gambling and harm to the Leagues" and granting an injunction against New Jersey from enforcing the 2012 law. New Jersey appealed to the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, but the court, in a 2–1 split decision, upheld the District Court's ruling. The Third Circuit opinion noted the distinction between "affirmative authorizations" specifically prevented in PASPA, and the act of repealing the state's law. The opinion stated: "We do not read PASPA to prohibit New Jersey from repealing its ban on sports wagering." The Supreme Court of the United States refused to hear the case by June 2014.
Revision of the law
Based on the repealing language from the Third Circuit's decision on Christie I, New Jersey State Senator Raymond Lesniak revised the 2012 law with the approval of the Justice Department. The revised bill, instead of authorizing sports gambling, repealed portions of existing New Jersey laws from 1977 that had banned sports gambling, citing the Third Circuit's decision, effectively making sports gambling legal within certain establishments (for example, the bill did not allow for underage gambling, and preventing gambling on teams from New Jersey). While it passed the New Jersey Legislature, Gov. Christie vetoed it, believing it was an attempt to bypass the Third Circuit's ruling. However, in September 2014, Gov. Christie changed his mind, and supported the legislation's attempt to grant sports betting rights in the states; within five weeks, Lesniak's new legislation was signed into law. 
The five leagues sued the state again in November 2014, creating Christie II. Both the District Court and Third Circuit found in favor of the leagues, that New Jersey's revised law still violated the PASPA; in both Courts, the judges saw the act of repealing only portions of previous state laws equivalent to affirmative authorizations and thus still violated PASPA.  While the Third Circuit decision was still split, the author of the original decision dissented from the new ruling, leading the state to request an en banc hearing of the full Third Circuit. The full Circuit still favored the leagues, 9–3, in their August 2016 decision, stating that PAPSA does not commandeer the states because it "does not command states to take affirmative actions."
Supreme Court
Encouraged by the language in the dissenting opinions from the Third Circuit on Christie II, New Jersey petitioned for a writ of certiorari from the Supreme Court in October 2016. The state specifically asked the question "Does a federal statute that prohibits modification or repeal of state-law prohibitions on private conduct impermissibly commandeer the regulatory power of States?," citing New York v. United States, , as precedent. The Court accepted to hear the case June 27, 2017.   The case was combined with NJ Thoroughbred Horsemen v. NCAA, a petition to the Supreme Court filed by the New Jersey Thoroughbred Horsemen's Association (NJTHA) who had joined the state in its case in the District and Third Circuit court. The NJTHA is the licensed permit for gambling at Monmouth Park Racetrack, and they argued that because of the lower courts' stance on PASPA from Christie II, the economic viability of the Racetrack was at a severe economic disadvantage without the legal authority to bet on horse races. While they filed their petition separately to reflect the commercial impact of the situation, their question to the Supreme Court was the same of whether PASPA commandeered power from the states.
During the case, Phil Murphy was elected Governor of New Jersey, and the case, initially filed as Christie v. National Collegiate Athletic Association, was renamed Murphy v. National Collegiate Athletic Association.
During the course of the 2016 presidential campaign, then-candidate Donald Trump expressed his support for legalized sports betting.  In May 2017, Trump appointee, acting Solicitor General Jeffrey B. Wall, said New Jersey did not have a case. The Court heard the combined docket oral arguments December 4, 2017. 
Opinion of the Court
The Court announced judgment in favor of the governor on May 14, 2018, reversing the Third Circuit by a vote of 7–2. Justice Samuel Alito wrote the majority opinion, joined by Justices John Roberts, Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, Elena Kagan, and Neil Gorsuch, and in part by Justice Stephen Breyer. The majority opinion agreed that one specific clause of PASPA, 28 U.S.C. §§ 3701(1), did commandeer power from the states to regulate their own gambling industries, following New York v. United States, and thus was unconstitutional, reversing the Third Circuit decision. Alito wrote "Congress can regulate sports gambling directly, but if it elects not to do so, each state is free to act on its own. Our job is to interpret the law Congress has enacted and decide whether it is consistent with the Constitution. PASPA is not." Regarding the distinction between Congress preventing the states from taking an action versus Congress requiring the states to take an action, Alito wrote, "This distinction is empty. It was a matter of happenstance that the laws challenged in New York and Printz commanded "affirmative" action as opposed to imposing a prohibition. The basic principle—that Congress cannot issue direct orders to state legislatures—applies in either event."
The court rejected the respondents' argument that the anti-authorization provision was a valid preemption of state law under the Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution.Murphy v. National Collegiate Athletic Ass'n, , slip op. at 21-24 (2018). The Supremacy Clause, the court pointed out, "is not an independent grant of legislative power to Congress" but "[i]nstead, it simply provides a rule of decision."Murphy, slip op. at 21. For a federal provision to validly preempt state law, "it must represent the exercise of a power conferred on Congress by the Constitution[,] pointing to the Supremacy Clause will not do", and "since the Constitution confers upon Congress the power to regulate individuals, not States, [the] provision at issue must be best read as one that regulates private actors."Murphy, slip op. at 21 (internal citation and quotation marks removed).
The court then outlined the three types of preemption, illustrated with cases. In Mutual Pharmaceutical Co. v. Bartlett, an example of conflict preemption, federal law enacted under Congress' Commerce Clause authority prohibited generic drug manufacturers from changing the composition or labeling of drugs approved by the Federal Drug Administration, thus state tort law could not force or hold liable a generic drug manufacturer for adding additional information to the FDA-approved label.Murphy, slip op. at 22 (citing . Express preemption "operates in essentially the same way, but this is often obscured by the language used by Congress in framing preemption provisions." The court illustrated express preemption with Morales v. Trans World Airlines. concerning a provision of the Airline Deregulation Act that used language that seemed directed to the states and similar to the issue in Murphy: 
Field preemption, the third type of preemption, occurs when federal regulation of a "'field' of regulation [is] so comprehensive[] that it has left no room for supplementary state legislation."Murphy, slip op. at 23 (internal punctuation altered) The court noted that even it used the same sort of abbreviated description as Congress has done in express preemption, such as involved in Morales, in a 2015 case where the court described field preemption: "Congress has forbidden the State to take action in the field that the federal statute pre-empts."Murphy, slip op. at 23 (quoting , slip  op.  at  2 (2015)). However, "in substance, field preemption does not involve congressional commands to the States", but "like all other forms of preemption, it concerns a clash between a constitutional exercise of Congress's legislative power and conflicting state law."Murphy, slip op. at 23 The court then explained why preemption was not applicable to the PASPA provision prohibiting states from authorizing sports betting:
A question posed by the majority opinion was over the current severability doctrine employed by the Supreme Court at the time of this decision. Under this doctrine, if the Court finds a portion of the law passed by Congress is deemed unconstitutional, they must review all other aspects of that law based on the intent of Congress to determine if some or all of the law must be deemed unconstitutional. Alito and the five other justices that joined his opinion, excluding Breyer, believed §§ 3701(1) was unseverable from the remaining language of PASPA, and declared the law unconstitutional. 
Concurrences and dissent
In a concurrence, Justice Thomas affirmed that the use of the severability doctrine was the right course of action in this decision, but postulated that the Court should revisit this doctrine since it often requires hypothesizing the intent of Congress. Justice Breyer, in his own written opinion, disagreed with Alito's opinion related to severability, believing the rest of the law could remain. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Sonia Sotomayor and in part by Breyer. Justice Ginsburg wrote that the decision to overturn all of PASPA was excessive, and based on the desire to legalize sports betting.
Subsequent developments
The oral arguments in the case were considered to have gone favorably towards New Jersey and against the leagues, and many commentators believed that the Court would find that PASPA was unconstitutional. In anticipation of the Court's ruling, several states have begun setting legislation in place to allow for legal sports gambling, contingent on the results of the Supreme Court case.  By June 5, 2018, Delaware became the first state outside of Nevada to legalize sports gambling in wake of the Supreme Court decision. The New Jersey legislature had prepared a bill legalizing sports gambling prior to the Supreme Court ruling, and upon the Court's decision, formally introduced the bill the same day; the bill had undergone several revisions, and had passed both houses and signed into law by Governor Murphy by June 11, 2018.
In some cases, the leagues have been involved in helping to establish the legislation to be favorable for them as well, should the Court find for New Jersey. The professional leagues, like the NFL, NBA, and NHL, have also indicated they would agree to federally-regulated sports gambling and preparing their teams, owners, and players for this possibility, though the NCAA, representing non-professional players, has been more vocal about such allowances unless gambling on college or amateur sports remain banned. The Supreme Court decision only impacts intrastate sports gambling schemes. Interstate sports gambling remains illegal under the Federal Wire Act.
With the Court finding in favor of New Jersey, observers believe its ruling will impact other current federal laws in place that could be considered to have commandeered power from the states and other challenges related to the Tenth Amendment, such as gun ownership rights, immigration enforcement (eg. penalizing sanctuary cities), and the legalization of marijuana under state law.
See also
 Tenth Amendment
References
https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/17pdf/16-476_dbfi.pdf
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Tenth Amendment case law
Category:Legal history of New Jersey
Category:United States gambling case law
Category:Sports betting
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:National Collegiate Athletic Association litigation
"""

From "Murphy v. Waterfront Commission" ==> """
Murphy v. Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor, 378 U.S. 52 (1964), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning the self-incrimination clause in the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Court ruled that a state cannot compel a witness to provide testimony that may be incriminating under other State/Federal laws, even if it granted immunity under its own laws.Murphy v. Waterfront Comm'n of N.Y. Harbor, . Decided on the same day as Malloy v. Hogan (1964), the Supreme Court reconsidered its previous rulings that the Federal Government could compel witness testimony that could be incriminating under a state's laws,. and states could similarly compel testimony that would be incriminating under Federal law..
 Background 
The Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor is a bi-state agency tasked to investigate and aid prosecution of criminal activity in the Port of New York and New Jersey. While investigating work stoppage activity suspected to be in violation of the Waterfront Commission Act, it subpoenaed petitioners asking them to testify about the striking activity under investigation. Petitioners were granted immunity from prosecution under New York and New Jersey laws pursuant to New Jersey law, but they refused to testify beyond their names and union membership status, claiming that the immunity did not protect them from federal prosecution. They were held in civil and criminal contempt by the Law Division of the New Jersey Superior Court. The criminal contempt charges were reversed on appeal to the Supreme Court of New Jersey, while the civil contempt charges were remanded for a new trial. Petitioners appealed to the United States Supreme Court, arguing that the contempt charges were in violation of the Fifth Amendment.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 378
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:Port of New York and New Jersey
"""

From "Murray v. United States" ==> """
Murray v. United States, 487 U.S. 533 (1988), was a United States Supreme Court decision that created the modern "independent source doctrine" exception to the exclusionary rule. The exclusionary rule makes most evidence gathered through violations of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution inadmissible in criminal trials as "fruit of the poisonous tree". In Murray, the Court ruled that when officers conduct two searches, the first unlawful and the second lawful, evidence seized during the second search is admissible if the second search "is genuinely independent of [the] earlier one.". 
 Background 
The case arose out of the conviction of Michael F. Murray for conspiracy to possess and distribute illegal drugs. Based on information received from informants, federal law enforcement agents had been surveilling Murray. They observed Murray drive a truck into a warehouse. The agents saw the truck leave with another driver, and lawfully seized it. The agents found marijuana in the vehicle. After making this discovery, several agents illegally entered the warehouse. They found burlap bales in the warehouse. They did not reenter the warehouse until they received a warrant. In applying for the warrant, the agents did not mention their prior illegal entry.Murray, 487 U.S. at 535.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Scalia delivered the opinion of the Court in a 4-3 decision.
The majority opinion agreed with the government that "the independent source doctrine applies to evidence initially discovered during, or as a consequence of, an unlawful search but later obtained independently from activities untainted by the initial illegality."Murray, 487 U.S. at 537. The Court found that a search pursuant to a warrant is not genuinely independent of evidence if (1) the agents' decision to seek the warrant was prompted by what they had seen during the initial [illegal] entry or (2) if information obtained during that entry was presented to the Magistrate and affected his decision to issue the warrant.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 487
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 References 
 External links 
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:United States evidence case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Murray's Lessee v. Hoboken Land & Improvement Co." ==> """
Den ex dem. Murray v. Hoboken Land & Improv. Co., 59 U.S. (18 How.) 272 (1856), was a case before the United States Supreme Court. The issue adjudicated was whether a distress warrant, issued pursuant to statute, was valid and constitutional.
Background
Facts
Three cases came up from the circuit Court of the United States for the district of New Jersey, upon a certificate of division in opinion between the judges thereof. The dispute arose from attempts to recover money embezzled by Customs agents at the Port of New York who purchased land with stolen money.
This case arose from an action of ejectment, in which both parties claimed title to certain property. Defendants claimed title under a sale by virtue of what was referred to as a distress warrant, issued by the solicitor of the treasury under an act of Congress.
Circuit court
The judges for the court below were in disagreement as to whether the sale was valid in that there was some question as to whether the statute that produced the distress warrant proceeding was constitutional.
This action arose from a certified question from the Circuit Court of the United States for the District of New Jersey, in which the judges could not agree whether a distress warrant, issued pursuant to statute, was valid and constitutional.
Decision
The United States Supreme Court found that under the Constitution of the United States, an individual from whom a balance of account had been found due would not be deprived of his liberty, or property by having payment of that balance enforced, without the exercise of the judicial power of the United States. A distress warrant, issued by the solicitor of the treasury under the act of Congress passed on the 15th May, 1820, (3 Stats. at Large, 592,) is consistent with the Constitution.
The Court also found that after the levy of the distress warrant had begun, the individual could bring before a district court the question of whether he was actually indebted as recited in the warrant.
Thus, the Court answered the lower court's question by finding that there was no constitutional problem with the distress warrant and that the sale was valid.
The Court responded to the questions presented by the lower court by declaring that the statutory basis for the distress warrant proceeding at issue was not in conflict with the constitutional guarantee of due process.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 59
Samuel Swartwout, Collector of Customs for the Port of New York 1829-1838
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:1856 in United States case law
Category:United States due process case law
Category:Port of New York and New Jersey
Category:Customs services
Category:Hoboken, New Jersey
"""

From "Musacchio v. United States" ==> """
Musacchio v. United States, 577 U.S. ___ (2016), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States clarified procedures for appellate review when the government does not object to an erroneous jury instruction that adds elements to a criminal offense as well as whether a defendant may raise a statute of limitations defense for the first time on appeal.Musacchio v. United States, No. 14–1095, 577 U.S. ___, slip op. at 1, 6, 11 (2016). In a unanimous opinion written by Justice Clarence Thomas, the Court held that when reviewing a claim that the government failed to demonstrate sufficient evidence to substantiate a criminal offense, an appellate court should assess the elements of the alleged crime, rather than the elements that were described in jury instructions.Musacchio, slip op. at 1, 6. Justice Thomas explained that "[a] reviewing court’s limited determination on sufficiency review ... does not rest on how the jury was instructed."Musacchio, slip op. at 6. Additionally, with respect to the statute of limitations issue, Justice Thomas held that a statute of limitations defense cannot be raised for the first time on appeal.Musacchio, slip op. at 1, 11.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Statutes of limitations
"""

From "Muscarello v. United States" ==> """
Muscarello v. United States, 524 U.S. 125 (1998), is a United States Supreme Court case focusing on legislative interpretation of a firearms chapter of the federal criminal code.  The Court was asked to rule on whether a particular statute with the phrase “carries a firearm” should be interpreted so as to be limited to carrying a firearm only on one’s person or interpreted more broadly to include carrying a firearm in a vehicle.  The Court held that the statute should be construed broadly and that a firearm discovered in a vehicle, including the glove compartment and trunk, would constitute as “carrying” under the statute..
 Background 
The federal criminal code has a provision dealing with firearms that imposes a five-year mandatory prison term on a person who “uses or carries a firearm” both during and in relation to a drug-related crime..  Frank J. Muscarello, the petitioner, was arrested for selling marijuana; at the time of his arrest Muscarello had a handgun in the locked glove compartment of the truck in which he was transporting the marijuana.  Muscarello’s case was consolidated with another case with similar facts except in the other case the firearms in question were in the trunk of the car belonging to the other defendants’.  Muscarello and the other defendants all argued that possessing firearms in a glove compartment or the trunk of a car fell outside of the scope of the mandatory sentencing statute.524 U.S. at 126.
 Opinion of the Court 
In deciding whether possessing a firearm in either the glove compartment or the trunk should be included in the statutory definition of “carries” the Court employed a lengthy discussion of the linguistics and ordinary meanings of the phrase “carries a firearm.”524 U.S. at 127-131.  The majority debated over the possible ways to define the phrase but ultimately ruled that the Congress intended for the word “carries” to be defined in its original, etymological meaning that would include conveying a gun in a vehicle and not necessarily on one’s person.  The Court did not make this ruling lightly and rested its reasoning on sources of literature, excerpts of New York Times articles, and multiple dictionaries to examine how the phrase has been used.
The Court then analyzed the purpose of Congress in enacting the legislation to further support the conclusion that Congress intended to include this type of “carrying” within the scope of the statute.524 U.S. at 132.  To make this analysis the Court looked to the legislative history of the statute where they found that the congressional intent was to deter criminals to leave their guns at home instead of using them during the commission of a drug felony.  Thus, on this point the Court also found that “carries a weapon” should be construed to include possessing a weapon in one’s vehicle.524 U.S. at 139.
 References 
External links
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States federal criminal case law
"""

From "Muskrat v. United States" ==> """
Muskrat v. United States, 219 U.S. 346 (1911),. was a landmark United States Supreme Court case in which the Court delineated the authority of United States federal courts to hear certain kinds of cases under the Case or Controversy Clause of the United States Constitution.
Facts
In this case, Congress passed a statute permitting certain Native Americans to bring suits against the United States to determine the constitutionality of a law allocating tribal lands, and providing that Counsel for both sides were to be paid from the United States Treasury. Several cases were brought pursuant to this statute, including suits brought by David Muskrat and J. Henry Dick opposing the partition of Indian lands, and by another pair, William Brown and Levi B. Gritts, opposing a prohibition against the sale of certain Indian lands.
Result
The United States Supreme Court refused to allow the case to be heard, maintaining that, though the United States was named as a defendant, the case in question was not an actual controversy: rather, the statute was merely devised to test the constitutionality of a certain type of legislation, and the Court's ruling would be nothing more than an advisory opinion; therefore, it dismissed the suit for failing to present a "case or controversy", as required by Article III of the United States Constitution.
Later developments
Although this decision remains as valid case law, its effective precedent has been diminished by the Supreme Court's approval of the declaratory judgment act, which permits a party to seek a declaration of rights against another party, even where no affirmative relief (e.g. damages or an injunction) is being sought. In a declaratory judgment action, if under the facts as proved, there is some possibility of a future need for relief as among the parties, a declaratory judgment may be entered.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 219
Hayburn's Case, 2 U.S. 409 (1792)
References
External links
Category:1911 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Native American case law
"""

From "Mutual Film Corp. v. Industrial Commission of Ohio" ==> """
__NOTOC__
Mutual Film Corporation v. Industrial Commission of Ohio, 236 U.S. 230 (1915), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court ruling by a 9-0 vote that the free speech protection of the Ohio Constitution, which was substantially similar to the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, did not extend to motion pictures.   
Background
The state government of Ohio had passed a statute in 1913 forming a board of censors which had the duty of reviewing and approving all films intended to be exhibited in the state. Like other state and municipal governments, Ohio charged a licensing fee to distributors.Pondillo, Bob. "Mutual Film Corp. v. Industrial Commission of Ohio (1915)", The First Amendment Encyclopedia, Middle Tennessee State University The board could order the arrest of anyone showing an unapproved film in the state.
The plaintiff, Mutual Film Corporation, was a movie distributor and sought an injunction against the Board. Mutual argued that in addition to the violation of its freedom of speech, the censorship board was interfering with interstate commerce in violation of the Dormant Commerce Clause and that the government had illegally delegated legislative authority to a censor board.  Those arguments were dismissed by the Court perfunctorily.
Decision
Justice McKenna, writing for the Court stated:
The Court described movies in some technical detail and noted their popularity but wrote that as "they may be used for evil, ... We cannot regard [the censorship of movies] as beyond the power of government." The Court added that it would be equally unreasonable to grant free speech protection to the theater or the circus and noted that in many prior cases regarding government licensure of theatrical performances, the issue of freedom of opinion had not been raised.
 Overturned 
The decision that motion pictures did not merit First Amendment protection drove an increase in regulation of film content, which culminated in the enforcement in July 1934 of the Production Code over all Hollywood films. The Production Code, also known as the Hays Code, was not law but an agreement between studios and theaters to self-censor, partly to avoid the patchwork of local censorship laws that existed around the country. In May 1952, the Supreme Court overturned its Mutual decision in Joseph Burstyn, Inc v. Wilson, popularly known as the "Miracle Decision" since it referred to the short film The Miracle, part of the anthology film L'Amore (1948), directed by Roberto Rossellini.
The Production Code was loosened in the 1950s and 1960s and was eventually abandoned, in favor of the MPAA film rating system in 1968.
See also
Film censorship in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 236
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
Whirlpool of Desire (1935) French film distributed by Arthur Mayer and Joseph Burstyn
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1915 in United States case law
Category:Film censorship in the United States
"""

From "Mutual Life Insurance Co. of New York v. Hillmon" ==> """
{{Infobox SCOTUS case
  |Litigants=Mutual Life Insurance Co. of New York v. Hillmon
  |DecideDate=May 16
  |DecideYear=1892
  |FullName=Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York v. Hillmon, No. 182; New York Life Insurance Company v. Hillmon, No. 183; Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Company of Hartford, Connecticut v. Hillmon, No. 184
  |USVol=145
  |USPage=285
  |ParallelCitations=12 S. Ct. 909; 36 L. Ed. 706
  |Prior=C.C.D. Kan.
  |Holding=(1) The three consolidated defendants should have received three peremptory challenges each, rather than three jointly(2) Walter's letter, though hearsay and not a business record, should have been admitted as a statement of intent
  |Majority=Gray
  |JoinMajority=unanimous  |LawsApplied=28 U.S.C. § 734
}}Mutual Life Insurance Co. of New York v. Hillmon, 145 U.S. 285 (1892), is a landmark U.S. Supreme Court case that created one of the most important rules of evidence in American and British courtrooms: an exception to the hearsay rule for statements regarding the intentions of the declarant.Mut. Life Ins. Co. of N.Y. v. Hillmon, .  Decided in 1892, the Hillmon case was authored by Justice Horace Gray, and its holding has been codified in Federal Rule of Evidence 803(3), and adopted by many other jurisdictions.
Background
The Hillmon lawsuit concerned the enforcement of a life insurance contract and the identity of a man who died of a gunshot wound near Medicine Lodge, Kansas.  Sallie Hillmon - a young woman from Lawrence, Kansas - claimed that in late 1879, her husband John had been killed by a firearm accident at a desolate Kansas campsite called Crooked Creek.  The three insurance companies issuing a $25,000 policy on John Hillmon's life maintained that he was still alive.  In support of their contention that Hillmon was still alive, the insurance companies offered a letter purportedly written on March 1, 1879 by Frederick Walters, a young cigarmaker.  In his letter written to his sweetheart, Walters describes meeting "a man named Hillmon" who invited him to travel with him out west to start a sheep ranch.  Upon the insurance companies' refusal to issue the $25,000 policy to Ms. Hillmon, she sued the companies for the policy proceeds.  The first two Hillmon trials, in 1882 and 1885, produced hung juries.  However, the third resulted in a victory for Sallie Hillmon. It was this 1888 verdict that led to the famous Supreme Court decision of 1892 reversing the judgment in her favor.  Nevertheless, three more trials ensued, two ending with hung juries and the last in another verdict for Sallie Hillmon, which was once again overturned by the Supreme Court. The ultimate contested factual issue in all of the trials was the identity of a man whose death far predated the availability of twentieth-century methods of identification. After repeated hung juries in the first two trials, the Supreme Court found that Walters' letter should have been admitted into evidence.  With this ruling, the Court created an entirely new exception to the hearsay rule for out-of-court statements describing the intentions of a declarant and remanded the decision to the trial court. More than a decade later, the trial court produced a verdict for Ms. Hillmon.
On May 19, 2006 - around 115 years after the Supreme Court's ruling - Professor Marianne Wesson of the University of Colorado Law School, Anthropologist Dennis Van Gerven of the University of Colorado at Boulder, and University of Colorado graduate students in anthropology exhumed the corpse in the presence of Hillmon family members and a film crew to try to scientifically determine the corpse's identity.  Although the DNA results from the bones discovered by the team were inconclusive, scientific analysis of photographic comparisons of the corpse, Hillmon, and Walters indicated that the disputed corpse was more likely Hillmon than Walters.  The Hillmon case and Wesson's investigation of the identities of the corpse are described in detail in Wesson's book, A Death at Crooked Creek, and on the book's website.
John Hillmon
John Wesley Hillmon, a Civil War veteran, was born in 1848 in Indiana.  In the late 1860s, he moved with his family to a Kansas township called Grasshopper Springs.  In October 1878, Hillmon, thirty years old, married a young waitress named Sallie Quinn.  Thereafter, the couple set up housekeeping in Lawrence, Kansas.MacCracken, 1968, at 51.   Hillmon, an industrious man, had worked as a foreman, miner, brick maker, cowboy, ranch hand, buffalo hunter, and occasional buffalo hide dealer in Kansas, Colorado, and Texas.  Despite his many occupations, he had never made much money.See the deposition of John Brown, see Transcript, No. 94, at 342-81.  Accordingly, a few weeks after his wedding, Hillmon set off on a journey west with his old friend and working partner John Brown.  Hillmon told Sallie that he intended to find some land where they could start a ranch of their own.
Before leaving home, Hillmon purchased $25,000 of life insurance (which would be nearly $500,000 in current dollars) with the help of his wife's cousin, Levi Baldwin.Hillmon, 145 U.S. at 286.  The amount of insurance was so large for a man of ordinary means to carry that Hillmon had to go to three different insurance companies to procure four policies totaling $25,000 (one for $10,000 and three for $5,000).
In December 1878, Hillmon and Brown set out west for their journey.  They traveled as far as the southwest Kansas town of Medicine Lodge before cold weather eventually drove them back to Wichita together, and then Hillmon back to Lawrence, Kansas.  In late February 1879, Hillmon set off again, meeting up with Brown in Wichita and traveling to Crooked Creek on the night of March 16, 1879.  The next evening, John Brown reported to a neighbor named Philip Briley that Hillmon had been shot dead at their campsite.  The neighbor called the nearest coroner, George Paddock, who inspected the scene of the death and convened an inquest.  On March 18, 1879, John Brown testified that he had accidentally shot and killed Hillmon when the rifle he was unloading from their wagon discharged, shooting Hillmon in the head.  The corpse was dressed in John Hillmon's clothes and boots.MacCracken, 1968, at 52.   At the inquest, witnesses from Medicine Lodge who had been in the company of Brown and Hillmon testified that the corpse was the man they had known as Hillmon.  Most of them remembered Hillmon because he had passed through their town on the earlier trip.McNeal, 2009, at 91. On April 10, 1879, the Medicine Lodge inquest returned a verdict of death by misadventure, or accidental death.Lawrence Standard, April 10, 1879, at 2.
Once the body was buried in Medicine Lodge, Sallie requested payment of the life insurance proceeds from the three companies that had issued the policies.Hillmon, 145 U.S. at 286; MacCracken, 1968, at 52.  Suspicious, the insurance companies began to investigate the Hillmon claim.   At this time, life insurance fraud was not uncommon — there had been several cases in which people had bought large amounts of insurance, killed someone, and disguised the corpse as the policy holder, who would be somewhere in hiding.MacCracken, 1968, at 51; Carleton, 1896, at 53.   (In fact, when the Hillmon case reached the Supreme Court, one of the Justices would refer to the case as one of “graveyard insurance,” meaning fraud.)Maguire, 1925, at 711.   Believing they were being swindled, the companies dispatched their agents to Medicine Lodge immediately.
The agents insisted that the body be disinterred and returned to Lawrence, after which it was delivered to an undertaking establishment and inspected by dozens of persons who had known John Hillmon in life. The Douglas County coroner convened another inquest.  Although performed by the state-employed Douglas County coroner, the County Attorney, and in the presence of Douglas County jurors, this inquest (which the coroner much later admitted) was wholly funded by the insurance companies, who paid all the involved parties.Topeka Daily Capital, February 16, 1895, at 6.   The chief controversies at this inquest were the differences between the corpse's and Hillmon's height and teeth, in addition to the smallpox vaccination scar that the corpse carried on its shoulder.MacCracken, 1968, at 53.  Sallie Quinn Hillmon and her cousin Levi Baldwin testified that the body belonged to John Hillmon, as did a few other acquaintances. Other witnesses testified emphatically that it was not and could not have been Hillmon. The corpse was five feet, eleven inches tall; some said it could not be Hillmon because Hillmon was at least two inches shorter, but others said he was exactly that height.  Witnesses testified that Hillmon had one or more rotten teeth, while the corpse's teeth were excellent. But some witnesses testified that Hillmon too had fine teeth.   Moreover, the corpse had a smallpox vaccination scar exactly where Hillmon had been vaccinated, but some of the insurance company doctors said that the scar on the corpse's arm was too fresh to be from the vaccination that Hillmon had received some weeks prior.  Ultimately, this inquest, unlike the Medicine Lodge inquest, returned a finding that the death was of a “person unknown,” and had been caused “feloniously by J.H. Brown.”MacCracken, 1968, at 53; Murder Will Out!, Lawrence Standard, June 26, 1879, at 4.
Sallie Hillmon
Sallie Hillmon, John Hillmon's wife (their marriage license can be found here), was a waitress from Lawrence, Kansas.  Sallie Hillmon claimed that, in 1879, her husband John had been killed by a firearm accident at a desolate Kansas campsite called Crooked Creek.  It became clear to Sallie that the insurance companies were not going to pay, so she filed suit in 1880.Hillmon, 145 U.S. at 285. Her case went to trial in 1882; it would eventually be tried six times.  The Hillmon litigation lasted for almost 25 years, and would be argued in front of the Supreme Court twice. The first two trials, in 1882 and 1885, both produced hung juries.   The third trial produced a verdict for Sallie Hillmon, possibly because of the trial judge's exclusion of the insurance companies’ most important piece of evidence: the “Dearest Alvina” letter.Hillmon, 145 U.S. at 287.
Even with the Dearest Alvina letter in evidence, the fourth trial of 1895 and the fifth trial of 1896 ended in hung juries.MacCracken, 1968, at 76-77.  In the sixth trial matters became even more interesting with the testimony of a Leavenworth cigar factory owner, Arthur Simmons.Mrs. Hillmon's Evidence to be Finished Today, Leavenworth Times, October 25, 1899, at 4.  Simmons testified that he had employed an F. Walters at his cigar making shop two months after Frederick Adolph Walters’ alleged death at Crooked Creek.Claims Walters Was In Leavenworth In May 1879, Leavenworth Times, November 14, 1899, at 4.  He produced employment records and identified a picture of Frederick A. Walters as the Walters who was formerly in his employ.Ready for Arguments in the Hillmon Case, Leavenworth Times, November 15, 1899, at 4.  This evidence was persuasive to the jury and they returned a unanimous verdict for Sallie Hillmon.MacCracken, 1968, at 77.   The insurance companies managed in 1903 to persuade the Supreme Court again to overturn Sallie Hillmon's victory, on less memorable evidentiary grounds.  But eventually all of the insurance companies settled with Sallie, for the full face amount of the policies plus accumulated interest.
Frederick Walters
The crux of the insurance company's case was a letter headed "Wichita, Kansas, March 1, 1879" and beginning "Dearest Alvina."  It appeared to be from Frederick Adolph Walters to his fiancée, Miss Alvina Kasten.Hillmon, 145 U.S. at 288.   Walters and Kasten had been sweethearts in Fort Madison Iowa, but Walters had left his Iowa home in the spring of the previous year to pursue his trade as an itinerant cigarmaker.MacCracken, 1968, at 74; Mrs. Hillmon's Evidence to be Finished Today, Leavenworth Times, October 25, 1899, at 4. Alvina Katsen, in a pretrial deposition, swore that she had received this letter from the post office early in March 1879.Transcript, No. 184, at 1778; Was it Walters?, Leavenworth Times, June 29, 1882, at 4.  In the letter, Walters wrote that he planned to leave Wichita “with a certain Mr. Hillmon, a sheep-trader, for Colorado or parts unknown to me.”Maguire, 1925, at 709.  It was this intention to travel with Mr. Hillmon that was crucial to the 1892 decision.  According to Alivina Kasten and members of the Walters family, this was the last correspondence any of them received from Frederick, and they had not seen him since.MacCracken, 1968, at 74.
Judge Oliver Perry Shiras, presiding in the third trial of the Hillmon case, had excluded this letter from the jury's knowledge, agreeing with Sallie Hillmon's lawyers that it was hearsay.MacCracken, 1968, at 75. (Her lawyers apparently had not thought to make this objection in the first two trials.)  The letter certainly was hearsay according to the usual definition: an out of court statement offered in court to prove the truth of the matter asserted.  There were certain recognized exceptions to the hearsay rule, but the Dearest Alvina letter did not seem to qualify for any of them.  The insurance companies’ lawyers could do no better than to argue that it was a business record; there was such an exception to the hearsay rule, but a love letter certainly did not satisfy its requirements.MacCracken, 1968, at 75; Maguire, 1925, at 711.
John Brown
John Brown was John Hillmon's traveling companion.  After John Brown reported the shooting death at Crooked Creek to some nearby rural residents, two inquests were conducted under the auspices of the coroner at Medicine Lodge, seat of Barbour County. The first coroner's jury failed to agree whether the death was accident or otherwise (one account says the jury “did not know how to render a verdict,” an odd circumstance suggesting that homicide, or at least investigations into it, were not common in Barbour County); the second concluded that the shooting was accidental. The body was then buried at Medicine Lodge, and Brown wrote a letter to Sallie Hillmon explaining what had happened and conveying his regret and condolences.
In each of the inquests, Brown told the same story of an accidental shooting.  However, after the Douglas County inquest's finding, Brown went to stay at his brother's home to Missouri, and soon afterward his story changed.  Over the summer of 1879, Brown was approached several times by an attorney who claimed he had been hired by Brown's father to represent the son and protect him from the consequences of the second inquest verdict.That Tooth, Leavenworth Times (Kan.), June 22, 1882, at 1; Transcript, No. 184, at 401 (deposition of John Brown); A Long Story, Leavenworth Times (Kan.), June 17, 1882, at 1.   But the attorney, J.R. Buchan, was really retained by the insurance companies.MacCracken, 1968, at 73; The Hillmon Case, Leavenworth Times (Kan.), June 14, 1885, at 4. It is undisputed that Brown then signed an affidavit prepared by Buchan that was wholly inconsistent with his previous tale.MacCracken, 1968, at 73. Brown's new story stated that he and Hillmon had picked up a traveler called Joe, whose last name sounded like Burgess or Berkley.Transcript, No. 184, at 400 (deposition of John Brown). This traveler, according to the affidavit, was naïve and agreed to travel unseen, hiding at times under the blanket in the wagon so people would only note two men traveling together. The document went on to say that “Joe” was chosen because he was a passable lookalike for Hillmon, and that Hillmon had inoculated the intended victim by using a pocket knife and serum from Hillmon's own vaccination site.
Brown's affidavit stated that it was Hillmon who murdered the Joe Burgess/Berkley and switched clothes with the victim, as well as planting his own journal in the victim's inside jacket pocket. The affidavit also described a conversation Brown had with Sallie, in which she said she knew of Hillmon's whereabouts and that he was not dead.Transcript, No. 184, at 416 (deposition of John Brown).  After Buchan showed this affidavit to Mrs. Hillmon, in an unsuccessful effort to persuade her to withdraw her insurance claims, Brown tore up it up and threw it in the stove.Transcript, No. 184, at 457 (deposition of John Brown); How It Happened, Leavenworth Times (Kan.), June 20, 1882, at 1.  (Buchan retrieved it and repaired it for use in court later, making clear that his real client was the insurance companies.MacCracken, 1968, at 73; The Hillmon Case, Topeka Daily Capital (Kan.), March 2, 1888, at 4.)  Later, Brown further repudiated this statement, and he testified in 1882 that he had only signed the affidavit because Buchan had told him he would be arrested and convicted of murder if he refused.Transcript, No. 184, at 401 (deposition of John Brown); MacCracken, 1968, at 74.
 The Supreme Court Opinion 
After losing the third trial to Sallie Hillmon, the companies pursued an appeal to the United States Supreme Court.MacCracken, 1968, at 75; Maguire, 1925, at 709. That Court overturned the jury's verdict for Sallie, ruling that declarations of intention are ‘credible evidence’ of said intention, and that such statements of intention are thus admissible as exceptions to the hearsay rule.Maguire, 1925, at 710. The Court held that often such evidence is "indispensable to the due administration of justice" and the truth of such evidence is an evidentiary issue to be decided by the jury.Hillmon, 145 U.S. at 296.  This decision was quite novel, for there was very little authority for the proposition that statements of intention qualified as an exception to the hearsay rule.MacCracken, 1968, at 75-76.   Most hearsay exceptions (then and now) rest on the belief that certain kinds of statements are unlikely to be false even if made without benefit of oath and cross-examination.Hillmon, 145 U.S. at 299.  It was Walters’ expressed intention to go traveling with Hillmon that was dispositive of the Court's 1892 opinion.Hillmon, 145 U.S. at 295.  The Court held that the declarations in the letters tended to prove Walters’ “intention of going, and going with Hillmon,” which would make it more plausible that Walters’ “did go and that he went with Hillmon,” which in turn would increase the likelihood that the corpse and murder victim was Walters.   The Court concluded that admissibility of Frederick Adolph Walters’ letters could contribute to the circumstantial case presented by the defendants and “might properly influence the jury.”
 Modern Investigation 
In March 2006, with the help of attorney Mark Thornhill from the Kansas City, Missouri law firm of Spencer, Fane, Britt and Browne, Professors Wesson and Dennis Van Gerven obtained permission from a judge in Lawrence, Kansas to disinter the disputed remains, which were buried at Oak Hill Cemetery in that city. In May 2006, accompanied by a film crew, anthropology graduate students, and a few of Hillmon's descendants, they excavated the grave, with the goal of using modern forensics to identify the body.  A backhoe was used to remove the first couple of feet of soil, then shovels for the next few feet, and lastly hands and hand tools when it was decided that the potentially fragile remains might be too close to continue the use of larger tools. Once the diggers got down deep enough, an underground stream was discovered; it had been flowing through the body and the casket for an indeterminate amount of time.  In fact there was not much casket left from the years of spring water flowing through the grave; only a few rusty coffin nails remained of the container.
After hours of careful digging, Van Gerven found 47 bone fragments and 5 teeth, fragmented and eroded from long immersion in the wet ground.  Because the frail nature of the remains made physical methods of identification impossible, Wesson and Van Gerven planned to use DNA matching to determine if the bones belonged to John Hillmon (Wesson had managed to track down John Hillmon's half-brother's grandson, Leray Hillmon, and procure a DNA sample).  However, the bones did not contain sufficient human DNA to enable testing given that the water and organisms engulfed any human genetic material that might have resided in the remains.
Nevertheless, Van Gerven and his colleagues were able to analyze the photographic evidence available: pictures of the living men John Hillmon and Frederick Adolph Walters, and photographs taken of the corpse during the Lawrence inquest.  They used photographical superimposition, which is generally used for exclusion but can be used for positive identification of unique morphological features.  Van Gerven used the profile shot of the corpse in the coffin and superimposed it onto pictures of John Hillmon and Frederick A. Walters.  “The profile image of the corpse was then digitally rotated into a vertical axis matching the life photographs,” Van Gerven explained in his report.  The pictures were then matched using standard anatomical points (the lower margin of the chin and a point at the top of the nasal bones between the eyes) in order to establish scale. The results showed a striking similarity between the corpse and Hillmon's photograph in their nasal profiles, hairlines, eyebrow positions, and lips.  With these results, Van Gerven concluded that the corpse more closely matched John Hillmon than Frederick Walters.
For more information on the exhumation, see here.
 Documentary Film 
A movie named Hillmon’s Bones was made to document the exhumation and resulting forensic determinations. Directed by Professor Ernesto Acevedo-Munoz of the University of Colorado, the film also tells the Hillmon story through interviews with Professors Wesson and Van Gerven, and the other participants in the research.
 Federal Rule of Evidence 803(3) Hillmon has been codified by Federal Rule of Evidence 803(3), has found its way into the evidence rules of all or nearly all American states, and has been adopted in international jurisdictions including England and Australia.Maguire, 1925, at 720.  FRE 803(3) makes hearsay admissible if it is "a statement of the declarant’s then existing state of mind, emotion, sensation or physical condition (such as intent, plan, motive, design, mental feeling, pain and bodily health), but not including a statement of memory or belief to prove the fact remembered or believed."Fed. R. Evid. 803(3).  The advisory committee comments make clear that the Hillmon is the source of the exception.Fed. R. Evid. 803(3) advisory committee's note ("[T]he rule of [Hillmon] . . . allowing evidence of intention as tending to prove the doing of the act intended is, of course, left undisturbed.")
The Hillmon exception has played a role in several notable cases, including United States v. Pheaster, 544 F.2d 353 (1976).  In that case, Angelo Inciso was convicted of kidnapping and sentenced to seventy years in prison, largely on the victim's testimony that he was “going to meet Angelo.”United States v. Pheaster, 544 F.2d 353, 375 (1976).   Although some of the appellate judges in that case doubted the fairness of this outcome, they ultimately agreed that the outcome was compelled by the Hillmon doctrine.  Professor Wesson has criticized Hillmon as an outcome-oriented decision and argued for its repeal.  For a critical analysis of the court's decision, see here.
ReferencesStratagems and Conspiracies to Defraud Life Insurance Companies:  An Authentic Record of Remarkable Cases (G.W. Carleton ed., 1896).
Brooks W. MacCracken, The Case of the Anonymous Corpse, Am. Heritage, June 1968.
John MacArthur Maguire, The Hillmon Case—Thirty-Three Years After, 38 Harv. L. Rev. 709 (1925).
Thomas Allen McNeal, The Hillmon Case (2009).  BiblioLife.
Marianne Wesson, The Hillmon Case, the Supreme Court, and the McGuffin, in'' Evidence Stories (R. Lempert ed., 2006).
Marianne Wesson, "Particular Intentions": The Hillmon Case and the Supreme Court, 18 L. and Literature 343 (2006).
Marianne Wesson, "Remarkable Strategems and Conspiracies": How Unscrupulous Lawyers and Credulous Judges Created an Exception to the Hearsay Rule, 76 Fordham L. Rev. 1675 (2007).
External links
 The Hillmon Case, a website about the case
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States hearsay case law
Category:1892 in United States case law
Category:Life insurance
Category:Meade County, Kansas
"""

From "Mutual Pharmaceutical Co. v. Bartlett" ==> """
Mutual Pharmaceutical Co. v. Bartlett, 570 U.S. 472 (2013), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States holding that generic drug manufactures cannot be held liable under state law for not adequately labeling medication when federal law prohibits them from changing the label from the original brand name drug..
Legal Background
The Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FDCA) requires that all drug manufacturers gain approval from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before engaging in interstate commerce. When a new brand name drug is created, the drug must be submitted under a New-Drug Application (NDA). In the NDA is a compilation of materials that must include a full report of all clinical investigations and all relevant studies. The NDA may only be approved by the FDA if they find that the drug is safe for use and the therapeutic benefits outweigh the drug's harm.
Because submitting an NDA is expensive and lengthy, the Congress set out to create an easier path for generic drugs to be issued to the public. Congress passed the Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984, known as the Hatch-Waxman Act. Under Hatch-Waxman a generic drug may be approved for use without the onerous provisions of an NDA provided the generic drug is identical to an already approved brand-name drug. Under Hatch-Waxman the generic drug manufacturer is prohibited from making any changes in the drug or from making any changes to the already approved label.
New Hampshire State Law imposes a duty on drug manufactures that the drugs they produce are not unreasonably unsafe. The safety of drugs is to be judged by a combination of its chemical properties and its warning label.
Case Background
In 1978 the FDA approved an anti-inflammatory pain reliever called sulindac under the brand name Clinoril. When the patent expired the FDA approved several generic versions including one manufactured by Mutual Pharmaceutical. The drugs have serious side-effects including hypersensitivity skin reactions with necrosis of the skin, toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens–Johnson syndrome.
In 2004 the respondent Karen Bartlett was given Clinoril for shoulder pain. The pharmacist dispensed a generic form made by Mutual Pharmaceutical. Bartlett soon developed toxic epidermal necrolysis with sixty percent of her skin was destroyed. She underwent months in medically induced coma, twelve eye surgeries and was tube fed for a year.
At the time of the incident the label did not specifically refer to developed toxic epidermal necrolysis but did warn of severe skin reactions, however toxic epidermal necrolysis was listed on the package insert
District Court
Bartlett sued in New Hampshire State Court, however Mutual was able to remove the case to Federal District Court. Bartlett initially argued both failure-to-warn and design-defect claims. The District Court dismissed her failure-to-warn claim on her doctor’s own testimony that she had not read the box nor label. On the claim of design-defect a jury found Mutual liable for over $21 million in damages. Mutual appealed.
Appellate Court
The Court of Appeals affirmed the District Court's ruling. It distinguished from an earlier case, PLIVA v. Mensing, in that generic drug makers could simply choose not to make the generic drugs and thus satisfy both State and Federal Laws.
Decision of the Court
The Court reversed the decision of the First Circuit with Justice Alito writing for the majority. The Court centered its opinion around the impossibility of a generic drug manufacturer both meeting its obligations under State law and Federal Law. Where such conflict exists, the court writes, Federal Law must take primacy under the Supremacy Clause.
Dissent
Justice Breyer, joined by Justice Kagan dissented arguing that it was not totally impossible for the drug manufactures to comply with both State and Federal Law. He argued that the company could either choose not to do business in the State of New Hampshire or could accept that such damages are a cost of doing business.
Justice Sotomayor, joined by Justice Ginsburg also dissented arguing that the majority had removed Mutual from the reach of common law liability. She also argued that Federal drug law should be looked at as complementary to State laws, rather than in competition with them.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment case law
Category:2013 in United States case law
"""

From "Myers v. Anderson" ==> """
Myers v. Anderson, 238 U.S. 368 (1915), was a United States Supreme Court decision that held Maryland state officials liable for civil damages for enforcing a grandfather clause. Grandfather clauses exempted voters from requirements such as poll taxes and literacy tests if their grandfathers had been registered voters, and were largely designed to exempt white voters from restrictions intended to disenfranchise former black slaves and their descendants. Despite striking down the Maryland law as discriminatory, the court noted that economic discrimination in the form of property requirements should be presumed to be "free from constitutional objection."Keyssar, Alexander. "The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United States," Basic Books, 2000, p. 108. 
Myers was a companion case to Guinn v. United States (1915),. which struck down an Oklahoma grandfather clause that effectively exempted white voters from a literacy test, finding it to be discriminatory and a violation of the Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
 References 
 External links 
Category:1915 in United States case law
Category:African-American history of Maryland
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:Legal history of Maryland
Category:United States Fifteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:Maryland elections
"""

From "Myers v. United States" ==> """
Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52 (1926), was a United States Supreme Court decision ruling that the President has the exclusive power to remove executive branch officials, and does not need the approval of the Senate or any other legislative body. It was distinguished in 1935 by Humphrey's Executor v. United States. However, in Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2020), the Supreme Court interpreted Myers as establishing that the President generally has unencumbered removal power. Myers was the first Supreme Court case to address the president's removal powers.
Claim
In 1920, Frank S. Myers, a First-Class Postmaster in Portland, Oregon, was removed from office by President Woodrow Wilson.Myers, 272 U.S. at 57. An 1876 federal law provided that "Postmasters of the first, second, and third classes shall be appointed and may be removed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate." Myers argued that his dismissal violated this law, and he was entitled to back pay for the unfilled portion of his four-year term.Myers, 272 U.S. at 59.
Opinion
Chief Justice (and former President) William Howard Taft, writing for the Court, noted that the Constitution does mention the appointment of officials, but is silent on their dismissal. He proceeded to conduct a voluminous examination on the history of the President's removal power. First, Taft examined the notes of the Constitutional Convention, and found their silence on the subject to be intentional: the Convention did discuss the dismissal of executive-branch staff, and believed it was implicit in the Constitution that the President did hold the exclusive power to remove his staff, whose existence was an extension of the President's own authority.Myers, 272 U.S. at 110-11. 
Second, Taft discussed the Decision of 1789 and said that the decision indicated that a "considerable majority" of Congress were in "favor of declaring the power of removal to be in the President."Myers, 272 U.S. at 111-14. He then analyzed subsequent congressional debates over the issue. 
The Court therefore found that the statute was unconstitutional, for it violated the separation of powers between the executive and legislative branches. In reaching this decision, it also expressly found the Tenure of Office Act, which had imposed a similar requirement on other Presidential appointees and was known for playing a key role in the impeachment of Andrew Johnson during the Reconstruction era, to have been invalid; it had been repealed by Congress some years before this decision.Myers, 272 U.S. at 176.
Important to subsequent cases, dicta in Taft's opinion suggested Congress could never qualify the President's removal power.
Dissents
In a lengthy dissent, Justice McReynolds used an equally exhaustive analysis of quotes from members of the Constitutional Convention, writing that he found no language in the Constitution or in the notes from the Convention intended to grant the President the "illimitable power" to fire every appointed official, "as caprice may suggest", in the entire government with the exception of judges.Myers, 272 U.S. at 239 (McReynolds, J., dissenting).
In a separate dissent, Justice Brandeis wrote that the fundamental case deciding the power of the Supreme Court, Marbury v. Madison, "assumed, as the basis of decision, that the President, acting alone, is powerless to remove an inferior civil officer appointed for a fixed term with the consent of the Senate; and that case was long regarded as so deciding."Myers, 272 U.S. at 272 (McReynolds, J., dissenting).
In a third dissent, Justice Holmes noted that it was within the power of Congress to abolish the position of Postmaster entirely, not to mention to set the position's pay and duties, and he had no problem believing Congress also ought to be able to set terms of the position's occupiers.Myers, 272 U.S. at 177 (Holmes, J., dissenting).
Precedential value
Myers was the first case to concern congressional limitations on the President's removal power. In 1935, in Humphrey's Executor v. United States, the Supreme Court distinguished Myers and disavowed its dicta. Humphrey's distinguished executive officers from officers occupying "quasi-legislative" or "quasi-judicial" positions. The majority opinion stated that:Humphrey's Executor v. United States, 295 U.S. 602 (1935) at p.295.
In Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2020), the Court "interpreted Myers as establishing a general rule of unencumbered presidential removal authority for all executive officers."
See also
 Free Enterprise Fund v. Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 272
References
External links
Category:1926 in United States case law
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States Postal Service litigation
Category:History of Portland, Oregon
Category:Presidency of Woodrow Wilson
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "NAACP v. Button" ==> """
NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. 415 (1963), is a 6-to-3 ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States which held that the reservation of jurisdiction by a federal district court did not bar the U.S. Supreme Court from reviewing a state court's ruling, and also overturned certain laws enacted by the state of Virginia in 1956 as part of the Stanley Plan and massive resistance, as violating the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution.. The statutes here stricken down by the Supreme Court (and one overturned by the Virginia Supreme Court after the 1959 remand in Harrison v. NAACP) had expanded the definitions of the traditional common law crimes of champerty and maintenance, as well as barratry, and had been targeted at the NAACP and its civil rights litigation.
Background
After the U.S. Supreme Court decisions in Brown v. Board of Education, especially the 1955 decision known as Brown II,. which ordered federal courts to enforce the 1954 decision "with all deliberate speed", U.S. Senator Harry F. Byrd declared a policy of Massive Resistance to desegregation of Virginia's schools. Meanwhile, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) was filing legal challenges to segregation in various Virginia schools. Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County had been filed in 1951, and became a companion case decided along with Brown. In January 1956, Virginia voters called for a limited state constitutional convention to allow tuition grants, which could be used at segregation academies and thus undercut the desegregation required by Brown. That constitutional convention was held in March 1956.
On September 29, 1956, the Virginia General Assembly met in a special session and passed more than two dozen statutes concerning segregation and the schools, which Governor Thomas B. Stanley soon signed into law and which became known as the "Stanley Plan." Some concerned tuition grants. Seven of the new statutes concerned NAACP practices in Virginia, and of those, five regulated lawyers: expanding the definitions of the common law legal ethical violations called barratry, champerty, maintenance, running and capping."School, NAACP Bills Signed by Gov. Stanley." Washington Post. September 30, 1956. Barratry is the "stirring up" of litigation by inducing individuals or organizations to sue when they otherwise would not.Dickson, Del, The Supreme Court in Conference, 1940-1985: The Private Discussions Behind Nearly 300 Supreme Court Decisions (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001) at p. 314  Champerty occurs when a third party (not the plaintiff or nor their legal counsel) assumes the risks and financial costs of a lawsuit in return for a portion of the monetary award.Dickson, p. 314. Maintenance occurs when a third party supports or promotes a litigant's suit to prolong litigation when the parties would otherwise have brought an end to litigation or settled the suit. The bills were specifically aimed at curbing the NAACP, which many segregationists believed was "stirring up" integration lawsuits against the Commonwealth."Bills Aimed at NAACP Stir Va. Assembly Fight." Washington Post. September 11, 1956. By 1956, the NAACP had filed fifteen desegregation petitions with local school boards.Brian J. Daugherity, Keep on Keeping On (Charlottesville, University of Virginia Press, 2016) p. 46. 
The new laws also collectively required annual filing of financial reports and membership lists for any group that promotes or opposes state legislation aimed at (1) any race, (2) any organization attempting to influence public opinion on behalf of any race, or (3) any group raising funds to employ legal counsel in connection with racial litigation. Virginia's legislature also established two new legislative committees composed of lawyer members of both houses, which investigated NAACP practices both in light of and using the new statutes. One chaired by John B. Boatwright became known as the "Boatwright Committee"; another chaired by Byrd's son-in-law James M. Thomson became known as the "Thomson Committee". This was similar to the approach taken by several other southern states, decided as Sheldon v. Tucker, 364 U.S. 479 (1958) (overturning Arkansas laws requiring public schoolteachers to disclose every organization to which they belonged or made donations to during the previous five years; and prohibiting NAACP members from holding any state job), NAACP v. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U.S. 449 (1958)(overturning an Alabama attorney general Patterson's attempt to enjoin all NAACP activities in the state) and Louisiana ex rel. Gremillion v. NAACP, 366 U.S. 293 (1961) (overturning Louisiana's attempt to prevent NAACP from doing business in the state). 
The Virginia NAACP soon filed suit in federal court in 1956 against the five new legal ethics laws, and also supported Quaker printer David Scull when he was subjected to aggressive testimony by the Thomson Committee. Both cases reached the U.S. Supreme Court around the same time, and were argued after January 19, 1959 (Robert E. Lee's birthday, a holiday in Virginia), when both a three-judge federal panel in James v. Almond and the Virginia Supreme Court in Harrison v. Day invalidated many other provisions of the Stanley Plan. Then on May 4, 1959, the Supreme Court unanimously threw out the contempt conviction the Thomson Committee had obtained in Scull v. Virginia ex rel. Committee on Law Reform and Racial Activities.
The case that ultimately became this one had been filed by the NAACP against the Attorney General of Virginia (first J. Lindsay Almond then when he resigned to run for governor his interim successor Kenneth Cartwright Patty, and later other successors), to have the five barratry, champerty, maintenance, running and capping laws thrown out as an unconstitutional infringement of its members' rights under the 1st Amendment to freedom of speech and freedom of assembly.Dickson, p. 315. The district court overturned three of the laws on constitutional grounds, and remanded the remaining two to state courts. The newly elected Attorney General, Albertis S. Harrison, Jr., appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, although he delegated the case to outside counsel David J. Mays who argued it on March 23 and 24, 1959, with future justice Thurgood Marshall arguing on behalf of the NAACP.
In Harrison v. NAACP, 360 U.S. 167 (June 8, 1959), the U.S. Supreme Court accepted Mays' arguments and held that the federal district court should have abstained from deciding the laws' constitutionality until state courts had had a reasonable chance to construe them.
The NAACP then pursued its suit in state court, suing Harrison and later substituting his successors as Virginia Attorney General (initially Frederick Gray then Robert Button, since Harrison resigned to run for governor, and was elected on the Democratic ticket with Button), in the Circuit Court of the City of Richmond to have the two remaining statutes overturned on constitutional grounds. During the three day trial, the NAACP (represented by Robert L. Carter of New York and Oliver W. Hill of Richmond) called its Executive Secretary W. Lester Banks to establish the harms the new provisions had caused, as membership dropped significantly even though the NAACP refused to disclose its membership lists as required by the new laws. Attorneys representing Virginia's attorney general questioned several Virginia attorneys who handled NAACP cases, as well as more than a dozen plaintiffs in such actions.
Meanwhile, in February 1960, the NAACP and other organizations began sit-ins to support desegregation. The Virginia State Bar, following the reports of the Boatwright committee, also initiated disbarment proceedings against NAACP attorney Samuel W. Tucker in Emporia, Virginia based on the expanded laws. The NAACP brought in attorney Robert Ming from Chicago to defend Tucker, and after two years of litigation, state judges dismissed the charges against Tucker in early 1962. This did, however, keep desegregation progress slow. By the fall of 1960, NAACP litigation had resulted in some desegregation in eleven localities, and the number of at least partially desegregated districts had slowly risen to 20 in the fall of 1961, 29 in the fall of 1962, and 55 (out of 130 school districts) in 1963 (only 3,700 black pupils or 1.6% attended school with whites even in 1963).Daugherity p. 99 However, the Richmond court refused to declare the new attorney discipline laws unconstitutional.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 418. The NAACP appealed to the Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals, which upheld one statute but not the other.
The NAACP appealed again to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari. While Mays (who had argued the case previously before the U.S. and Virginia Supreme Courts) supervised the brief and attended the oral arguments (Robert L. Carter arguing for the NAACP), due to time constraints Mays let Wickham handle what turned out to be two arguments.James R. Sweeney (ed.) Race Reason and Massive Resistance: The Diary of David J. Mays, 1954-1959 (University of Georgia Press 1959) indicates that Mays thought the Supreme Court would strike down the laws. The book does not contain excerpts from the years in which this case was briefed and argued, but the Historical Society of Virginia library does have Mays's voluminous diary from those years. The case was argued on November 8, 1961 and reargued on October 9, 1962, due to the resignation of two justices (Charles E. Whittaker and Felix Frankfurter) and their replacement (after a Senate confirmation process) by Byron White and Arthur Goldberg. Both resigned justices were in the majority in Harrison v. NAACP; both new justices were in the majority in this decision.
Ruling
The opinion was issued on January 14, 1963.
Majority
Associate Justice  William J. Brennan, Jr. wrote the decision for the majority, and was joined by Chief Justice Earl Warren and Associate Justices Hugo Black and Arthur Goldberg.  Associate Justice William O. Douglas concurred in the decision, but wrote an opinion expressing further views on the subject.
For Brennan, the first issue before the court was a procedural one.  In Harrison v. NAACP, the Supreme Court had ordered the district court to remand the case back to the state courts for disposition. However, the district court was to still maintain jurisdiction over the issue.  The question before the Supreme Court was whether the NAACP could appeal the Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals' ruling directly to the U.S. Supreme Court, or was the NAACP required to go through the federal district court again?  Brennan held that although the federal district court had reserved jurisdiction, this did not impinge on the Supreme Court's authority to review a supreme state court's decision.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 427-428.
Having asserted the Supreme Court's jurisdiction over the matter, Brennan now turned to the constitutional issues.  The Commonwealth of Virginia argued that it was not regulating the free speech of individual lawyers and citizens, but rather that of a corporation (the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People), and that the U.S. Constitution did not protect the free speech rights of corporations as strongly as it did that of people.  Brennan disagreed: Corporations, he said, not only have rights equal to that of individuals, but a corporation may also assert free speech and free assembly rights on behalf of its members.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 428. The nature of these free speech rights in particular, Brennan said, were not limited to "abstract discussion", but included lawful advocacy against government intrusion on this and other rights.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 429. Litigation, too, he said, was protected.  Litigation was not merely a mechanism for resolving differences between two private parties but a constitutionally protected form of political expression.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 429-430. Furthermore, litigation is constitutionally protected because it is one of the few lawful means by which equal protection of the laws can be enforced. The state of Virginia had argued that organizational activity (collecting membership dues, hiring attorneys, advocating lawsuits, etc.) of the kind the NAACP engaged in was not literally a speech act, a petition for redress of grievances, or assembly of the kind mentioned in the First Amendment.  But Brennan and the majority disagreed, concluding that Court precedent clearly establishes that this kind of lawful activity is protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 430-431.
Relying on the authoritative construction of the acts by the Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals, Brennan noted that merely telling another individual that their rights have been violated and referring that person to an attorney or group of attorneys became a crime under the five statutes.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 434. This chilled the lawyers' and individual's First Amendment rights, and made the individual's ability to enforce its Fourteenth Amendment rights difficult, both of which were unconstitutional:NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 437. "There thus inheres in the statute the gravest danger of smothering all discussion looking to the eventual institution of litigation on behalf of the rights of members of an unpopular minority."
The Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals had asserted that government had an interest in ensuring high professional standards in the legal community, and that it was not the state's intent to restrict freedom of expression. Brennan said this was no defense, for only the most compelling of governmental interests justifies an imposition on freedom of speech—and Court precedent had long established that a state's interest in prohibiting professional misconduct did not constitute a compelling interest.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 438-439. Virginia does have a governmental interest in regulating the practice of law, Brennan said, because litigation can be malicious: It can abuse the legal system for personal gain, it can be used to oppress others, and lay people can urge the use of the legal system for their own personal financial gain.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 440-441.  But "the exercise ... of First Amendment rights to enforce constitutional rights through litigation, as a matter of law, cannot be deemed malicious."NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 440. Yet First Amendment litigation is exactly the sort of activity the Virginia laws sought to bar.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 442-444. Furthermore, Virginia could not show at trial any substantive evil flowing from the NAACP's activities.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 444.
The judgment of the Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals was reversed.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 445.
Douglas' concurrence
Associate Justice Douglas concurred in the Court's ruling.  He addressed the dissent by pointing out that not only the laws' legislative history, but both the district court and the Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals clearly found that the legislature passed them to discriminate against the NAACP and to circumvent the U.S. Supreme Court's rulings.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 445-446. "[T]hey make clear the purpose of the present law — ... to evade our prior decisions... The fact that the contrivance used is subtle and indirect is not material to the question."NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 446.
White's concurrence and dissent 
Associate Justice Byron White concurred in the Court's judgment, but dissented from its reasoning.
White thought that the five Virginia legal business laws unconstitutionally infringed on freedom of speech and the constitutionally protected lawful exercise of the court system to ensure the full exercise of those rights.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 447. A more narrowly drawn statute, White felt, may have passed constitutional scrutiny, but the majority's decision appeared unable to admit such an outcome.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 447-448. White would not have discussed the maliciousness of the NAACP's activities, as that issue was not properly before the Court.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 448.
Harlan's dissent
Associate Justice John Marshall Harlan II, who had written the majority opinion in Harrison v. NAACP, now wrote the dissent, joined only by Associate Justices Tom C. Clark and Potter Stewart.
Harlan argued that the record before the Court clearly showed that the lawyers working for the NAACP were members of the organization's legal staff, that NAACP policy and officers controlled the lawyers' actions, and that the NAACP did not merely represent clients who came to it but instead actively sought out very specific types of clients to advance its policy agenda. Thus the dissenters thought that the "normal" attorney-client relationship was often not present in the NAACP's relationships with its legal clients.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 448-451.
The dissenters thought the NAACP had violated not only the five new legal business laws, but also similar laws adopted more than 20 years earlier.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 451. Harlan noted that the Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals construed the five new legal business laws as not prohibiting the constitutional exercise of freedom of speech and freedom of assembly, and thought that should be determinative.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 451-452. The dissenters denied that litigation enjoyed strong constitutional protection, because it was only "associated" with freedom of expression, and the Virginia statutes only incidentally infringed on this speech.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 453-454. Furthermore, Harlan considered litigation conduct, which does not enjoy the same strong constitutional protection as speech.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 454. Harlan also disagreed with the majority's characterization of the NAACP's activities as free from financial gain, calling it not a typical (and protected) attorney-client relationship because the NAACP and its clients lacked enough common interests to avoid maliciousness.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 456-463. The dissenters argued that the Court had never allowed before allowed constitutional lawsuits avoid the rules of evidence, regulation of the law, legal ethics, or other state interests.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 463-465.
Harlan chided the majority for labeling the Virginia statutes vague and overbroad, arguing that neither the trial record nor the state courts' construction of the statutes had found the laws vague.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 465-467.  Since Harlan would have upheld the statutes despite the First Amendment challenges, he thought the Fourteenth Amendment guarantees of due process of law and equal protection of the law not infringed.NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. at 469-470.
Consequences
The next year, the Supreme Court heard and decided Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen v. Virginia ex rel. Virginia State Bar. Virginia's attempt to use its professional responsibility regulations to curtail union practices was again curtailed in another opinion authored by Justice Black, over the dissents of Justices Clark and Harlan. Justice Stewart did not participate in the Trainmen decision.
The NAACP v. Button decision, which approved the NAACP's "test case" strategy, also led to the growth of public interest law firms with other goals, such as less restrictive housing of the mentally ill, and even contesting the No Child Left Behind Act. However, those later class action cases also raised possible ethical problems of lawyers placing ideological motivations above actual client interests. The American Bar Association later adopted Model Rule of Professional Conduct 6.1 (applicable to lawyers working without charging clients) to distinguish those solicitations from others that violate legal ethics guidelines, although Justice Thurgood Marshall criticized that approach as benefiting primarily white establishment attorneys who could afford to work without pay, rather than increasing diversity within the bar, as NAACP practices had. Thus, in  Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Assn.,436 U.S. 447 (1978),. the Supreme Court distinguished inappropriate for-profit client solicitations from the protected political speech in Button and the ACLU attorney in In re Primus, whom it found South Carolina improperly prosecuted for offering legal services for free to a woman who was involuntarily sterilized.Nicole M. Brown, Note: NAACP v. Button:The Troubling Intersection of the Civil Rights Movement and Public Interest Law, 24 Georgetown J. Legal Ethics 479, 487-491 (2011).
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Virginia law
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1963 in Virginia
Category:NAACP
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware Co." ==> """
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People v. Claiborne Hardware Co., 458 U.S. 886 (1982),.  was a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court ruling 8–0 (Marshall did not participate in the decision) that although states have broad power to regulate economic activities, they cannot prohibit peaceful advocacy of a politically motivated boycott.
 Facts 
thumb|left|The Claiborne County courthouse at which the march took place.
In March 1966, Black citizens of Port Gibson, Mississippi, and other areas of Claiborne County presented white elected officials with a list of particularized demands for racial equality and racial integration. After not receiving a satisfactory response, a local National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) meeting at the First Baptist Church had several hundred Black residents vote to place a boycott on white merchants in the area.The Supreme Court, race, and civil rights, By Abraham L. Davis, Barbara Luck Graham, p. 350
In February 1967, Port Gibson employed its first Black police officer, and the boycott was lifted. In April 1968, in the unrest following the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr., two Port Gibson police officers shot and killed a young Black man, Roosevelt Jackson. On April 19, 1968, the field secretary of the NAACP for Mississippi, Charles Evers, led a march to the Claiborne County courthouse and demanded for the entire Port Jefferson police force to be discharged. When the demand was not met, the boycott on the merchants was reimposed. On April 21, Evers made a speech in which he said, "If we catch any of you going into these racist stores, we're going to break your damn neck." During the boycott, individuals known as "Black Hats" or "Deacons" stood outside stores to identify Black people who broke the boycott. The names of those who were identified were published in a Black newspaper, and the names were read aloud at NAACP meetings. In at least 10 instances, individuals who violated the boycott experienced instances of violence, including shots fired into their homes, bricks thrown through their windshields, and tires on their cars slashed.458 U.S. at 904–906. Five of the incidents occurred in 1966 and were not correlated to Evers' speech, and the other 5 were undated and so were discarded from the court case. That resulted in the court finding no grounds for incitation of violence and noting, "For similar reasons, the judgment against Evers cannot be separately justified, nor can liability be imposed upon him on the basis of speeches that he made, because those speeches did not incite violence or specifically authorize the use of violence."
On October 31, 1969, 17 of the merchants sued in the Chancery Court of Hinds County, 146 individuals, the NAACP, and Mississippi Action for Progress (MAP) in state court to recover losses caused by the boycott and to enjoin future boycott activity.
 Procedural history 
A trial began in 1973 and, the chancellor found in 1976 that the Black defendants were jointly and severally liable to the plaintiffs based on three separate theories: for a tort of malicious interference with the plaintiff's business, for a violation of a Mississippi statute banning secondary boycotts on the theory that the defendants' primary dispute was with the governing authorities of Port Gibson and Claiborne County and not the white merchants at whom the boycott was directed, and for a violation of Mississippi's antitrust statute on the grounds that the boycott had diverted Black patronage from the white merchants to Black merchants and to other merchants outside Claiborne County and so had unreasonably limited competition between Black and white merchants that had traditionally existed.458 U.S. at 891–892. The court rejected the defendants' defense that their actions were protected by the First Amendment.458 U.S. at 892.
The court held that 130 of the defendants were liable for damages to 12 merchants over an 11 year period (1966–1976) in an amount of $1,250,699 plus interest and put into place a permanent injunction enjoining the defendants from stationing "store watchers" at the merchants' business premises, from "persuading" any person to withhold his patronage from the merchants, from "using demeaning and obscene language to or about any person" because that person continued to patronize the merchants, from "picketing or patroling" the premises of any of the merchants, and from using violence against any person or inflicting damage to any real or personal property.458 U.S. at 893.
 Mississippi Supreme Court 
In December 1980, the Mississippi Supreme Court upheld the lower court's decision ruling that the boycott was unlawful.458 U.S. at 894. Although the court held that the secondary boycott statute was inapplicable because it had not been enacted until "the boycott had been in operation for upward of two years," and it declined to rely on the Mississippi antitrust statute by noting that the "United States Supreme Court has seen fit to hold boycotts to achieve political ends are not a violation of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1 (1970), after which our statute is patterned," the court upheld the imposition of liability on the basis of the chancellor's common law tort theory.
 Reversal by Supreme Court 
On July 3, 1982, in a decision by Justice Stevens, the US Supreme Court reversed the Mississippi Supreme Court's decision and held that the nonviolent elements of the petitioners' activities were protected by the First Amendment and that the petitioners were not liable in damages for the consequences of their nonviolent protected activity.458 U.S. at 934. The decision means that "boycotts and related activities to bring about political, social and economic change are political speech, occupying the highest rung of the hierarchy of First Amendment values."
Justice Rehnquist concurred in the judgment only.
Justice Marshall did not take part in consideration or decision of the case.
The decision of the Supreme Court was announced the same day by Thomas I. Atkins to the 3,000 delegates who had gathered for the NAACP's 73rd national convention in Boston. A reporter for The New York Times described the outburst of emotion that the announcement created: 
With that, members joyfully and tearfully transformed their meeting for a time into a cross between an emotional church service and a rowdy political convention. As delegates sang, 'We shall not be moved,' Mississippi members paraded through the aisles and then to the stage, holding high a signpost bearing the name of their state. Then, with a flourish, the organist played 'Amazing Grace' and the auditorium grew silent.
'When you have done your best, there is a God who will do the rest,' said Benjamin L. Hooks, the executive director of the association, the nation's oldest and largest civil rights organization.
 Subsequent history 
The case was cited by the dissent in Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project (2010) in which Justice Stevens, the only remaining member of the Court from Claiborne Hardware, joined the majority.. The case has also been cited as prima facie evidence of the unconstitutionality of anti-BDS laws by their opponents.
 References 
External links
 N.A.A.C.P. delegates celebrate boycott decision, July 3, 1982. The New York Times
Category:NAACP
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1982 in United States case law
"""

From "Nance v. Ward" ==> """
Nance v. Ward, 597 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to death row inmates' as-applied challenges to methods of execution.
 Background 
In December 1993, Michael Nance robbed a bank and committed murder during a carjacking. He was convicted and sentenced to death soon thereafter. In January 2020, Nance filed an as-applied challenge to Georgia's execution protocol under , asserting its use of lethal injection would subject him to a level of pain that is unconstitutional under the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The district court dismissed Nance's claim on the basis that it was meritless and was untimely.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit found that Nance's request for a firing squad, which is not authorized by Georgia law, constituted an attack on his death sentence and thus had to be filed in the context of a writ of habeas corpus. Then, the court found the request was "second or successive," and vacated and remanded for the district court to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. Judge Beverly B. Martin dissented. The court denied rehearing en banc over the dissent of Judge Charles R. Wilson, who was joined by two other judges. Nance filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on January 14, 2022. Oral arguments were held on April 25, 2022.
 Ruling 
On June 23, 2022, the Supreme Court reversed the Eleventh Circuit in a 5–4 vote. Justice Elena Kagan wrote the majority, and Justice Amy Coney Barrett wrote the dissent.
The court ruled that a claim for an alternative methods of execution that is not authorized by the state can still be addressed under  and does not need to be filed in the context of a writ of habeas corpus. This extends the reach of a claim under , to include alternative methods of execution not authorized by the state, as well as, those authorized by the state.
 Opinion of the Court 
In her writing for the majority, Justice Kagan stated that it is through "comparative exercise" that the state does not "cruelly superadd(s)" pain onto the inmate, in violation of their Eighth Amendment rights. That the inmate has an option to choose a method of death that is not practiced by the state of imprisonment but also other states, this reduces the "burden" of the inmate. She adds that due to the "vagaries of state law”, if prisoners of different state have to file different types of claims (e.g. an inmate filing a §1983 claim in Alabama for a firing squad as their preferred choice of death and an inmate filing a habeas claim in Georgia for the same method of death), this "non-conformity" would be "strange". She wrote that the inmate claim for a differing death method is not dispute their death sentence and does not prevent or burden the state from issuing the death penalty to the inmate, the state can simply change its laws on death penalty as they have done before.
 Dissent 
In her dissent, Justice Barrett wrote that the claim by the prisoner would prevent the state from executing the prisoner as the state does not practice such a method of execution under their laws, therefore the claim made should be a habeas claim and not a claim under . She rebuts the majority claim by arguing that the non-conformity is an "unremarkable consequence of federalism" and enjoinment of the death sentence is to enjoin enforcement of it, therefore a habeas claim should be filed.
 Reactions 
Matthew Hellman, a partner of the law firm that represented the inmate, released a statement saying that the ruling provides the inmate "a pathway to seek a humane and lawful execution".
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
"""

From "Napue v. Illinois" ==> """
Napue v. Illinois, 360 U.S. 264 (1959), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the knowing use of false testimony by a prosecutor in a criminal case violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, even if the testimony affects only the credibility of the witness and does not directly relate to the innocence or guilt of the defendant.
Background
 Prior case law 
The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides:
The Supreme Court of the United States has repeatedly addressed whether the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment is violated when prosecutors knowingly use false testimony in a criminal trial. In 1935, the Supreme Court briefly wrote in Mooney v. Holohan. that prosecutors violate the Due Process Clause if they knowingly present perjured testimony. The Court expanded on its decision in 1957 in the case Alcorta v. Texas, in which it held that a prosecutor's neglect to correct false testimony is equivalent to knowingly presenting perjured testimony. However, in Alcorta, the Court refrained from setting a specific standard regarding when false testimony becomes material enough to warrant reversal of a conviction.
 Proceedings in state court 
Henry Napue was tried in an Illinois state court on charges of murder. At his trial, the prosecution's primary witness, George Hamer, who was serving a 199-year sentence for the same murder, testified that the prosecution had not offered any reduction of sentence or other reward for his testimony.The following colloquy took place on direct examination: "Q. Did anybody give you a reward or promise you a reward for testifying? "A. There ain't nobody promised me anything." After cross-examination, on redirect, the testimony was reinforced:  "Q. Have I [the Assistant State's Attorney] promised you that I would recommend any reduction of sentence to anybody? "A. You did not."  . The prosecutor did not dispute or otherwise correct Hamer's testimony. Based primarily on Hamer's testimony, Napue was convicted and sentenced to 199 years in prison.. 
After Napue's conviction, the Assistant State's Attorney who prosecuted the murder filed a petition to reduce Hamer's sentence. In the petition, the Assistant State's Attorney wrote that he had "promised" to Hamer that "a recommendation for a reduction of his [Hamer's] sentence would be made and, if possible, effectuated"Napue, 360 U.S. at 267. if he agreed to cooperate by testifying against Napue and several other defendants. The petition referred to the agreement to seek a lower sentence for Hamer as a "compact entered into between the duly authorized representatives of the State of Illinois and George Hamer", and noted that Hamer testified only after being given "definite assurance" of a recommendation for a lower sentence.Napue, 360 U.S. at 267–268.
Napue subsequently filed a post-conviction petition asking for reversal of his conviction, arguing that Hamer's testimony that he was not promised a lower sentence was false, and that Assistant State's Attorney's knowing failure to correct Hamer's statement rendered Napue's conviction unconstitutional. The trial court held a hearing at which the Assistant State's Attorney testified that he had only promised to help Hamer if Hamer's assertion that he was just a reluctant participant in the murder was true. The Assistant State's Attorney went on to testify that there was no promise to reduce Hamer's sentence if Hamer testified, and that his petition to lower Hamer's sentence used language that "[he] should not have used". On the basis of the Assistant State's Attorney's testimony, the trial court denied the petition to overturn Napue's conviction.
Napue appealed to the Supreme Court of Illinois, which affirmed the denial of Napue's petition with two justices dissenting. The Supreme Court of Illinois disagreed with the trial court and found that the Assistant State's Attorney had promised Hamer a recommendation for sentence reduction, and that the Assistant State's Attorney knew that Hamer was lying by testifying to the contrary. However, it held that because a public defender had testified that he would try to reduce Hamer's sentence, the jury was aware that Hamer would be trying to reduce his sentence, and that accordingly, Hamer was not entitled to relief.
Supreme Court
right|175px|thumb|Chief Justice Warren delivered the opinion of the Court
Napue asked the Supreme Court to review the case, which granted certiorari.Napue v. Illinois, cert. granted, 358 U.S. 919 (1958). Chief Justice Earl Warren delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court. The Court held that because the credibility of a witness can often be critical in the jury's verdict a prosecutor's knowing failure to correct false testimony violates the Fourteenth Amendment even when the testimony presented affects only the credibility of the witness and does not directly relate to the innocence or guilt of the defendant. The Court further held that the false testimony must be corrected by the prosecution whether the prosecutor actively sought false testimony or simply allows it to occur. The Court reiterated that prosecutors have a duty to seek to correct false testimony when it occurs in order for a trial to be fair, and held that any false testimony allowed by the prosecutor that may affect the outcome of trial creates a violation of due process rights protected by the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Applying those standards to Napue's case, the Court held that because the prosecution knowingly failed to correct false testimony made by its witness that "may have had an effect on the outcome of the trial",Napue, 360 U.S. at 272. Napue's due process rights had been violated. The Court accordingly reversed Napue's conviction.
Subsequent developments
After Napue, in 1963, the Supreme Court decided Brady v. Maryland, a landmark case in which the Court held that Due Process Clause requires prosecutors to disclose all exculpatory evidence to the defendant. In 1972, the Court decided in Giglio v. United States that it is a due process violation if a prosecutor fails to correct perjured testimony if the prosecutor's office was aware of the lie, even if the individual prosecutor in the courtroom was not. In Giglio, the Court also decided the threshold for materiality for Napue claims, holding: "A new trial is required if the false testimony could [...] in any reasonable likelihood have affected the judgment of the jury". (internal quotation marks omitted).
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1959 in United States case law
"""

From "Nardone v. United States" ==> """
Nardone v. United States, 308 U.S. 338 (1939), was a U.S. Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that evidence obtained via warrantless wiretaps, in violation of the Communications Act of 1934, was inadmissible in federal court. The Court ruled that use of evidence directly obtained from wiretapping, such as the conversations themselves, and indirectly, such as evidence obtained through knowledge gained from wiretapped conversations, was inadmissible in trial court.
 References 
Category: Evidence case law
Category: Surveillance
Category: Warrants
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category: Telephone tapping
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "NASA v. Nelson" ==> """
NASA v. Nelson, 562 U.S. 134 (2011), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States holding that NASA's background checks of contract employees did not violate any constitutional privacy right.
Background
In 2004, President George W. Bush, on the recommendation of the 9/11 Commission, issued a directive ordering new, uniform identification standards for federal employees, including contract employees. Previously, federal contract employees were not generally required to undergo background investigation, except as required by specific contracts. Pursuant to this directive, the Department of Commerce mandated that contract employees with long-term access to federal facilities must complete a background check and set an October 2007 deadline for completion of this effort. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), a NASA facility that is operated by the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) under government contract and hence is staffed entirely by contract employees, was subject to this requirement. In January 2007, NASA modified its contract with Caltech to include a new background-check requirement. All employees of JPL, including those deemed in low-risk positions, were informed that they must complete OPM form SF-85, which included an open-ended authorization to release effectively all personal information, or else they would be voluntarily terminated.
In August 2007, 28 JPL scientists and engineers including lead plaintiff Robert "Half" Nelson, a senior research scientist at JPL, sued NASA, Caltech, and the Department of Commerce in the District Court for the Central District of California, alleging that the background-check requirement violated a constitutional right to informational privacy. The district court denied a motion for a preliminary injunction, but the Ninth Circuit reversed the district court's order. The circuit court held that portions of the background-check forms were likely unconstitutional, particularly portions requiring disclosure of drug treatment or counseling (which the court questioned whether the government had a legitimate interest in requiring), as well as open-ended questions soliciting "any adverse information" concerning financial integrity, mental stability, and "other matters" (which the court doubted were narrowly tailored to meet legitimate interests). The Ninth Circuit later denied rehearing en banc. The government appealed, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Opinion of the Court
The issue before the Supreme Court was whether the background checks required of the JPL employees violated a right to informational privacy. In two previous cases, Whalen v. Roe and Nixon v. General Services Administration, the Supreme Court hinted that such a right might exist, but it had never settled the issue definitively. In an 8–0 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that the NASA background checks did not violate any such constitutional privacy right that might exist. The majority of the Supreme Court decided to leave open the question of whether any such constitutional right exists. Taking an approach similar to the Court in Whalen, they assumed, without deciding, that such a right does exist, and then ruled that the background checks do not violate such a right. In particular, they found that the government has a legitimate and long-standing interest in conducting reasonable employment background checks and said that courts should "keep those interests in mind when asked to go line-by-line through the Government’s employment forms and to scrutinize the choice and wording of the questions they contain". In addition, the Court found that the government's interests do not hinge on the distinction between federal civil-service employees and federal contract employees; the contract employees at JPL perform critical work, and the government has a strong interest in carrying out background checks on them.
Justice Scalia, in a concurring opinion joined by Justice Thomas, agreed that the background checks did not violate any constitutional rights, but argued that the Court should have settled the constitutional privacy question—in the negative. Scalia accused the respondents of asking the Court "to invent a constitutional right out of whole cloth" and dismissed their position as "farcical". Scalia criticized the Court's decision to evade the constitutional question, writing: "Thirty-three years have passed since the Court first suggested that the right may, or may not, exist. It is past time for the Court to abandon this Alfred Hitchcock line of our jurisprudence."
In addition to joining Scalia, Thomas also filed his own, very short (single-paragraph) concurrence, objecting to the idea of a constitutional right to informational privacy.
It was later revealed that Alito, who wrote the opinion of the Court, had cited a false statistic to justify the background checks. Alito cited a statistics by the National Association of Professional Background Screeners saying 88 percent of private companies conduct background checks. An investigation by ProPublica found that this statistic was made up.
See also
Josette Bellan, a plaintiff on the case
FIPS 201
Privacy laws of the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 562
References
External links
SCOTUSblog: National Aeronautics and Space Administration v. Nelson
The Fight against Homeland Security Presidential Directive-12 (the respondents' publicity site)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:NASA
"""

From "Nashville, Chattanooga & St. Louis Railway Co. v. United States" ==> """
Nashville, Chattanooga & St. Louis Railway Co. v. United States, 113 U.S. 261 (1885), regarded a suit brought by the United States against a railroad company, Nashville, Chattanooga and St. Louis Railway, to recover monies paid for delivery of United States mail in Tennessee from March 31 to June 8, 1861..
Justice Gray delivered the opinion of the court, which stated:
The judgment was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Louisville and Nashville Railroad
Category:Railway litigation in 1885
"""

From "Nasrallah v. Barr" ==> """
Nasrallah v. Barr, 590 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled on the question of what appeals courts can review when determining whether a noncitizen who has committed a crime in the United States can be deported.. It reversed the judgment of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit.
 References 
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "National Archives and Records Administration v. Favish" ==> """
National Archives and Records Administration v. Favish et al., 541 U.S. 157 (2004) is a United States Supreme Court ruling about the Freedom of Information Act concerning the release of photos surrounding the death of Vince Foster, then Deputy White House Counsel. The court ruled unanimously that a family has the right to invoke a deceased individual's right to privacy and the unwarranted invasion of privacy exception in the Act must have evidence of improper conduct to overturn the exception.
 References 
 See also 
 United States Department of Justice v. Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press
 McCambridge v. Little Rock, 298 Ark. 219, 231–232, 766 S. W. 2d 909, 915 (1989)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:Freedom of information in the United States
"""

From "National Ass'n of Home Builders v. Defenders of Wildlife" ==> """
National Assn. of Home Builders v. Defenders of Wildlife, 551 U.S. 644 (2007), was a United States Supreme Court case about federal jurisdiction over anti-pollution statutes..  Justice Samuel Alito wrote the opinion of the Court, holding that the Endangered Species Act did not require the Environmental Protection Agency to apply additional criteria when evaluating a transfer of pollution control jurisdiction under the Clean Water Act.  Justices John Paul Stevens and Stephen Breyer wrote dissenting opinions.
Facts
The Clean Water Act instructs the Environmental Protection Agency to turn over authority under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System to a state if that state's proposal meets nine listed criteria.  Arizona issued such a proposal.  The EPA regional office replied with the concern that the transfer might violate the Endangered Species Act, which prohibits agencies from taking actions that might jeopardize endangered species.  The EPA consulted the Fish and Wildlife Service, which advised that the Endangered Species Act was inapplicable because the EPA had no authority to consider additional factors beyond the nine Clean Water Act criteria. On the advice of the Fish and Wildlife Service, the EPA approved the transfer of authority to Arizona.
Procedural history
Defenders of Wildlife, a non-profit organization concerned with endangered species, challenged the transfer, arguing that the Endangered Species Act imposed an independent requirement on the EPA's decision to approve the transfer.  The EPA argued the Endangered Species Act was not an independent source of authority, but imposes requirements only on the discretionary decisions of federal agencies.  Since its decision was non-discretionary under the Clean Water Act, the agency argued, the Endangered Species Act did not apply.  (The National Association of Home Builders moved to intervene in the case which was granted, and ultimately found their name in the case citation.)
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit found in favor of the Defenders of Wildlife and invalidated the transfer, finding that the Fish and Wildlife Service opinion was flawed and that the EPA's reliance on it "arbitrary and capricious" and inconsistent with previous transfers of permitting authority, in which the impact on endangered species was considered.
Decision
Issues
 Can a court require that state-run Clean Water Act pollution permitting programs include protections for endangered species?
 Does the Endangered Species Act constitute an independent source of authority for federal agencies?
 Is the EPA's approval of a state permitting program the legally relevant cause of impacts to endangered species resulting from future private land use activities?
 Was the Court of Appeals correct that the EPA's decision to transfer pollution-permitting authority to Arizona under the Clean Water Act was arbitrary and capricious because it was based on inconsistent interpretations of the Endangered Species Act? If so, should the Court of Appeals have sent the case back to the EPA for further proceedings without ruling on the interpretation of the Endangered Species Act?
Opinion of the Court
The opinion of the Court, written by Justice Alito, held that the EPA's decision was not arbitrary and capricious, even if internally inconsistent.  "The federal courts ordinarily are empowered to review only an agency’s final action," Alito wrote, "and the fact that a preliminary determination by a local agency representative is later overruled at a higher level within the agency does not render the decisionmaking process arbitrary and capricious."  The Court also agreed that because the decision was not discretionary, the Endangered Species Act did not apply.
Stevens's dissent
Justice Stevens dissented, writing that while the Endangered Species Act and the Clean Water Act conflicted, precedent under Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill. and others require that the Endangered Species Act's requirements be given precedence over other aims of federal agencies.
Breyer's dissent
Justice Breyer joined in Stevens's dissent, but differed in reserving judgment "as to whether §7(a)(2) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 ... really covers every possible agency action even of totally unrelated agencies...."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 551
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:2007 in the environment
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "NAACP v. Alabama" ==> """
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People v. Alabama, 357 U.S. 449 (1958), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court.  Alabama sought to prevent the NAACP from conducting further business in the state. After the circuit court issued a restraining order, the state issued a subpoena for various records, including the NAACP's membership lists.  The Supreme Court ruled that Alabama's demand for the lists had violated the right of due process guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Facts
In 1956, the Attorney General of Alabama, John Patterson, brought a suit to the State Circuit Court of Montgomery, Alabama, challenging the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) for violation of a state statute requiring foreign corporations to qualify before doing business in the state. The NAACP, a nonprofit membership corporation based in New York, had not complied with the statute, as it believed it was exempt. The state suit sought both to prevent the Association from conducting further business within the state and, indeed, to remove it from the state.
Referring to the Association's involvement with the Montgomery bus boycott in 1955 and its role in funding and providing legal assistance to black students' seeking admission to the state university, the suit charged that the Association was "...causing irreparable injury to the property and civil rights of the residents and citizens of the State of Alabama for which criminal prosecution and civil actions at law afford no adequate relief...." On the day this suit was filed, the circuit court agreed to issue an ex parte order restraining the Association from conducting business in the state or taking steps to qualify it to do so.
The Association, represented throughout by Robert L. Carter of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, responded by moving to dissolve the order on the grounds that its activities within the state did not require its qualification under the statute and that the state's suit was intended to violate its rights to freedom of speech and of assembly as guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States. Before a hearing date was set, the state issued a subpoena for much of the Association's records, including bank statements and leases, but most notably the names and addresses of the "agents" or "members" of the Association in Alabama.
In its response to the lawsuit, the Association admitted that it was in breach of the statute and offered to obtain qualification to continue business if that part of the ex parte order was lifted.  Because the Association did not comply with the order to produce its records, that motion was denied and the Association was held in contempt and fined $10,000. The contempt order allowed for the reduction or remission of the fine if the production order was complied with within five days, after which the fine would be raised to $100,000.
Contending that the State could not constitutionally force disclosure of the records, the Association moved to dismiss the contempt judgment once more. According to Alabama case law, however, a petitioner could not seek a hearing or to dissolve an order until it purged itself of contempt.
thumb|Lead attorney on NAACP v. Alabama, Judge Robert L. Carter (left), with the dean of Georgetown University Law Center, William TreanorThe United States Supreme Court reversed the first contempt judgment. The Alabama Supreme Court then claimed the U.S. Supreme Court had relied on a "mistaken premise" and reinstated the contempt judgment, which the U.S. Supreme Court reversed again. The NAACP moved to try the case on the merits; this motion was denied and again appealed up to the U.S. Supreme Court, which remanded the case to Alabama, and ordered the Federal district court to try the case on the merits if the Alabama court system continued to refuse to do so.
The Alabama state circuit court finally heard the case on the merits, and decided the NAACP had violated Alabama law and ordered it to stop doing business in the state; the Alabama appeals courts upheld this judgment, refusing to hear the NAACP's appeals on Constitutional grounds.  Finally, the fourth time the case was heard by the U.S. Supreme Court, it granted certiorari and decided the case, itself, on the merits rather than remand the case to the balking Alabama court system, which had taken five years to get this far.
Judgment
In an opinion delivered by Justice John Marshall Harlan II, the Supreme Court decided in favor of the petitioners, holding that "Immunity from state scrutiny of petitioner's membership lists is here so related to the right of petitioner's members to pursue their lawful private interests privately and to associate freely with others in doing so as to come within the protection of the Fourteenth Amendment" and, further, that freedom to associate with organizations dedicated to the "advancement of beliefs and ideas" is an inseparable part of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The action of the state's obtaining the names of the Association's membership would likely interfere with the free association of its members, so the state's interest in obtaining the records was superseded by the constitutional rights of the petitioners.. Harlan said the following.
See also
 Freedom of association
Bates v. City of Little Rock (1960)
Talley v. California (1960)
Roberts v. United States Jaycees (1984)
Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston (1995)
Boy Scouts of America v. Dale (2000)
 Bruce Bennett, the Arkansas Attorney General  sought in 1958 to impose limitations on the NAACP comparable to what had been done in Alabama.
 List of landmark African-American legislation
References
External links
NAACP Banned in Alabama ~ Civil Rights Movement Archive
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:1958 in United States case law
Category:United States freedom of association case law
v. Alabama
Category:1958 in Alabama
Category:United States due process case law
Category:African-American history of Alabama
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "National Association of Manufacturers v. Department of Defense" ==> """
National Association of Manufacturers v. Department of Defense, 583 U.S. ___ (2018), is a United States Supreme Court case. At issue is which court will hear cases that define the term Waters of the United States for the purpose of rule making, to the exclusion of the states. The case is the successor to North Dakota v. EPA, among others.
Facts and prior history
The United States Army Corps of Engineers and the Environmental Protection Agency engaged in rule making to define Waters of the United States for the purpose of promulgating other environmental rules.  The State of North Dakota, joined by other states, challenged the definition. The states won an injunction which was subsequently challenged in the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals.  This case will settle the matter of jurisdiction.
The Court heard oral arguments on October 11, 2017.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court issued an opinion on January 22, 2018.https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/17pdf/16-299_8nk0.pdf  Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor authored the unanimous opinion of the Court.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States environmental case law
"""

From "National Bellas Hess v. Illinois" ==> """
In National Bellas Hess v. Department of Revenue of Illinois, 386 U.S. 753 (1967), the Supreme Court ruled that a mail order reseller was not required to collect sales tax unless it had some physical contact with the state.
Background
National Bellas Hess was a mail order seller of various consumer products. Its principal place of business was in Missouri.  It owned no tangible property in Illinois and had no sales outlets, representatives, telephone listing, or solicitors in that state. It did not advertise there by radio, television, billboards, or newspapers. It mailed catalogues to customers throughout the United States, including Illinois. Orders for merchandise were mailed to appellant's Missouri plant, and goods were sent to customers by mail or common carrier. The State of Illinois attempted to force National Bellas Hess to collect a use tax from its customers.
Ruling
The Commerce Clause prohibits a State from imposing the duty of use tax collection and payment upon a seller whose only connection with customers in the State is by common carrier or by mail. The court stated that "the Court has never held that a State may impose the duty of use tax collection and payment upon a seller whose only connection with customers in the State is by common carrier or the United States mail." The opinion cited Miller Brothers Co. v. Maryland, 347 U.S. 340 (1954)
In 1992, the Supreme Court in Quill Corp. v. North Dakota (1992) issued an order overruling part of the case. The court held, "Thus, to the extent that this Court's decisions have indicated that the Clause requires a physical presence in a State, they are overruled."  That case slightly distinguished itself from Bellas Hess by ruling that physical presence was not necessary for a state to impose a duty to collect under the Due Process Clause of the US Constitution, but physical presence was still necessary for a state's use tax on a foreign vendor under the Dormant Commerce Clause of the US Constitution.
The Court stated that in determining whether a state tax falls within the confines of the Due Process Clause, the Court has said that the "simple but controlling question is whether the state has given anything for which it can ask return."
The Court stated, "In this case, the Supreme Court of North Dakota declined to follow Bellas Hess because “the tremendous social, economic, commercial, and legal innovations” of the past quarter-century have rendered its holding “obsole[te].” [cite omitted] we must either reverse the State Supreme Court  or overrule Bellas Hess. While we agree with much of the state court's reasoning, we take the former course. Quill Corp. v. N. Dakota By & Through Heitkamp, 504 U.S. 298, 301-02 (1992).
The entirety of National Bellas Hess was later overruled in South Dakota v. Wayfair, Inc. (2018).
 See also 
 Direct Marketing Ass'n v. Brohl (2015)
 References 
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:Sales taxes
Category:Taxation in Illinois
Category:Non-store retailing
"""

From "National Broadcasting Co. v. United States" ==> """
National Broadcasting Co. v. United States, 319 U.S. 190 (1943), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Federal Communications Commission had the power to issue regulations pertaining to associations between broadcasting networks and their affiliated stations, otherwise known as "chain networks.".  The case is important in the development of American administrative law.
Legal principles
The scope of authority held by an agency is determined by the agency's organic statute.  Where Congress grants an agency the power to maintain and regulate an area guided by the "public interest, convenience, or necessity," such a grant of power can include the regulation of areas not explicitly contemplated by the organic statute, as long as they are within the scope of the purpose of the original statute.
Note: The approach in this case takes a much more expansive approach than the earlier case of ICC v. Cincinnati, New Orleans and Texas Pacific Railway Co. which provided for more limited powers for administrative agencies.  Specifically, ICC held that regulative powers must be expressly granted by statute and not implied, while NBC held that the issuance of regulations, though not expressly granted, are an  acceptable way for the agency to fulfill its statutory obligations to serve the "public interest, convenience, or necessity."
Facts and procedural posture
The FCC established Chain Broadcasting Regulations in 1941, which specifically governed the licensing and content of chain broadcasting stations.  NBC sued to enjoin the enforcement of the regulations.  The United States District Court for the Southern District of New York dismissed the complaint, ruling for the government, and NBC appealed.
The Supreme Court ultimately affirmed the dismissal of the complaint, ruling that the government had the power to enact and enforce the regulations in question.
Analysis
The FCC's authority stemmed from its organic statute, the Communications Act of 1934.  The Act provided that:
It is the purpose of this Act, among other things, to maintain the control of the United States over all the channels of interstate and foreign radio transmission; and to provide for the use of such channels, but not the ownership thereof, by persons for limited periods of time, under licenses granted by Federal authority, and no such license shall be construed to create any right, beyond the terms, conditions, and periods of the license.
The Act also provided that the criterion governing the exercise of the Commission's license power is the "public interest, convenience, or necessity."
NBC argued that the FCC's power was limited to the technical aspects of radio transmission.  The Court found that it was not, but instead "we are asked to regard the Commission as a kind of traffic officer, policing the wave lengths to prevent stations from interfering with each other."
NBC argued that the Act did not explicitly allow the Commission to develop regulations for chain broadcasting.  The Court admitted this, but held that an explicit grant of power was not necessary in this context, because the field was new and dynamic, and that by granting power to the FCC, it intended "not niggardly but expansive powers."
NBC argued that the grant of power to the FCC was unconstitutionally vague, because it did not provide definite guidelines.  The Court found that the guidelines were the service of "public interest, convenience, or necessity," and that those guidelines were constitutionally sufficient.
The Court concluded that the Chain Broadcasting Regulations were simply the particularization of the Commission's conception of the "public interest" sought to be safeguarded by Congress in enacting the Communications Act.
Context
The Opinion of the Supreme Court was not unanimous and it led to a conflict with an earlier decision in Federal Communications Commission v. Sanders Brothers Radio Station..
In Sanders Brothers, the FCC interpreted Supreme Court decisions concerning broadcasting to mean that potential economic injury to an existing licensee was not grounds for refusing to license a competitor. (This FCC interpretation remained in place from 1940 to 1958.)
The opinion of the Supreme Court was delivered by Felix Frankfurter with Justices Hugo Black and Rutledge taking no part in the discussion or decision. Justice Murphy offered a dissenting Opinion by stating that the Court was effectively giving the FCC a power to regulate networks which had not been given to the FCC by Congress. Murphy stated that;
... we exceed our competence when we gratuitously bestow upon an agency power which the Congress has not granted. Since that is what the Court in substance does today, I dissent.NBC, Inc., 319 U.S. at 228 (Murphy, J., dissenting).
The decision effectively gave the FCC power to regulate the networks. As a result of this 1943 decision, NBC was forced to sell one of its networks and it was this action which then led to the creation of the American Broadcasting Company (ABC).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 319
References
External links
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:Federal Communications Commission litigation
Category:Broadcast law
Category:NBC Radio Network
Category:United States nondelegation doctrine case law
"""

From "National Cable & Telecommunications Ass'n v. Brand X Internet Services" ==> """
National Cable & Telecommunications Association v. Brand X Internet Services, 545 U.S. 967 (2005), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court held that decisions by the Federal Communications Commission  on how to regulate Internet service providers are eligible for Chevron deference.. While the case concerned routine regulatory processes at the FCC and applied to interpretations of the Communications Act of 1934 and Telecommunications Act of 1996, the ruling has become an important precedent on the matter of regulating network neutrality in the United States.
 Background 
Per the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and its predecessor the Communications Act of 1934, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) is enabled to enforce regulations against new companies, products, and services in the telecommunications field by classifying them into one of several "titles" in the statute. At issue in this case are Title I and Title II of the 1996 Act. If the Commission classifies a given service under Title I in the statute, it is considered to be an "information service" and is subjected to relatively lenient economic regulations. If that service is classified under Title II, it is considered to be a "telecommunications service" and is subjected to much stricter common carrier regulations on the content of messages and prices charged to customers.
With the advent of Internet service providers (ISPs) available to the general public in the 1990s, early services were provided via DSL by telephone companies that were subjected to traditional Title II regulations. Later cable modem service was typically provided by cable TV companies that were subjected to traditional, and less restrictive, Title I regulations. The FCC classified cable modem Internet service as an "information service" in 2002. This resulted in a confusing situation in which different types of ISPs were subjected to different levels of telecommunications regulation by the FCC.
After that classification decision, Brand X, a DSL-based ISP, requested judicial review because it had been subjected to tougher regulations than many of its competitors based on network delivery method (telephone vs. cable) rather than quality of service or customer satisfaction.  
The case was initially heard at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit under the name Brand X Internet Services v. FCC. That court ruled that the 2002 classification decision by the FCC, in which cable modem was determined to be an "information service", was in error.Brand X Internet Services. v. FCC, 345 F. 3d 1120 (9th Cir., 2003). That was because cable modem service had already been confirmed as a "telecommunications service" under the 1996 Act (and therefore eligible for stricter regulations) in the Ninth Circuit precedent AT&T Corp. v. City of Portland in 2000.AT&T Corp. v. City of Portland, 216 F. 3d 871 (9th Cir., 2000). 
The FCC believed that the Circuit Court should not have second-guessed it regulatory decision, and appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. Meanwhile, the National Cable & Telecommunications Association (NCTA), an industry trade group that favored the lesser regulations under the "information service" classification, joined the suit.
 Opinion of the court 
The case was accepted by the Supreme Court under the new title National Cable & Telecommunications Association v. Brand X Internet Services. The Supreme Court, in an unexpected act, decided to review the dispute not as a matter of precedent (as the Circuit Court did) but as a matter of judicial deference to the expertise of an administrative agency. In particular, the administrative law principle of Chevron deference dictates that when a statute passed by Congress instructs an agency like the FCC on how to regulate its field of expertise, if that statute was written in an ambiguous and open-ended fashion, this indicates that Congress intended the agency to exercise its expertise on a case-by-case basis. Subsequently, whenever an agency regulatory decision is challenged in court, judges should assume that agency personnel are experts on the topic and the best qualified to assess the issue at hand. Thus, judges should defer to the agency's expertise and not second-guess its decisions.
Brand X argued that when the agency decision is clearly in error, Chevron deference should not apply. The company argued that Internet service should be classified as a "telecommunications service" under the 1996 Act, because this would subject all ISPs to the same regulations, thus leveling the playing field, while all would be considered common carriers with robust obligations to customers and to the public.
The NCTA argued that the FCC's classification decision was correct because the 1996 Act defines "information service" as "the offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications, and includes electronic publishing", all of which could be used to describe cable modem Internet service. The NCTA was in favor of judicial deference toward the FCC's decision, arguing that the agency's regulators and not judges possessed the required expertise on the matter.
 Ruling 
In a 6–3 decision, the Supreme Court held that the Telecommunications Act of 1996 enabled the FCC to make classification decisions within certain parameters, but Congress included enough ambiguity and vagueness to support the assumption that it intended the FCC to handle such decisions on a flexible and case-by-case basis. Thus, the court concluded that Chevron deference was merited, and upheld the FCC's decision to classify DSL services and cable modem services differently. In an unusual procedural twist, this overturned the Circuit Court ruling, not out of disagreement but under the decision to approach the matter via judicial deference rather than the rule of precedent.
In an influential dissenting opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia disagreed with the FCC's characterizations of "telecommunications service" and "information service" in all of the relevant classification decisions. Scalia concluded that these decisions created an untenable situation in the ISP marketplace, with different companies being subjected to different levels of regulation, but ultimately placed the blame on Congress for its poor construction of the 1996 Act, which in turn hobbled the FCC's ability to regulate new technologies and markets.
Impact 
 FCC regulations 
The Brand X ruling is often cited in critiques of outdated telecommunications policy in the United States, as the Telecommunications Act of 1996 is unable to address new technologies that arose after its passage, and saddled the FCC with procedures based on old technologies. Due to convergence in the industry, previous network delivery methods and data protocols (e.g. Internet data and voice telephone calls) came together in new forms while the FCC was forced to regulate each new service under rules written by Congress for older technologies and network architectures. This in turn requires the FCC to formulate confusing arguments to justify its classification decisions, while courts must embark on equally confusing analyses to determine if such classifications comply with the law.
 Network neutrality 
Brand X is considered an important precedent in the debate over the regulation of network neutrality in the United States, as it established that the FCC has the authority to classify Internet service as either an "information service" or a "telecommunications service" based on network delivery methods, rather than customer satisfaction or other public interest-oriented concerns. The inflexible classification process became a crucial issue in later years when the FCC attempted to penalize non-neutral behavior by ISPs via existing regulations within the "information service" or "telecommunications service" designations. However, the lack of a statutory process allowing flexibility in those decisions, or handling objections to them, resulted in numerous and inconsistent court rulings on the matter of net neutrality regulation, including Comcast Corp. v. FCC, Verizon Communications Inc. v. FCC, and United States Telecom Association v. FCC. This has resulted in some clarification of the FCC's regulatory classification process, but an unresolved conflict over whether and how the Commission has the authority to regulate network neutrality. That conundrum remains unresolved as of 2022.
Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas has criticized the Brand X ruling's dependence on judicial deference, stating in two dissenting opinions for unrelated cases that the decision "has taken this Court to the precipice of administrative absolutism. Under its rule of deference, agencies are free to invent new (purported) interpretations of statutes and then require courts to reject their own prior interpretations." Thomas has suggested that the Supreme Court should revisit Brand X as he sees it now "to be inconsistent with the Constitution, the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), and traditional tools of statutory interpretation."
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States Internet case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:Federal Communications Commission litigation
"""

From "National Collegiate Athletic Association v. Alston" ==> """
National Collegiate Athletic Association v. Alston, 594 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning the compensation of collegiate athletes within the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). It followed from a previous case, O'Bannon v. NCAA, in which it was found that the NCAA was profiting from the namesake and likenesses of college athletes. The case dealt with the NCAA's restrictions on providing college athletes with non-cash compensation for academic-related purposes, such as computers and internships, which the NCAA maintained was to prevent the appearance that the student athletes were being paid to play or treated as professional athletes. Lower courts had ruled that these restrictions were in violation of antitrust law, which the Supreme Court affirmed in a unanimous ruling in June 2021.
Background
The National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) oversees rules related to student athletes that play in their athletics programs. These athletic programs are generally seen as revenue generation for the individual school, particularly for the popular college football and basketball programs which are widely televised and marketed. Because the school benefits from the performance of the players, the NCAA had established rules to limit the type of compensation that the school could give to student athletes as to distinguish college athletics from professional sports. This had included disallowing "non-cash education-related benefits" such as scholarships and internships so that there is no apparent "pay to play" aspects.
In 2014, a class-action lawsuit O'Bannon v. NCAA was filed in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California. The plaintiffs, numerous college athletes, asserted that the NCAA and its colleges were profiting off their names and likeness in works related to the college athletic programs such as in video games but none of the athletes were receiving any compensation for that pay, in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act. District Court judge Claudia Ann Wilken found for the plaintiffs, a decision upheld in part by the Ninth Circuit. In review of the Ninth Circuit's decision, the NCAA agreed to allow student athletes to receive full scholarships for academics. Subsequently, the NCAA had started review of its policies related to how to compensate players for names and likenesses, as well as the impact of  California's Fair Pay to Play Act passed in October 2019 and due for enforcement in 2023 which would allow students to have more control on their names and likenesses for sponsorships and endorsements beyond the NCAA's control.
Subsequent to O'Bannon, a number of additional lawsuits challenging the NCAA's restrictions on educational compensation for athletes were raised, led by Shawne Alston and Justine Hartman. The cases were combined into NCAA v. Alston at the Northern District Court of California. Judge Wilken, also overseeing this case, issued her decision in March 2019, ruling against the NCAA that their restrictions on "non-cash education-related benefits" violated antitrust law under the Sherman Act and required the NCAA to allow for certain types of academic benefits beyond the previously-established full scholarships from O'Bannon, such as for "computers, science equipment, musical instruments and other tangible items not included in the cost of attendance calculation but nonetheless related to the pursuit of academic studies". The ruling barred the NCAA from preventing athletes from receiving "post-eligibility scholarships to complete undergraduate or graduate degrees at any school; scholarships to attend vocational school; tutoring; expenses related to studying abroad that are not included in the cost of attendance calculation; and paid post-eligibility internships". Wilken's ruling also established that the conferences within the NCAA may set other allowances. The NCAA may still limit cash or cash-equivalent awards for academic purposes under the ruling. Wilken rationalized her ruling bases on the large differences in compensation that the NCAA receives from the student athletes' performance to what the students themselves receive. Wilken's ruling did not limit what individual athletic conferences may restrict in terms of compensation.
The NCAA appealed Wilken's ruling to the Ninth Circuit. The three-judge Ninth Circuit panel ruled in May 2020 to uphold the District Court's decision. The panel did agree that the NCAA had a necessary interest in "preserving amateurism and thus improving consumer choice by maintaining a distinction between college and professional sports", but their practices still violated antitrust law. Judge Milan Smith wrote "The treatment of Student-Athletes is not the result of free market competition. To the contrary, it is the result of a cartel of buyers acting in concert to artificially depress the price that sellers could otherwise receive for their services. Our antitrust laws were originally meant to prohibit exactly this sort of distortion."
Supreme Court
The upheld decision went into effect in August 2020, though the NCAA had sought an emergency request to hold the injunction prior to that. The NCAA along with the American Athletic Conference filed petitions to the Supreme Court in October 2020 to hear their appeal. Both asked the Court to review the Ninth Circuit's decision, arguing that the decision created a new definition of items that could be "related to education" which could be abused by colleges and sponsors to create effective "pay for play" programs in all but name, such as a hypothetical -a-semester "internship" with Nike that the NCAA described as "the antithesis of amateurism". The Supreme Court granted certiorari to both petitions in December 2020, consolidating the two petitions into NCAA v. Alston.
Oral arguments were heard on March 31, 2021, with observers stating that the Justices in general appeared to agree with arguments made by the students against the NCAA regulations but expressed concern about the potential effects of weakening the NCAA's objective of maintaining the appearance of amateur play within their leagues.
The Supreme Court issued its decision on June 21, 2021. The decision was unanimous, affirming the Ninth Circuit's ruling, with Justice Neil Gorsuch writing the opinion. Gorsuch wrote that the lower courts' decision is consistent with established antitrust principles, and thus the Court upheld the ruling, but did not attempt to make any judgment on the aspect related to whether student athletes should receive further pay as this was beyond the remit of the court. Gorsuch acknowledged that "some will see this as a poor substitute for fuller relief" in addressing the apparent discrepancy of compensation between student athletes and the coaches and administrators of the NCAA.
Justice Brett Kavanaugh wrote a concurring opinion, stating that antitrust laws "should not be a cover for exploitation of the student athletes." Kavanaugh's opinion also spoke to other NCAA regulations that he believed "also raise serious questions under the antitrust laws" and would be struck down if challenged under the same legal principles used by the lower courts in Alston.
Legal impact
This ruling only concerned education-related payments and did not address restrictions on direct compensation payment to athletes. However, it also opened the door for the possibility of future court cases concerning this matter.
The decision was filed at a time as several states were on the verge of passing laws to give student athletes more control over the use of their likeness, and the U.S. Congress had been mulling legislation to provide better compensation for student athletes after years of inaction by the NCAA. With the decision, passage of laws to help improve collegiate athlete compensation are expected to be accelerated if the NCAA does not take quick actions to remedy from the ruling. President Joe Biden stated that he "believes that everyone should be compensated fairly for his or her labor", while Senate Commerce Chair Maria Cantwell said the ruling gave "new urgency" to their legislative efforts. NCAA's president Mark Emmert said that the ruling affirms the association's efforts to qualify what counts as educational benefits, and that "we remain committed to working with Congress to chart a path forward, which is a point the Supreme Court expressly stated in its ruling."
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:National Collegiate Athletic Association litigation
"""

From "National Endowment for the Arts v. Finley" ==> """
National Endowment for the Arts v. Finley, 524 U.S. 569 (1998), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that the National Foundation on the Arts and Humanities Act, as amended in 1990, ((d)(1)), was facially valid, as it neither inherently interfered with First Amendment rights nor violated constitutional vagueness principles. The act in question required the Chairperson of the  National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) to ensure that "artistic excellence and artistic merit are the criteria by which [grant] applications are judged, taking into consideration general standards of decency and respect for the diverse beliefs and values of the American public". Justice O'Connor delivered the opinion of the Court.
 Background 
Congress established the National Endowment for the Arts in 1965 as an independent agency of the federal government. As of 2012, the NEA had awarded a total of more than $4 billion to support artistic excellence, creativity, and innovation for the benefit of individuals and communities.
Since its establishment, the NEA has funded thousands of individual artists and arts organizations. In 1989, two controversial works were partially or fully funded with grants from the NEA. The Institute of Contemporary Art at the University of Pennsylvania used $30,000 of a visual arts grant from the NEA to fund a retrospective of Robert Mapplethorpe’s work. The exhibit, titled "The Perfect Moment", included homoerotic photographs that some members of Congress deemed to be pornographic. Members of Congress also criticized Serrano’s work, Piss Christ, a photograph of a crucifix submerged in urine. The Southeast Center for Contemporary Arts, which also received funding from the NEA, awarded Serrano a $15,000 grant.
In response to the use of NEA grants to funding these projects, Congress created an Independent Commission of constitutional law scholars to review the NEA's grant-making process and make recommendations. Ultimately, Congress adopted the Williams/Coleman Amendment. The Amendment became §954(d)(1), which directs the NEA Chairperson to judge the artistic merit of grant applications while also “tak[ing] into consideration general standards of decency and respect for the diverse beliefs and values of the American public”.
The case ultimately known as NEA v. Finley was filed by four individual performance artists Karen Finley, John Fleck, Holly Hughes, and Tim Miller, and the National Association of Artists' Organizations (NAAO). The plaintiffs alleged that the defendants, the NEA and NEA Chairperson John E. Frohnmayer violated their constitutional rights by wrongly turning down their applications for NEA grants. They sought declaratory and injunctive relief on their constitutional and statutory funding claims, and damages on an additional Privacy Act claim. In addition, all plaintiffs sought a declaration that the so-called "decency clause" of 20 U.S.C. 954(d), was void for vagueness and violated the First Amendment on its face.
The Supreme Court heard two motions. The first was the defendants' motion for judgment on the pleadings. Defendants argued that: (1) the NEA's funding decisions are unreviewable because they are committed to agency discretion by law; (2) venue was improper as to the Privacy Act claim; and (3) plaintiffs lacked standing to challenge the facial validity of the "decency clause" because they cannot establish the necessary injury. The Court also considered plaintiffs' motion for summary judgment on their facial challenge to the "decency clause".
 Lower courts 
 District Court 
The District Court found that the decency clause debased the First Amendment by deceitfully preventing some forms of protected speech and that the clause was vague under the Fifth Amendment. The District Court rejected the NEA’s argument that “decency” and “respect” were implicit and voluntary standards in funding evaluations. Instead, the court stated that the clause represented criteria to determine eligibility for the NEA grants and that an overbroad statute would restrict protected and unprotected speech. The court held that while the government may constitutionally regulate “obscene” speech, the decency clause might repress indecent speech, a form of expression immune from substantial governmental obstruction.
The court also argued that in certain protected areas, such as public education funding, government grants “may not be used to suppress unpopular expression”. Since both academic expression and artistic expression reached the core of a democratic society’s cultural and political vitality, the court found that, similar to education funding, art funding enhanced education neutrality.
 U.S. Court of Appeals 
The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals confirmed the district court’s finding and ruled in Finley’s favor.
 Supreme Court Decision 
The Supreme Court overturned the Court of Appeals decision. The Court found that decency does not certainly interfere with the First Amendment right to free expression and it does not violate the Fifth Amendment’s void for vagueness provision. The court found that 20 U.S.C. § 954(d)(1) merely adds factors to the grant-making process. It does not state that all grants should be denied to applications involving indecent or disrespectful artworks. Although the statute does not state how much weight the Advisory Commission should give these factors, the NEA has wide discretion in considering this provision.
Also, the Court stated that Finley carried the burden of demonstrating that there is a substantial risk that the application of the decency clause will lead to the suppression of speech. However, the Court found that the provision on its face was very clear in that the decency and respect provision is only a consideration; it is not a provision that compels the Chairperson to require decency and respect in every application. Because the very nature of the subject matter is open to different interpretations, the Court determined that in the context of selected artistic subsidies it is not possible at all times for Congress to legislate with clarity and it is difficult to establish a precise criterion when granting subsidies.
 Majority opinion and dissent 
Justice O’Connor wrote the majority opinion, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices Stevens, Kennedy, Ginsburg, and Breyer. The meaning of the section 954(d) obligation to take into consideration decency and respect for diverse beliefs and values had been debated throughout the litigation. From the outset, the NEA had argued that it could discharge this obligation simply by ensuring that the membership on the review panels reflected national diversity. Both the district court and the court of appeals, however, decisively rejected this reading. Like the lower courts, Justice Souter’s dissent readily disposed of this reading as inconsistent with the text and legislative history, as well as redundant because another statutory provision already required the Chairperson to consider diversity in selecting the panels. The majority dodged the issue by noting that it need not evaluate the NEA’s interpretation because the statute was constitutional on its face even if construed more broadly.
The majority opinion is remarkably vague with regard to what exactly the statutory language entails. It seems that a panel and the Chairperson could find a particular project indecent and void of respect for diverse beliefs and values and yet still award the grant on the basis of the project’s artistic excellence. The construction would seem to be the most natural reading of the phrase “take into consideration”. As Justice O’Connor noted, “when Congress has in fact intended to affirmatively constrain the NEA’s grant-making authority, it has done so in no uncertain terms”—for example, the prohibition against awarding grants for obscene works. Neither Justice Scalia nor Justice Souter necessarily rejected the Court’s interpretation of the statute. Justice Scalia began his opinion with the comment that “’the operation was a success, but the patient died.’ What such a procedure is to medicine, the Court’s opinion in this case is to the law. It sustains the constitutionality of 20 U.S.C. 954(d)(1) by gutting it.”
From the easily supportable conclusion that “consideration” is not equivalent to per se prohibition, the Court reasoned that the factors to be taken into consideration—“decency” and “respect” for diverse beliefs and values—are not intended to “disallow any particular viewpoints”. The Court noted that the legislation was bipartisan in nature, a compromise position designed to counter proposals to abolish the NEA and seemingly influenced by the Independent Commission’s cautions regarding the use of independently preclusive criteria. Perhaps the Court simply continued the argument that decency and respect are merely two factors in the mix that deserve some consideration.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 524
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:National Endowment for the Arts
"""

From "National Equipment Rental, Ltd. v. Szukhent" ==> """
National Equipment Rental, Ltd. v. Szukhent, 375 U.S. 311 (1964), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that service of process upon a party's designated agent does not invalidate personal jurisdiction that would otherwise be established, if the agent gives prompt notice to the party..
Background
Defendants Szukhents, farmers in Michigan, entered into a contractual relationship with plaintiff National Equipment Rental, a New York-based company, for the leasing of farm equipment.  This contract, written by National Equipment Rental, included a term designating Florence Weinberg, at a New York address, as agent for service of process regarding the contract.  The Szukhents had never met Ms. Weinberg.  In suing the Szukhents in Federal court (E.D.N.Y.), National Equipment Rental served process upon Ms. Weinberg, who then notified the Szukhents of the suit via mail.375 U.S. at 313-314.  Subject-matter jurisdiction was founded upon diversity of citizenship.375 U.S. at 313 n. 2.  The Szukhents challenged personal jurisdiction on the grounds that there was no constitutional basis for personal jurisdiction.375 U.S. at 313-314.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court upheld the ability of parties to a contract to agree in advance to the jurisdiction of a particular court.375 U.S. at 316.  The Court then proceeded to consider the validity of the agency relationship between Ms. Weinberg and the Szukhents, and found that since Ms. Weinberg appropriately notified the Szukhents, the agency was valid under relevant laws, and therefore the service upon Ms. Weinberg was effective service upon the Szukhents.375 U.S. at 316-318
With effective service, the Court held that personal jurisdiction over the Szukhents had been established in the District Court, pursuant to the then-effective Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 4(d)(1).375 U.S. at 318.
Justice Black dissented, and would have found the agency relationship invalid by applying of New York state appellate court precedent, thus affirming the District Court's quashing of service.  Alternatively, if defining agency law for the purposes of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, Justice Black would not include the relationship in question in such a definition.  Finally, Justice Black questioned whether the Szukhents had received due process under the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments, which form parts of the basis for Constitutional personal jurisdiction jurisprudence.375 U.S. at 318 (Black, J., dissenting).
Justice Brennan, with whom the Chief Justice and Justice Goldberg joined, agreed with Justice Black's second contention, and would have held that 4(d)(1) requires a Federal standard for agency, and that the relationship with Ms. Weinberg would not meet such requirements.375 U.S. at  333.
See also
 Law of agency
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Warren Court
References
External links
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States civil procedure case law
"""

From "National Federation of Independent Business v. Occupational Safety and Health Administration" ==> """
National Federation of Independent Business v. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 595 U.S. ___ (2022), is a Supreme Court of the United States case before the Court on an application for a stay of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's COVID-19 vaccination or test mandate. On January 13, 2022, the Supreme Court ordered a stay of the mandate.
 Background 
In September 2021, President of the United States Joe Biden announced his administration would be promulgating a vaccination or test mandate for all private companies with 100 or more employees. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration announced its Emergency Temporary Standard (ETS) on November 5, 2021. On November 6, 2021, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit issued a nationwide stay of the ETS's implementation; it issued an opinion explaining its reasoning on November 12, 2021.https://www.ca5.uscourts.gov/opinions/pub/21/21-60845-CV0.pdf 
Challenges to OSHA regulations are randomly assigned to one of the twelve United States courts of appeals with geographic jurisdiction. The challenges to the COVID-19 ETS were all transferred to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit on November 16, 2021. The petitioners sought initial hearing en banc for consideration of the challenges. On December 15, 2021, the court denied the petition by an 8–8 vote, over the dissents of Chief Judge Jeffrey Sutton and Judge John K. Bush, joined by six additional judges.https://www.opn.ca6.uscourts.gov/opinions.pdf/21a0283p-06.pdf 
On December 17, 2021, a panel of the court dissolved the Fifth Circuit's stay of the ETS by a 2–1 vote. Judge Joan Larsen dissented.https://www.opn.ca6.uscourts.gov/opinions.pdf/21a0287p-06.pdf 
 Supreme Court 
Numerous challengers filed emergency applications at the Supreme Court of the United States in the days after the Fifth Circuit's stay was dissolved. The federal government responded to the applications on December 30, 2021. In an unusual proceeding for emergency applications, oral argument was held on January 7, 2022. The National Federation of Independent Business, representing many private companies, and Ohio, representing more than 20 states, argued for the petitioners. The Supreme Court granted a stay of the ETS in a per curiam order on January 13, 2022. The order stated that the OSHA mandate exceeded the authority that it was given by Congress; OSHA could only regulate occupational safety, and the vaccine mandate was seen as "broad public health measures." The order stated that "Permitting OSHA to regulate the hazards of daily life — simply because most Americans have jobs and face those same risks while on the clock — would significantly expand OSHA’s regulatory authority without clear congressional authorization." In a concurring statement written by Justice Neil Gorsuch and joined by Justices Samuel Alito and Clarence Thomas, Gorsuch wrote that it should be up to states and Congress to decide best how to respond to a pandemic like COVID.
A joint dissent to the order was written by Justices Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan. They stated that employees have "little control, and therefore little capacity to mitigate risk", and that the ruling "stymies the Federal Government’s ability to counter the unparalleled threat that COVID-19 poses to our Nation’s workers." The three countered Gorsuch's statement and stated that OSHA was the actor with the best understanding of workplace in light of threat like COVID, and not the court system.
See also
Jacobson v. Massachusetts (1905), Supreme Court case allowing state power to mandate a smallpox vaccination. 
COVID-19 vaccination in the United States
COVID-19 vaccination mandates in the United States
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius" ==> """
National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius, 567 U.S. 519 (2012), is a landmark United States Supreme Court decision in which the Court upheld Congress's power to enact most provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), commonly called Obamacare, and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act (HCERA), including a requirement for most Americans to pay a penalty for forgoing health insurance by 2014. The Acts represented a major set of changes to the American health care system that had been the subject of highly contentious debate, largely divided on political party lines.
The Supreme Court, in an opinion written by the Chief Justice, John Roberts, upheld by a vote of 5–4 the individual mandate to buy health insurance as a constitutional exercise of Congress's Taxing and Spending Clause (taxing power). A majority of the justices, including Roberts, agreed that the individual mandate was not a proper use of Congress's Commerce Clause or Necessary and Proper Clause powers, although they did not join in a single opinion. A majority of the justices also agreed that another challenged provision of the Act, a significant expansion of Medicaid, was not a valid exercise of Congress's spending power, as it would coerce states to either accept the expansion or risk losing existing Medicaid funding.
Background
In March 2010, President Barack Obama signed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act into law. A number of parties sued, including the National Federation of Independent Business, claiming that the sweeping reform law was unconstitutional for various reasons. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to three cases, totaling 5½ hours of oral arguments: National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius (which consolidated a part of Florida v. Dept. of Health and Human Services) on the issues of the constitutionality of the individual mandate and the severability of any unconstitutional provisions, Dept. of Health and Human Services v. Florida on the issue of whether review was barred by the Anti-Injunction Act, and Florida v. Dept. of Health and Human Services on the matter of the constitutionality of the Medicaid expansion.
District Court proceedings
The state of Florida filed a lawsuit against the United States Department of Health and Human Services, challenging the constitutionality of the law. On January 31, 2011, Judge Roger Vinson ruled that the mandatory health insurance "individual mandate"—the provision of Internal Revenue Code section 5000A imposing a "shared responsibility penalty" on nearly all Americans who fail to purchase health insurance—was outside the power of Congress. Vinson also held that the mandate could not be severed from the rest of the Affordable Care Act and struck down the entire act.
Eleventh Circuit appeal
thumb|right|Lawsuits
Virginia and Oklahoma, also highlighted, were involved in similar lawsuits.
The Department of Health and Human Services appealed to the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals. A three-judge panel issued a 2–1 ruling affirming Vinson's findings in part and reversing in part. The court affirmed the District Court's holding that the individual mandate was unconstitutional, but, contrary to the District Court's view, it held that the individual mandate could be severed, leaving the rest of the law intact.P. 15, slip op., National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius, U.S. Sup. Ct. (June 28, 2012). The government decided to not seek en banc review from the full Circuit and instead petitioned the United States Supreme Court to review the Eleventh Circuit's rulings.
Related cases
Other federal courts heard cases related to the Affordable Care Act that were not directly reviewed by the Supreme Court, but caused a divide regarding the law's constitutionality. Two federal judges appointed by President Bill Clinton upheld the individual mandate in 2010. Judge Jeffrey Sutton, a member of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals appointed by George W. Bush, was the first Republican-appointed judge to rule that the law is constitutional in June 2011, as part of a divided three-judge panel that upheld the law.Thomas More Law Ctr. v. Obama, 2011 U.S. App. LEXIS 13265, 2011 WL 2556039 (6th Cir. Mich. 2011)
Briefings and oral arguments
On November 14, 2011, the Supreme Court granted certiorari to portions of three cross-appeals of the Eleventh Circuit's opinion: one by the states (Florida v. U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Svcs.), one by the federal government (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Svcs. v. Florida), and one by the National Federation of Independent Business (Nat'l Fed. of Independent Bus. v. Sebelius).
Oral arguments
The Court announced in December 2011 that it would hear approximately six hours of oral argumentation over a three-day period, from March 26 to March 28, 2012, covering the various aspects being questioned by the principal parties involved in this and other related cases concerning the ACA.
The court first heard argument on whether the Anti-Injunction Act, which limits suits "for the purpose of restraining the assessment or collection of any tax", barred a decision before the ACA fully entered into force in 2014. Since neither the government, represented by Solicitor General Donald Verrilli, nor the states, represented that day by Gregory G. Katsas of the law firm Jones Day, were willing to defend that position (which had been accepted by three of the 12 appellate court judges who heard the cases),Think Progress: Ian Millhiser, "What The Heck Is The Tax Anti-Injunction Act?" March 23, 2012, accessed July 1, 2012, the Court appointed Robert Long of the law firm Covington & Burling as amicus curiae to defend that position.
On the second day, the court heard arguments over whether the ACA's "individual mandate" fell under the constitutional powers of Congress. The states (Florida et al.) were represented during the hearings by former Bush administration Solicitor General Paul Clement while the government was represented by current Solicitor General Donald Verrilli. Tom Goldstein of SCOTUSblog, while acknowledging that Verrilli had an initial stumble, called Verrilli's performance "tremendous", but also said that Clement's performance was "the best argument I've ever heard".
On the morning of the third day, the Court considered the issue of severability—whether the ACA could survive if the Court struck down the individual mandate. Paul Clement, Deputy Solicitor General Edwin Kneedler, and Court-appointed amicus curiae H. Bartow Farr, III of the law firm Farr & Taranto argued their various positions before the Court.
On the afternoon of the third day, the Court considered whether the Medicaid expansion the ACA instituted was coercive. Both Clement and Verrilli again argued before the Court. Chief Justice Roberts extended the time limit for both parties by 15 minutes during the arguments.
Verrilli's performance during the hearings was widely criticized by analysts.
Outcome
thumb|200px|upright|Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the majority opinion upholding the Affordable Care Act but overturning one section as exceeding Congress's spending authority.
The case generated a complex division on the bench. With respect to the Tax Anti-Injunction Act and individual mandate penalty, judgment was for the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services. With respect to the Medicaid expansion, judgment was for the challenging states.
All the justices were in rough agreement that the Anti-Injunction Act did not apply. Five justices (Roberts, Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan) joined an opinion as to this.
One combination of five justices (Roberts, Scalia, Kennedy, Thomas, and Alito) were of the opinion that the individual mandate was not within the scope of Congress's Commerce Clause or its Necessary and Proper Clause powers. As four of them did not concur in the judgment, their votes could not count toward a controlling opinion.
A separate combination of five justices (Roberts, Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan) held the individual mandate was a valid exercise of Congress's taxing power. As these five justices concurred in judgment and agreed to the same parts of Roberts's opinion, this was the binding and controlling majority as to this aspect of the case.
As the individual mandate was upheld, the issue of its severability from the rest of the Affordable Care Act was not reached.
A final combination of seven justices (Roberts, Scalia, Kennedy, Thomas, Breyer, Alito, and Kagan) concurred in judgment that the Medicaid expansion of the Affordable Care Act, in combination with existing statutes, amounted to an unconstitutionally coercive use of Congress's spending power; however, those seven justices were divided as to the appropriate legal remedy.
Opinion of the Court
Roberts authored an opinion, of which three parts gained the assent of five justices (Roberts, Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan) and became the opinion of the Court, and one part gained the assent of a plurality (Roberts, Breyer, and Kagan) and became part of the holding. Those parts of Roberts's opinion that gained the assent of five justices were Parts I, II, and III-C. Part I recounted the facts and procedural history of the cases. Part II concerned the applicability of the Anti-Injunction Act to the individual mandate penalty. Part III-C held that, for constitutional purposes, the individual mandate penalty was a valid exercise of Congress's taxing power.
Tax Anti-Injunction Act
The Anti-Injunction Act prohibits federal courts from enjoining agencies of the federal government from collecting a tax while a challenge to the tax is pending. Congress's motivation in passing the act was to prevent the starvation of the federal treasury while tax issues are being litigated before the courts. Instead, Congress requires a taxpayer who challenges any tax to first pay that tax, and only afterwards is the taxpayer allowed to bring suit and seek a refund. Challengers of the Affordable Care Act maintained that the individual mandate's enforcement mechanism was not a tax. The Court agreed. Because the ACA calls the individual mandate's shared responsibility payment a "penalty" instead of a "tax", it prevents the penalty from being treated as a tax under the Anti-Injunction Act. 
Congress's taxing power
Taking a functional view to the individual mandate penalty,567 U.S., at 565. the Court held that it was a tax for constitutional purposes.567 U.S., at 563–80. The Court noted that the label of the individual mandate shared responsibility payment as a penalty for the purposes of the Anti-Injunction Act did not control whether it was a tax for purposes of constitutional analysis.567 U.S., at 564.  The Court asserted that the individual mandate penalty, in practical operation, exhibited all the characteristics of a tax—the penalty "looks like a tax in many respects."567 U.S., at 563.  That is, the individual mandate penalty had all of the following features of a tax:
payment went to the U.S. Treasury when taxpayers filed their tax returns;567 U.S., at 563–64.
the amount of the penalty was determined by factors such as the individual's taxable income, number of dependents, and joint filing status;
the penalty was found in the Internal Revenue Code, and enforced by the Internal Revenue Service in the same manner as taxes are collected; and 
the penalty produced "some revenue" for the government.
Neither did the penalty's operation as a tax run afoul of even "our narrowest interpretations of the taxing power",567 U.S., at 573. which disallows punitive taxation: 
the upper limit of the penalty was not so high as to become coercive since it was capped by statute to never be more than the cost of obtaining insurance;567 U.S., at 565–66.
the penalty had no scienter element typical of punitive statutes; and
while the penalty was collected by the IRS, any failure to pay the penalty would not result in criminal prosecution.
Moreover, adhering to prior precedent, the Court reasoned the tax imposed by the individual mandate penalty is not a direct tax (i.e., it is not a capitation or poll tax, nor a tax on real estate) and consequently does not require apportionment:567 U.S., at 571. "[a] tax on going without health insurance does not fall within any recognized category of direct tax. ... The shared responsibility payment is thus not a direct tax that must be apportioned among the several States." Even where one views an individual's decision to self-insure as economic inactivity, the safety that such an omission to act provides from Congress's commerce power does not similarly apply to taxation.567 U.S., at 571–72. The Court provided three reasons that Congress's use of its taxing power in this manner was not troubling:
the Constitution makes no promise of avoiding taxation via inactivity;567 U.S., at 572–73.
Congress's use of the taxing power to influence conduct is not unlimited; and,
while Congress's taxing power is broader in scope than its commerce power, the authority the taxing power grants Congress over individual behavior is not as extensive.
As Roberts concluded for the Court:
Plurality holding
As stated above, seven justices agreed in judgment for the states against the Department of Health and Human Services on the issue of the Medicaid expansion, but no opinion among them obtained the assent of five justices. At issue were amendments to the Social Security Act contained in Title X of the Affordable Care Act. These amendments, in expanding Medicaid coverage, made changes to the plan requirements states must meet in their Medicaid plans. The 1965 amendments to the Social Security Act that created Medicaid authorized the Secretary of Health and Human Services to withhold federal payments to state Medicaid plans that were not in compliance with statutory requirements.
The seven justices were in agreement that the Secretary's existing ability to withhold all funds from noncompliant plans, coupled with the substantial coverage changes enacted by the Title X amendments, amounted to an unconstitutionally coercive use of Congress's spending power, given that Congress was not going to cover the full cost of the Medicaid expansion after 2016. Where the justices differed was in what they thought constituted the appropriate remedy. Four (Scalia, Kennedy, Thomas, and Alito) believed the Title X amendments should be struck down due to their impermissibly coercive nature. The remaining three (Roberts, Breyer, and Kagan) instead opted to exercise the existing severability clause (codified at 42 USC §1303) in the Social Security Act, as amended, holding that the ability given to the Secretary by statute to withhold federal payments could not be applied to the Title X amendments for those states refusing to participate in the Medicaid expansion.slip op., opinion of Roberts, CJ, Part IV, at 55–58. Since this latter opinion concurred in the judgment on the narrowest ground (i.e., severing only part of the application of the law instead of striking all of the amendments), the three-justice plurality became the controlling opinion under the rule set out by Marks v. United States (1977).
Other opinions
 Roberts's opinion 
Writing only for himself, Roberts would hold that the individual mandate penalty exceeded both Congress's commerce power and its Necessary and Proper Clause power.567 U.S., at 547–63. In part III-A of his opinion, he argued that Congress's authority under the Commerce Clause necessarily presupposes activity already exists for Congress to regulate,567 U.S., at 550. but the individual mandate seeks to compel activity in order to then regulate it.567 U.S., at 552. Such compulsion represents a "new and potentially vast domain to congressional authority" well beyond even the "most far reaching" extent of authority allowed under the precedent of Wickard v. Filburn. In Roberts's view, such a view of the commerce power would fundamentally change the relationship between the federal government and the individual;567 U.S., at 555. while Congress may anticipate the effects of activity on commerce, it has never been allowed to anticipate economic activity by those not engaging in commercial acts. "The Commerce Clause is not a general license to regulate an individual from cradle to grave, simply because he will predictably engage in particular transactions."567 U.S., at 557.
Nor could the Necessary and Proper Clause, in Roberts's view, support the individual mandate penalty. While authorizing Congress to enact laws incidental to powers enumerated in the Constitution, its authority is not a grant of any substantive and independent power.567 U.S., at 559. The individual mandate penalty represented an attempt by Congress to reach and draw in individuals beyond the scope of its authority; while the penalty may be necessary to Congress's ends, it is not a proper means of reaching it.567 U.S., at 560.
In part III-B of his opinion, Roberts argued that the failure to uphold the individual mandate penalty under those two clauses did not end the inquiry.567 U.S., at 561. He referred to canons of judicial interpretation, particularly the canon of beneficial interpretation: where a law "has two possible meanings, one of which violates the Constitution, courts should adopt the meaning that does not do so."567 U.S., at 562. Thus, if the individual mandate penalty payment can be read as a tax, then it may fall within Congress's taxing authority.
Justice Ginsburg's concurrence/dissent
Justice Ginsburg concurred in the judgment in part and dissented in part. Joined by Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan, she would have upheld the individual mandate under the Commerce Clause and Necessary and Proper Clause:See supra, slip op., at 81.
Further, joined only by Sotomayor, she dissented on striking down the Medicaid expansion penalty, arguing that it was within Congress's power under the Spending Clause:See supra, slip op., at 124.
Ginsburg's dissent went on to highlight the implications of the majority's finding that the federal government's threat of taking away existing funding from states unwilling to implement Medicaid expansion left states with no "legitimate choice".
Joint dissent
Justices Scalia, Kennedy, Thomas, and Alito joined an unsigned dissent that argued the individual mandate was unconstitutional because it represented an attempt by Congress to regulate beyond its power under the Commerce Clause.See supra, slip op., at 143. Further, they argued that reclassifying the individual mandate as a tax rather than a penalty in order to sustain its constitutionality was not to interpret the statute but to rewrite it, which they deemed a troubling exercise of judicial power:See supra, slip op., at 144 and 151.
The dissent also disputed Ginsburg's claim that the court's opinion failed "to explain why the individual mandate threatens our constitutional order":See supra, slip op., at 100 and 140.
Finally, the joint dissent argued that since the ACA exceeded its constitutional powers in both compelling the purchase of health insurance and in denying non-consenting States Medicaid funding, the whole statute should have been deemed inoperative because the two parts were central to the statute's design and operation.See supra, slip op., at 129–130. The joint dissent mentioned that "the Constitution requires tax increases to originate in the House of Representatives" per the Origination Clause,Fisher, Daniel. "Obamacare Dissents Poke Holes In Roberts' Reasoning", Forbes (June 29, 2012). though that issue was not addressed by the majority opinion.Eastman, John. "Hidden Gems in the Historical 2011-2012 Term, and Beyond ",  Charleston Law Review, Vol. 7, p. 19 (2012).
Justice Thomas's dissent
In a one-paragraph dissent, Justice Thomas emphasized his long-held belief that the Supreme Court's precedents have broadened Congress's powers under the Commerce Clause in a manner "inconsistent with the original understanding of Congress's powers and with this Court's early Commerce Clause cases". Thomas wrote that he agreed with Roberts's interpretation of precedents allowing Congress to use the Commerce Clause to regulate "the channels of interstate commerce" and the "persons or things in interstate commerce" and disallowing the regulation of commercial inactivity. But he disagreed with the court's third, "substantial effects" test as established by Wickard v. Filburn, articulated within United States v. Morrison, and strengthened by Gonzales v. Raich.
Reaction and commentary
Media coverage
The Court convened on the morning of June 28, 2012, to announce its decisions on the ACA and two other cases; it announced its ruling on the ACA shortly after 10:00 am EDT. CNN and Fox News initially reported that the individual mandate was found unconstitutional, but corrected themselves within minutes. President Obama initially heard from CNN and Fox News that the mandate had been found unconstitutional, but then heard the correct information shortly thereafter.
Speculation over Roberts's vote
Immediately after the decision, there was speculation that the joint dissent was the original internal majority opinion, and that Roberts's vote changed sometime between March and the public issuance of the decision.
On July 1, 2012, CBS News, citing unnamed sources within the Court, said that over the course of internal deliberations Roberts changed his position from striking down the mandate to upholding it. The article, by journalist Jan Crawford, reported that during the Court's private conference immediately after the oral arguments, Roberts was inclined to strike down the mandate but, in disagreement with the other four conservative justices, was not certain this required striking down the law in its entirety. News articles in May 2012 that warned of potential "damage to the court—and to Roberts' reputation—if the court were to strike down the mandate" reportedly increased the external pressure on Roberts, who "is keenly aware of his leadership role on the court [and] is sensitive to how the court is perceived by the public", and pays more attention to media coverage of the Court than some of his colleagues. It was around this time that Roberts decided to uphold the law. One of the conservative justices reportedly pressed Roberts to explain why he had changed his view on the mandate, but was "unsatisfied with the response".
On July 2, Adam Liptak of The New York Times insinuated that the leak could have come from Justice Thomas, as Liptak pointed out that Crawford has long had a relationship with Thomas, who had granted her rare interviews and singled her out as his favorite reporter, saying, "There are wonderful people out here who do a good job—do a fantastic job—like Jan [Crawford]."
Some observers have suggested Roberts's philosophy of judicial restraint or the lack of Supreme Court precedents available "to say the individual mandate crossed a constitutional line" played a part in his decision. The article reported that after Roberts "withstood a month-long, desperate campaign to bring him back to his original position", with Kennedy, who was typically the swing vote in 5–4 decisions, leading the effort, the conservatives essentially told him, "You're on your own." The conservative dissent was unsigned and did not, despite efforts by Roberts to convince them to do so, make any attempt to join the Court's opinion, an unusual situation in which the four justices "deliberately ignored Roberts' decision, the sources said, as if they were no longer even willing to engage with him in debate".
In 2019 it was reported that Roberts had originally voted to invalidate the individual mandate and uphold the Medicaid expansion requirement. He believed that the Constitution's commerce clause never was intended to cover inactivity, such as the refusal to buy insurance. But he was uneasy with the political division in the vote tally and also did not want to invalidate the entire law because he thought the individual mandate was only inseverable from "community rating" and "guarantee issue" provisions of the law. Due to this impasse he explored the argument that the individual mandate could be upheld as a tax and invalidating the Medicaid expansion. Breyer and Kagan had previously voted to uphold the Medicaid expansion, but decided to switch and join Roberts's opinion on that section.
Political reactions
thumb|President Obama's comments on the Supreme Court's ruling
President Obama praised the decision in a series of remarks, while discussing the benefits of the legislation in a statement shortly after the decision. House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, who as Speaker of the House had been instrumental in the passage of the ACA, said that Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts, a longtime proponent of health care reform who died before the bill became law, could now "rest."
The ruling quickly became a rallying cry for Republicans, who criticized the Court's reasoning and vowed to repeal the ACA. Though they had already repeatedly attempted to do so starting in January 2011, they were unsuccessful in enacting a repeal. Conservatives quickly seized on the fact that Obama and the bill's proponents insisted repeatedly throughout the protracted political debate 2009 and 2010 that the mandate was not a tax, but the Court upheld it on the grounds that it was. Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney said he would repeal the bill, as did Speaker of the House John Boehner and Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell. Several state attorneys general who challenged the law said they were disappointed with the Court's decision but happy that in doing so, the Court limited Congress's powers under the commerce clause. Several state Republican officials indicated their desire to take the option the Court granted them to not further expand Medicaid.
The American Medical Association, the National Physicians Alliance, the American Academy of Pediatrics, and the Association of American Medical Colleges said that the ruling was a victory.
The New York Times reported the ruling "may secure Obama's place in history".
Academic commentary
The New York Times reported that the Court's ruling was the most significant federalism decision since the New Deal. It reported it in this respect about the new limits the ruling placed on federal regulation of commerce and about the conditions the federal government may impose on money it gives the states. With respect to the Commerce Clause, the Court ruled that the federal government had no permission to force individuals not engaged in commercial activities to buy services they did not want. With respect to the Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act, the Supreme Court held that the ACA's requirement that states rapidly extend coverage to new beneficiaries or lose existing federal payments was unduly coercive. The health-care law had to allow states to choose between participating in the expansion while receiving additional payments, or forgoing the expansion and retaining existing payments. Virginia Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli, the first to challenge the ACA in federal court, praised the limits the Court placed on federal regulation of commerce and on the conditions the federal government could impose on money it gives the states.
Georgetown Law professor Randy Barnett said that by invalidating the withholding of existing Medicaid funding as unconstitutionally coercive, the Court found an enforceable limit on the spending power of the federal government. This limit on the spending power is part of Georgetown University law professor Neal Katyal's ruling analysis. Katyal, who served as acting solicitor general of the United States and argued the health care cases at the appellate level, argued that the ruling could change the relationship between the federal government and the states because of "the existence of an extraconstitutional limit" on the federal government's power under the Spending Clause. He said that until now it had been understood that when the federal government gave money to a state in exchange for the state's doing something, the federal government was free to do so as long as a reasonable relationship existed between the federal funds and the act the federal government wanted the state to perform. He then referred to the Court holding that the ACA's requirement that states rapidly extend Medicaid coverage to new beneficiaries or lose existing federal payments was unduly coercive by noting that the court found that "such a threat is coercive and that the states cannot be penalized for not expanding their Medicaid coverage after receiving funds. And it does so in the context of Medicaid, which Congress created and can alter, amend or abolish at any time. ... This was the first significant loss for the federal government's spending power in decades. The fancy footwork that the court employed to view the act as coercive could come back in later cases to haunt the federal government. Many programs are built on the government's spending power, and the existence of an extraconstitutional limit on that power is a worrisome development." Katyal also mentioned that the federal government told the court that long-standing laws contain clauses that condition money on state performance of certain activities. "The decision leaves open the question of whether those acts, and many others (like the Clean Air Act), are now unconstitutional as well." Reuters later reported that Katyal had reversed his opinion and stated that he didn't see any litigation coming out of the Supreme Court holding in the near term.
In the same direction as Katyal argues Kevin Russell, who teaches Supreme Court litigation at Harvard and Stanford Law Schools and clerked for Judge William Norris of the Ninth Circuit and Justice Breyer. According to him, several significant civil rights statutes, enacted under Congress's Spending Power, are at risk to be unconstitutional, because the Court held that Congress exceeded its Spending Clause authority by forcing states into an all-or-nothing choice by threatening to revoke all of their Medicaid funding if they did not participate in the Medicaid expansion. Russell remembers that a decade ago several states made challenges to a number of important civil rights statutes that condition receipt of federal funds on the state's agreement to abide by non-discrimination principles in the federally funded programs. "These statutes include Title IX (sex discrimination in federally funded education programs), Title IV (race discrimination in any federally funded program), and the Rehabilitation Act (disability discrimination in federally funded programs). States argued that by threatening to take away all of a program's funds if the States didn't agree to abide by these statutes, Congress was engaging in unconstitutional coercion."
David B. Kopel, an adjunct professor of constitutional law at University of Denver, said that the ruling was the Court's most important ruling in defining the limits of Congress's power under the Spending Clause, because this clause must, like Congress's other powers, conform to the principles of state sovereignty embodied in Constitution, the Tenth and Eleventh Amendments. According to him, this has a tremendous impact on state budgets: "Today (and from now on!), states do not need to provide Medicaid to able-bodied childless adults. Likewise, states today have discretion about whether to provide Medicaid to middle-class parents. Undoubtedly, some states will choose to participate in the ACA's massive expansion of medical welfare, but fiscally responsible states now have the choice not to."
University of Michigan law professor Samuel Bagenstos told The Atlantic that the Court's holding on the Medicaid expansion could be a landmark decision in federalism jurisprudence, if the Medicaid issue were not in the same case as the individual mandate. He deemed it "a big deal" that the Court had for the first time struck down a condition on federal spending on the grounds that it coerced the states. In his opinion, this means that a number of federal statutes that had not really been subject to effective legal challenge before could now be challenged by the states.
Public opinion
Fairleigh Dickinson University's PublicMind conducted research on the public's constitutional perspective by asking registered voters about key legal issues brought up by ACA litigation through two surveys based upon a random sampling of the population. The authors, Bruce G. Peabody and Peter J. Woolley contend that, through public response on this case, despite claims of an ignorant and uninformed public, the masses can be confident, properly conflicted, and principled when considering major controversies and dilemmas. Rather than polling the public on raw personal opinion, the study inquired into random voters' legal judgment of the ACA's constitutionality. For example, 56% of Americans (as of February 2012) deemed that Congress does not have the legal right to require everyone to have health insurance, while 34% believed that such a mandate was legally permissible.
Subsequent cases
Sebelius was the centerpoint of the third legal challenge to the ACA to reach the Supreme Court in California v. Texas, heard in the 2020–21 term. In 2017, Congress passed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act that reduced the health insurance requirement of the ACA to $0 from 2019 onward, effectively eliminating the individual mandate. Texas and several states sued the federal government, arguing on the basis of Sebelius that with mandate eliminated, the entire ACA was unconstitutional. A district court agreed with this, which was upheld on a challenge by California and other states to the Fifth Circuit, stepping in when the government declined to challenge the ruling. The Supreme Court agreed to hear the case to consider not only if the elimination of the individual mandate makes the ACA unconstitutional, but factors related to the severability of the individual mandate from other provisions in the ACA, as well as whether California has standing.
See also
 2011 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States  
 Burwell v. Hobby Lobby (2014)
 King v. Burwell (2015)
References
Further reading
External links
 Slip opinion from the U.S. Supreme Court
 Online symposium: The Bar Review version of NFIB v. Sebelius
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Affordable Care Act lawsuits
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:Taxing and Spending Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Articles containing video clips
"""

From "National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra" ==> """
National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra, 585 U.S. ___ (2018), was a case before the Supreme Court of the United States addressing the constitutionality of California's FACT Act, which mandated that crisis pregnancy centers provide certain disclosures about state services. The law required that licensed centers post visible notices that other options for pregnancy, including abortion, are available from state-sponsored clinics. It also mandated that unlicensed centers post notice of their unlicensed status. The centers, typically run by Christian non-profit groups, challenged the act on the basis that it violated their free speech. After prior reviews in lower courts, the case was brought to the Supreme Court, asking "Whether the disclosures required by the California Reproductive FACT Act violate the protections set forth in the free speech clause of the First Amendment, applicable to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment."National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra, SCOTUSblog.
The Court ruled on June 26, 2018, in a 5–4 decision that the notices required by the FACT Act likely violate the First Amendment by targeting speakers rather than speech.
 Background 
A crisis pregnancy center (CPC) is a type of nonprofit organization established to counsel pregnant women against having an abortion. CPCs provide peer counseling related to abortion, pregnancy, and childbirth, and they may offer non-medical services such as financial assistance, child-rearing resources, and adoption referrals. CPCs that qualify as medical clinics may provide pregnancy testing, sonograms, and other services. CPCs are typically run by anti-abortion Christians according to a conservative Christian philosophy, and thus do not recommend abortion as an option for pregnancy.
Medical professionals and abortion-rights advocates allege that CPCs omit information, provide false or misleading information regarding abortion, and may lead women to unsafe medical options. Cities like Baltimore, Austin, and New York passed legislation to require CPCs to disclose their status and that they did not offer abortion services, but organizations representing the CPCs have been successful in courts challenging these laws, principally on the argument that forcing the CPCs to post such language violated their First Amendment rights and constituted compelled speech.
Based on a report prepared by NARAL Pro-Choice America, which alleged that CPCs were providing misleading and inaccurate information, the California State Legislature passed the Reproductive FACT (Freedom, Accountability, Comprehensive Care, and Transparency) Act (AB-775) in October 2015. It required any licensed healthcare facility that provided care services related to pregnancies to post a notice that stated "California has public programs that provide immediate free or low-cost access to comprehensive family planning services (including all FDA-approved methods of contraception), prenatal care, and abortion for eligible women." The law set provisions where this notice was to be posted and established civil fines if facilities did not comply. The Act required unlicensed facilities which offered certain pregnancy-related services to post a notice stating: "This facility is not licensed as a medical facility by the State of California and has no licensed medical provider who provides or directly supervises the provision of all of the services, whose primary purpose is providing pregnancy-related services." Whereas the previous attempts at regulating CPCs in Baltimore and other cities were based on having signage that informed the patient that the CPC did not offer abortion-related services, the FACT Act instead makes the patient aware of state-sponsored services that are available rather than what the CPCs did or did not offer. The law went into effect January 1, 2016.
Procedural history
CPCs and the Pacific Justice Institute filed lawsuits challenging the constitutionality of the Reproductive FACT Act. The CPCs asserted that the law's requirements constituted compelled speech in violation of their rights to freedom of speech and free exercise of religion under the First Amendment. Among these was a lawsuit filed in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of California by the National Institute of Family and Life Advocates (NIFLA) who represented over 100 CPCs in California. NIFLA sought a preliminary injunction to prevent the Reproductive FACT Act from coming into force on January 1, 2016, while the lawsuit continued. The Court denied the motion for a preliminary injunction in February 2016. NIFLA appealed from the denial of the preliminary injunction to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in June 2016, which affirmed the judgment of the District Court in a unanimous decision authored by Judge Dorothy W. Nelson, joined by Judges A. Wallace Tashima and John B. Owens.
The Ninth Circuit decision noted that the existence of a circuit split on the issue of the proper level of scrutiny to apply in cases relating to abortion-related disclosures, and agreed with the Fourth Circuit that the Supreme Court's decision in Planned Parenthood v. Casey. did not resolve this question. The Court held that the notice that the state required to be posted in licensed facilities constituted professional speech, subject to intermediate scrutiny, and that the notice survived intermediate scrutiny because California has "a substantial interest in the health of its citizens, including ensuring that its citizens have access to and adequate information about constitutionally-protected medical services like abortion" and because the notice was "narrowly drawn to achieve California's substantial interests." The Court further held that the required notice for unlicensed facilities would survive any standard of review—even strict scrutiny—holding that "California has a compelling interest in informing pregnant women when they are using the medical services of a facility that has not satisfied licensing standards set by the state. And given the Legislature’s findings regarding the existence of CPCs, which often present misleading information to women about reproductive medical services, California’s interest in presenting accurate information about the licensing status of individual clinics is particularly compelling." The Court also ruled that the petitioners had no likelihood of success on their claim that the law violated their rights under the Free Exercise Clause. Citing Employment Division v. Smith, the court held that the law was a "neutral law of general applicability, subject to only rational basis review."
The Ninth Circuit denied a motion for rehearing en banc in December 2016.
Supreme Court
NIFLA filed a petition for writ of certiorari in March 2017, asking the Supreme Court to hear the case, pointing to the circuit split identified in the Ninth Circuit's decision. NIFLA specifically asked the Court to decide the question of "Whether the Free Speech Clause or the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment prohibits California from compelling licensed anti-abortion centers to post information on how to obtain a state-funded abortion and from compelling unlicensed anti-abortion centers to disseminate a disclaimer to clients on site and in any print and digital advertising."http://www.scotusblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/16-1140-cert-petition.pdf  The Court agreed to hear the case in November 2017.
NIFLA was represented by Alliance Defending Freedom.
Oral arguments were held on March 20, 2018. Observers of the arguments believed the Court favored the CPCs and agreed with their arguments that the legal requirements of the Reproductive FACT Act not only burdened the free speech of the centers, but also put a burden on the centers to post the noticefor example, CPCs in Los Angeles County would be required to post the notice in 13 different languages. At oral argument, a number of justices said they believed that the FACT Act was written specifically to target CPCs; Justice Elena Kagan questioned whether that the law was "gerrymandered" to impact CPCs rather than all pregnancy service providers.Oral argument transcript, National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra (S. Ct. No. 16-1140): "JUSTICE KAGAN: There is a -- a sense when you read this statute ... here's at least a question that arises as to whether this statute has been gerrymandered." The Court also considered the FACT Act in relationship to the Court's previous ruling of Planned Parenthood v. Casey, which upheld the constitutionality of a Pennsylvanian law that required doctors performing abortions to provide their clients with health information related to them.
Opinion of the Court
The Court announced judgment on June 26, 2018 in favor of the challengers. In the 5–4 decision, split between the conservative and liberal justices, the Court ruled that both notices required by the FACT Act likely violated the free speech principles of the First Amendment, reversing the Ninth Circuit's decision and remanding the case there for review. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote the majority opinion, joined by Justices Roberts, Kennedy, Alito, and Gorsuch. Thomas identified that the FACT Act targeted the speaker of the language demanded by the Act rather than the speech itself, which conflicted with the First Amendment. He wrote that the FACT Act "imposes a government-scripted, speaker-based disclosure requirement that is wholly disconnected from the State’s informational interest", and because it only applied to a specific classification of facilities, it could be seen as compelled speech for those in the CPCs that disagreed with the state's stance on abortion. Thomas' opinion rejected the Ninth Circuit's conclusion that the FACT Act was equivalent to "professional speech", defined through Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel of Supreme Court of Ohio,  as "factual, noncontroversial information" that is less protected by the First Amendment, as the FACT Act notice dealt with the controversial topic of abortion. Instead, Thomas argued, the state could use public advertising or even post public notices near the CPCs to achieve the same message without violating the First Amendment. In regard to the notice for unlicensed centers, Thomas found that the state had not proved anything more than a "purely hypothetical" harm that the notices were to remedy, following Ibanez v. Florida Dept. of Business and Professional Regulation, Bd. of Accountancy, , and even if they had demonstrated such harm, the notices would still run afoul of the First Amendment challenges.
Concurrence and dissent
Justice Kennedy wrote a concurrence, which was also joined by Roberts, Alito, and Gorsuch, which further asserted that the FACT Act was specifically targeting anti-abortion centers, describing it as "This law is a paradigmatic example of the serious threat presented when government seeks to impose its own message in the place of individual speech, thought, and expression".
Justice Breyer wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Ginsburg, Sotomayor, and Kagan. Breyer took issue with the majority's take on the First Amendment, using a heightened standard to test the First Amendment applicability as established from Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc., . Breyer also criticized the majority's opinion in light of the Court's decision from Planned Parenthood v. Casey, , in which the Court affirmed the constitutionality of a law requiring physicians to provide women considering abortions with information related to adoption. Breyer wrote "a Constitution that allows States to insist that medical providers tell women about the possibility of adoption should also allow States similarly to insist that medical providers tell women about the possibility of abortion".
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 585
 References 
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States reproductive rights case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Alliance Defending Freedom litigation
"""

From "NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp." ==> """
National Labor Relations Board v Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation, 301 U.S. 1 (1937), was a United States Supreme Court case that upheld the constitutionality of the National Labor Relations Act of 1935, also known as the Wagner Act. The case represented a major expansion in the Court's interpretation of Congress's power under the Commerce Clause and effectively spelled the end to the Court's striking down of New Deal economic legislation.
The case arose after the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) ordered Jones & Laughlin Steel to rehire workers who had been fired for seeking to unionize. Jones and Laughlin refused to comply on the grounds that the Wagner Act, which had established the NLRB, was unconstitutional.
In a 5–4 decision, Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes upheld the constitutionality of the Wagner Act, holding that Congress could regulate economic activities that were "intrastate in character when separately considered" if they held "such a close and substantial relation to interstate commerce that their control is essential or appropriate to protect that commerce from burdens and obstructions." In his dissent, Associate Justice James Clark McReynolds argued that Congress's power to regulate interstate commerce should be limited to cases in which a violation is "direct and material."
Background
Jones & Laughlin Steel, the fourth largest steel producer in the United States, was charged with discriminating against workers who wanted to join the Steel Workers Organizing Committee (SWOC). The company had fired ten employees at its plant in Aliquippa, Pennsylvania, after they moved to unionize. The NLRB ruled against the company and ordered that the workers be rehired and given back pay, but Jones & Laughlin refused to comply on the grounds and believed the Act to be unconstitutional. Citing Supreme Court precedent, lower courts agreed.
Decision
thumb|200px|right|Senator Robert F. Wagner was happy over the Supreme Court decision
Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes wrote the majority opinion in the case, which reversed the lower court's ruling, in a 5–4 decision:
Justice McReynolds dissented, questioning Congress's enhanced power under the commerce clause. Although he did not dispute Congress's regulation of commerce between the states, he stated that Congress's interference should be in cases where a violation is "direct and material." McReynolds stated that taxation on property, for example, may indirectly but seriously affect the cost of transportation. He concluded that Congress had transcended the power granted to it by the Constitution.
See also
United States labor law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 301
Notes
References
External links
 Case Brief for NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp. at Lawnix.com
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1937 in United States case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Seventh Amendment case law
v. Jones and Laughlin Steel Corporation
Category:History of Beaver County, Pennsylvania
Category:United Steelworkers litigation
Category:United States labor case law
Category:Aliquippa, Pennsylvania
Category:Steel industry of the United States
Category:Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
"""

From "NLRB v. Sands Manufacturing Co." ==> """
National Labor Relations Board v. Sands Manufacturing Co., 306 U.S. 332 (1939), is United States labor law case, decided by a majority of 5 to 2 by the Supreme Court of the United States, which overturned a decision by the National Labor Relations Board because it was not supported by substantial evidence. The Court defined collective bargaining under the National Labor Relations Act to mean that proposals and responses to proposals were pending, and that future meetings were being planned. Absent such conditions, bargaining was not occurring. The Court also held that an employer did not violate the Act if it chose to deal with the employees on an individual basis.
Facts
Sands Manufacturing Co. was a company based in Cleveland, Ohio, which made water heaters. In the spring of 1934, its employees joined the Mechanics Educational Society of America. A 60-day contract was agreed to, and although it expired both sides repeatedly agreed to extend it. When workload lessened, company policy was to transfer men in slack departments to those areas where workload was high, respecting both their seniority and existing pay rates. In 1934, the company won a government contract, and agreed that the "new men" would not only be paid a lower wage but also would be the first discharged once work slacked off. A new contract was reached in June 1935 in which management won the right not to respect the wage rates and seniority rights of men transferred to new departments during slack times.
As the government contract ended, the company closed the heater tank department. When the company sought to hire workers in its machine shop, it asked to hire the "new men" rather than transfer "old men" from other departments (which were shutting down). The union argued old men should be hired in the machine shop before any "new men." The union and company met repeatedly over the issue, but nothing was resolved. The company closed its plant in August 1935. When it reopened in September, it offered employment to several "old men" at much lower wage rates. The union refused the offer. The plant reopened, and the union began picketing.
The National Labor Relations Board held that Sands Manufacturing had refused to bargain with union, had discriminated against union members in hiring, and had discouraged membership in the union. Sands Manufacturing sued to have the Board's order overturned. A court of appeals agreed with the employer.
Judgment
Majority ruling
Associate Justice Owen Roberts wrote the decision for the majority, joined by Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes and Associate Justices James Clark McReynolds, Pierce Butler, and Harlan F. Stone.
Roberts held that the NLRB's decision was not supported by the evidence before the Board.National Labor Relations Board v. Sands Manufacturing Co., 306 U.S. 332, 339. Although the Board had alleged that the evidence supported only one conclusion, this allegation was also not supported by the evidence. The majority concluded that since no negotiations were pending and no new meetings were scheduled, there was no "negotiating" going on and hence the employer's plant shut-down did not violate the NLRA.National Labor Relations Board v. Sands Manufacturing Co., 306 U.S. 332, 344. Furthermore, since the employer had offered to hire some men back, clearly there had been no refusal to bargain. The employer's decision to rehire some of the "old men" by contracting with them individually was also not a violation of the Act.National Labor Relations Board v. Sands Manufacturing Co., 306 U.S. 332, 345.
Dissent
Associate Justice Hugo Black dissented, joined by Associate Justice Stanley Forman Reed. No dissenting opinion was filed.
Significance
The case was one of the first clear-cut defeats for the NLRB before the Supreme Court, after an unprecedented string of 15 successes.Gross, p. 83. The decision placed significant limitations on the ability of unions to engage in collective action.Atleson, p. 192; Klare, p. 303-304.Tomlins, p. 260. The Sands Court also upheld the right of an employer to violate the NLRA so long as the union had already acted illegally. The Court rejected the union's good faith effort to interpret its contract, which led to the strike.  Only the Court's interpretation of the contract mattered, the majority concluded,Lichtenstein and Harris, p. 145. and strikes over differences of interpretation of the contract were no longer protected activity.Engerman and Gallman, p. 683. The "employer's overriding right to unimpeded access to labor was held to justify its unilateral action to resolve an impasse in its favor."
Along with NLRB v. Fansteel Metallurgical Corp., 306 U.S. 240 (1939) and NLRB v. Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co., 306 U.S. 292 (1939), the decision has been called one of the three most significant NLRB cases since NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp., 301 U.S. 1 (1938) upheld the NLRA's constitutionality. The three cases also expanded the way the Court interpreted the NLRA. Although the justices had previously interpreted the Act solely through the lens of the Commerce Clause (showing strong deference to the Board), now the Court evinced a willingness to apply evidentiary standards to the Board's actions and to impose a less radical interpretation on the law.Ross, p. 150.
See also
US labor law
Notes
References
Atleson, James B. Labor and the Wartime State: Labor Relations and Law During World War II. Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1998.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Gallman, Robert E. The Cambridge Economic History of the United States. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Gross, James A. The Reshaping of the National Labor Relations Board: National Labor Policy in Transition, 1937-1947. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1981.
Klare, Karl. "Judicial Deradicalization of the Wagner Act and the Origins of Modern Leagl Consciousness." Minnesota Law Review. 62:265 (1978).
Lichtenstein, Nelson and Harris, Howell John. Industrial Democracy in America: The Ambiguous Promise. Washington, D.C.: Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 1993.
Ross, William G. The Chief Justiceship of Charles Evans Hughes: 1930-1941. Columbia, S.C.: University of South Carolina Press, 2007.
Tomlins, Christopher. The State and the Unions: Labor Relations, Law, and the Organized Labor Movement in America, 1880-1960. Reprint ed. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985.
External links
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:Laborers' International Union of North America
Category:History of Cleveland
Category:Boilers
"""

From "National League of Cities v. Usery" ==> """
National League of Cities v. Usery, 426 U.S. 833 (1976), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Fair Labor Standards Act could not constitutionally be applied to state governments..Hail, Michael W. and J. Gregory Frye. 2006. "National League of Cities v. Usery." Federalism in America: An Encyclopedia.  The decision was overruled by the U.S. Supreme Court in Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority..
 Background 
This case involved a dispute concerning the extent of the U.S. federal government’s Commerce Clause power to regulate the activities of the states.
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), which was upheld in United States v. Darby Lumber Co.,. was later amended to remove state exemptions pertaining to employees of state institutions. The FLSA imposed on all public employers certain minimum wage standards and maximum work hours limitations. Those limitations had previously been restricted to those individual businesses and private employees engaged in interstate commerce. After the amendment, the FLSA applied equally to all state employees including those in hospitals and schools which are areas typically thought to be outside the penumbra of "interstate commerce" regulatory powers.
The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari, and the question presented was whether the Tenth Amendment barred Congress from exercising its commerce powers to regulate wages, hours, and benefits of State employees, when doing so is a power traditionally reserved to states.
 Rehnquist's majority opinion 
Relying on language from Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States,. Justice William Rehnquist, writing for the majority, acknowledged that Congress may exercise power over private endeavors even when doing so preempts state law so long as the means chosen are reasonably adapted to the legitimate ends.  However, the Court distinguished the case from Darby, explaining that the 10th amendment declares that Congress cannot exercise its power so as to impair the states' integrity or their ability to function effectively in a federal system. Congress may have the authority to regulate individual businesses under the Commerce Clause, but in this case they are regulating not just individuals, but the "States as States." Additionally, the Court recognized that while Congress may have the affirmative authority under the Commerce Clause to reach the matter, the Constitution prohibits Federal regulation of that matter. The Court concluded that determinations of state employee wages, and compensations, as well as the hours they may work, are "functions essential to separate and independent existence," and that those functions are state plenary powers protected from Congressional infringement. To allow otherwise, the majority reasoned, would be to neglect the federal system of government embodied by the Constitution.
The majority abandoned the reasoning applied in Maryland v. Wirtz. and cited the fears of unchecked power expressed by Justice Douglas in his dissent. The majority also mentioned that the FLSA's requirements would force states to restructure many of their existing policies, and would result in a substantial cost burden.
Blackmun's concurrence 
Justice Harry Blackmun's interpretation of the majority view was that it advocated the courts to use a balancing approach that weighed the importance of the government’s interest with how essential the state functions are to the state’s separate and independent existence.
Blackmun was later the swing justice who switched sides and helped overturn the case, asserting that the "traditional government functions" test he had previously supported had proved "unworkable."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 426
References
External links
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:United States Tenth Amendment case law
Category:Minimum wage law
"""

From "National Mutual Insurance Co. v. Tidewater Transfer Co." ==> """
National Mutual Insurance Company v. Tidewater Transfer Company, 337 U.S. 582 (1949), was a United States Supreme Court case that upheld the constitutionality of 28 U.S.C. §1332(d).  §1332(d) treats citizens of United States territories as citizens of a state for the purpose of establishing diversity jurisdiction.Yeazell, S.C.  Civil Procedure, Seventh Edition.  Aspen Publishers, New York, NY: 2008, p. 197
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:1949 in United States case law
"""

From "National Organization for Women v. Scheidler" ==> """
National Organization for Women v. Scheidler, 510 U.S. 249 (1994), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) could apply to enterprises without economic motives; anti-abortion protesters could thus be prosecuted under it. An organization without an economic motive can still affect interstate or foreign commerce and thus satisfy the Act's definition of a racketeering enterprise.
The Court did not issue judgment on whether or not the Pro-Life Action Network, the organization in question, had committed actions that could be prosecuted under RICO.
G. Robert Blakey argued on behalf of Joseph Scheidler, while Miguel Estrada represented the United States as amicus curiae in favor of reversal.
See also
List of class-action lawsuits
 Further reading
Joseph Scheidler#NOW_v._Scheidler discusses the wider course of the litigation, before and after the 1994 Supreme Court decision.
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:Class action lawsuits
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:National Organization for Women
"""

From "National Pork Producers Council v. Ross" ==> """
National Pork Producers Council v. Ross (Docket 21–468) is a pending United States Supreme Court case related to the Dormant Commerce Clause.
 Background 
In 2018, California's voters approved Proposition 12, which seeks to better the treatment of pigs kept for livestock by barring the sale of pork produced in conditions that are common in the industry today. Much of the pork consumed in the state is imported from other parts of the United States, so the proposition serves to regulate the national pork industry as a whole. A group of farmers and corporations in the pork industry sued California, asserting the proposition violates the Dormant Commerce Clause. The United States District Court for the Southern District of California dismissed the lawsuit, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed, in a 3–0 opinion.
The National Pork Producers Council filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on March 28, 2022. Oral arguments were heard on October 11, 2022.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
"""

From "National Railroad Passenger Corp. v. Boston & Maine Corp." ==> """
National Railroad Passenger Corporation v. Boston & Maine Corp., 503 U.S. 407 (1992), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the National Railroad Passenger Corporation (better known as Amtrak), could condemn railroad property from Boston and Maine Railroad and convey it to another railroad in order to continue passenger rail service over that route.
History
The Montrealer was originally a service of the Boston and Maine Railroad which used B&M's Connecticut River Line south of Vernon, Vermont to reach New York City. The NYC-Montréal portion of this route was continued under Amtrak.
The Montrealer was suspended from early April 1987 to mid-July 1989 because of deteriorating track conditions on the Boston and Maine Railroad, which had been taken over by Guilford Transportation.  During the suspension, Amtrak offered "Ambus" service (operated by Vermont Transit).
To restore passenger rail service, Amtrak seized the section of the line between Windsor and Brattleboro by eminent domain. The track was rebuilt using federal funds and sold to the Central Vermont Railway. The train was reinstated in July 1989, continuing until 1995 on a modified route which used the Central Vermont Railway (now the New England Central Railroad) from East Northfield to New London, Connecticut.
The Supreme Court upheld Amtrak's action.
References
External links
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Amtrak
Category:Boston and Maine Railroad
Category:Eminent domain
Category:Railway litigation in 1992
"""

From "National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie" ==> """
National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie, 432 U.S. 43 (1977), arising out of what is sometimes referred to as the Skokie Affair, was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court dealing with freedom of speech and freedom of assembly. This case is considered a "classic" free speech case in constitutional law classes. Related court decisions are captioned Skokie v. NSPA, Collin v. Smith,Collin v. Smith,  and Smith v. Collin.Smith v. Collin,  (denying certiorari). The Supreme Court ruled 5–4, per curiam. (per curiam). The Supreme Court's 1977 ruling granted certiorari and reversed and remanded the Illinois Supreme Court's denial to lift the lower court's injunction on the NSPA's march. In other words: the courts decided a person's assertion that speech is being restrained must be reviewed immediately by the judiciary. By requiring the state court to consider the neo-Nazis' appeal without delay, the U.S. Supreme Court decision opened the door to allowing the National Socialist Party of America to march.
Background
Before the Skokie Affair, Frank Collin and his neo-Nazi group, the NSPA, would regularly hold demonstrations in Marquette Park, where the NSPA was headquartered. However, the Chicago authorities would eventually block these plans by requiring the NSPA to post a $350,000 public safety insurance bond and by banning political demonstrations in Marquette Park. While Collin did file a lawsuit against the City of Chicago for a violation against his first amendment rights, he realized that this case would get tied up in the courts for far longer than he was willing to wait to begin marching again.
On October 4, 1976, Collin sent out letters to the park districts of the North Shore suburbs of Chicago, requesting permits for the NSPA to hold a white power demonstration. While some suburbs chose to ignore their letter, Skokie—home to a significant number of Jewish people, many of them survivors of the Holocaust—chose to respond. At first, the Skokie mayor and Village Council intended to allow the NSPA to demonstrate; the village's tactic was to ignore them, in order to give the NSPA as little publicity as possible. The Jewish community found this unacceptable and held meetings throughout the month of April to discuss the matter. The mayor and the Village Council heard their concerns and on April 27, 1977, ordered village attorney, Harvey Schwartz, to seek an injunction.
In addition to filing for an injunction, the Village of Skokie passed three ordinances on May 2, 1977 to prevent any future event like the NSPA's request. One states that people could not wear military-style uniforms during demonstrations. The two other ordinances prohibited the distribution of material containing hate speech and a required a $350,000 insurance bond to hold a demonstration. These ordinances rendered it impossible for the NSPA to be able to hold the event.
Collin used both the injunction and ordinances as an opportunity to claim infringement upon his First Amendment rights and subsequently wanted to protest in Skokie for the NSPA's right to free speech. On March 20, 1977, Collin notified the Chief of Police and Park District of the NSPA's intentions to protest for their right to free speech on May 1. In the letters, he stated that about 30–50 members planned to demonstrate outside of the Village Hall from about 3–3:30 p.m. and they planned to hold up signs demanding free speech for white men, including the phrases "White Free Speech", "Free Speech for White Americans", and "Free Speech for the White Men".
Collin would send another letter on June 22, 1977 with the same details for a protest planned for July 4 from 12:00–12:30pm.
Preceding lower court cases
The case began in the local Cook County court, when the Village government successfully sued, under the caption Village of Skokie v. NSPA, for an injunction to bar the demonstration. On April 28, 1977, village attorney Schwartz filed suit in the Circuit Court of Cook County for an emergency injunction against the march to be held on May 1, 1977. The injunction was granted, prohibiting marchers at the proposed Skokie rally from wearing Nazi uniforms or displaying swastikas. On behalf of the NSPA, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) challenged the injunction. The ACLU assigned civil rights attorneys David Goldberger  and Burton Joseph to Collin's cases. The ACLU argued that the injunction violated the First Amendment rights of the marchers to express themselves. The ACLU challenge was unsuccessful at the lower court level.
The ACLU appealed on behalf of NSPA, but both the Illinois Appellate Court and the Illinois Supreme Court refused to expedite the case or to stay the injunction. The ACLU then appealed that refusal to the Supreme Court of the United States.
Supreme Court ruling and subsequent cases
On June 14, 1977, the Supreme Court ordered Illinois to hold a hearing on their ruling against the National Socialist Party of America, emphasizing that "if a State seeks to impose a restraint on First Amendment rights, it must provide strict procedural safeguards, including immediate appellate review. ... Absent such review, the State must instead allow a stay. The order of the Illinois Supreme Court constituted a denial of that right." On remand, the Illinois Supreme Court sent the case back to the Illinois Appellate Court. The Appellate Court ruled per curiam on July 11, 1977 that the swastika was not protected by the First Amendment. In other words, the NSPA could march, but they could not display the swastika during their march.
In its full review of the case, the Illinois Supreme Court focused on the First Amendment implications of the display of the swastika. Skokie attorneys argued that for Holocaust survivors, seeing the swastika was like being physically attacked. The state supreme court rejected that argument, ruling that display of the swastika is a symbolic form of free speech entitled to First Amendment protections and determined that the swastika itself did not constitute "fighting words".Village of Skokie v. Nat'l Socialist Party of America, 69 Ill.2d 605, 373 N.E.2d 21 (1978). Its ruling allowed the National Socialist Party of America to march.
In parallel litigation in the federal courts, under the caption Collin v. Smith, the village's ordinance was declared unconstitutional, first by the district courtCollin v. Smith,  and then by divided vote of the Seventh Circuit court of appeals. Over a published dissent by Justice Blackmun (joined by Justice White) giving a detailed history of the case and an overview of the issues involved, the U.S. Supreme Court denied further review.
Effect of the decision
In the summer of 1978, in response to the Supreme Court's decision, some Holocaust survivors set up a museum on the Main Street of Skokie to commemorate those who had died in the concentration camps. The Illinois Holocaust Museum and Education Center remains open today, having been moved to a new permanent location on Woods Drive in 2009.
Ultimately, the NSPA failed to carry through its march in Skokie, marching in Chicago instead when they had gained permission. From a legal point of view, the litigation left undecided, at the Supreme Court level, whether such older precedents as Beauharnais v. Illinois and Terminiello v. Chicago remain authoritative statements of how the First Amendment applies to provocative and intimidating hate speech expressing fascist or racist ideas. According to Nadine Strossen, the case was part of a gradual process in the 20th century where the Court strengthened First Amendment protections and narrowed down the application of earlier decisions which upheld restrictions of free speech, in part due to the realisation that the Illinois restrictions on Nazi "hate speech" were so broad they could have been equally used to prohibit Martin Luther King Jr. demonstrations in Skokie.
Cultural reference
This case is obliquely referenced in the 1980 film The Blues Brothers. In the film a scene where Jake Blues asks a State Trooper "Hey, what's going on?" to which the reply is "Ah those bums' won their court case so they're marching today." To which Jake asks "What bums?" To which the State Trooper replies "The Fucking Nazi Party". Jake and Elwood then surmise aloud "Ilinois Nazis. I hate Illinois Nazis" Elwood Blues then proceeds to drive the car he and Jake are in at speed towards the march which is stationary and on formation, located on a bridge, causing the troop to jump off the bridge and into the body of water below the bridge.
See also
 Skokie (film)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 432
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 Beauharnais v. Illinois, 
 Brandenburg v. Ohio, 
 R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 
 Virginia v. Black, 
References
Further reading
External links
 Chronology of Events
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:June 1977 events in the United States
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:History of racism in the United States
Category:Jews and Judaism in Chicago
Category:Neo-Nazism in the United States
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "National Treasury Employees Union v. Von Raab" ==> """
National Treasury Employees Union v. Von Raab, 489 U.S. 656 (1989), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the Fourth Amendment and its implication on drug testing programs. The majority of the Court upheld the drug testing program in the United States Customs Service.
Background
In 1986, the U.S. Customs Service imposed a drug testing program for "employees seeking transfer or promotion to positions having direct involvement in drug interdiction," required to carry firearms, or have access to classified information. The National Treasury Employees Union sued and alleged that the program was violative of the Fourth Amendment, which prohibits unreasonable search and seizure. The Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit ruled in favor of the government. The union then appealed to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court upheld the Court of Appeals ruling with regard to positions involving drug interdiction and firearms. The ruling for classified information was held over, as the Supreme Court determined that the U.S. Customs Service too broadly included employee groups who would not generally have access to high levels of classified information.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court upheld the Court of Appeals ruling with regard to positions involving drug interdiction and firearms. The ruling for classified information was held over, as the Supreme Court determined that the U.S. Customs Service too broadly included employee groups who would not generally have access to high levels of classified information.
The majority decision authored by Justice Kennedy upheld the constitutionality of the drug testing program, reasoning that Customs employees had a "diminished expectation of privacy." Justice Marshall wrote a dissent in which he was joined by Justice Brennan; Justice Scalia wrote a dissent in which Justice Stevens joined.
See also
Vernonia School District 47J v. Acton (1997) and Board of Education v. Earls (2002), later cases dealing with and upholding drug testing in schools rather than customs service.
Ferguson v. City of Charleston, a 2001 case striking down drug test imposed on pregnant women in hospitals.
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 489
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
National Drug Testing Laws & Guidelines
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States public employment trade union case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Drug testing
"""

From "Nationwide Mutual Insurance Co. v. Darden" ==> """
Nationwide Mutual Insurance Co. v. Darden, 503 U.S. 318 (1992), is a US labor law case, concerning the scope of protection for employees, under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA). The Court held that principles of agency were relevant to interpreting the concept of "employee"..
Background
Robert Darden sold Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company policies from 1962 to 1980 in Fayetteville, North Carolina. His agency contract stated he would be enrolled in the company retirement plan. The contract said, if his job terminated, he would forfeit entitlements if he worked and competed with Nationwide within 25 miles of his business location. In November 1980, Nationwide terminated its contractual relationship. A month later, Darden started selling insurance policies for Nationwide’s competitors. Nationwide said he was disqualified from receiving retirement benefits. Darden sued under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), 29 USC §1132(a). He contended he was protected as an ‘employee’ under §3(6), 29 USC §1002(6), and that under 29 USC §1053(a) his benefits had ‘vested’ and could not be forfeited. Nationwide argued Darden was not an employee, but an independent contractor.
Procedural history
At trial, the federal district Court held Darden was an independent contractor, not an employee, under common law agency principles. Darden appealed.
The Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit found Darden was an employee, and that ERISA’s policy had gone beyond common law agency principles. It asserted that "Darden most probably would not qualify as an employee" under traditional agency law principles. But Darden would be an employee, under the ERISA policy, if he could show (1) he had a reasonable expectation that he would receive benefits, (2) he relied on this expectation, and (3) he lacked the economic bargaining power to contract out of benefit plan forfeiture provisions.
Opinion of the Court
The Court held that ERISA did incorporate traditional agency law. Where nothing is definite, the Court would presume Congress meant an agency law relationship unless clearly stating otherwise, as in Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid, 490 U.S. 730, 739-740 (1989) The first two prongs of the substitute test of the Court of Appeals, insofar as it produced new standards of expectations and reliance, were ill founded. All of the incidents of the employment relationship must be assessed and weighed with no one factor being decisive. In an opinion for the majority of the Court, Justice Souter stated
The Court remanded the case to the District Court for reconsideration.
Significance
The result of the case was to affirm that principles of agency, alongside "economic reality" or remedying inequality of bargaining according to the purpose of a statute, must be taken into account when determining who is an employee. Common law tests are not to be disregarded.
See also
US labor law
References
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
"""

From "Nautilus, Inc. v. Biosig Instruments, Inc." ==> """
Nautilus, Inc. v. Biosig Instruments, Inc., 134 S.Ct. 2120 (2014), was a 2014 decision by the United States Supreme Court pertaining to the validity of U.S. patents. The opinion addressed the requirement contained in 35 U.S.C. § 112, ¶ 2 that a patent "particularly point[] out and distinctly claim[] the subject matter which the applicant regards as the invention." Writing for a unanimous court, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg held that a patent fails to comply with this requirement when the patent's claims, read in light of the specification and the prosecution history, "fail to inform, with reasonable certainty, those skilled in the art about the scope of the invention." Subsequent to the Court’s decision the case was remanded to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit which, using the new standard, declined to invalidate Biosig's patent.
 Background 
 The '753 patent 
In 1994, the United States Patent and Trademark Office awarded U.S. Patent No. 5,337,753 ("the '753 patent") to Dr. Gregory Lekhtman, who subsequently assigned his invention to Biosig Instruments, Inc. ("Biosig"). The '753 patent claimed as its invention an improved heart rate monitor that could filter out certain signals that distorted the accuracy of existing heart rate monitors. The invention used a "live electrode" to monitor the user's heart rate while using a "common electrode" to identify the signals that would need to be filtered out. Both sets of electrodes could be placed on the handlebar of an exercise machine, as depicted in Figures 1 and 7 from the '753 patent.
Figure 1 of the '753 patent|thumb Figure 7 of the '753 patent|thumb
 Procedural history 
In the late 1990s, Biosig disclosed its patented technology to StairMaster, a competing manufacturer of exercise machinery, and suggested that StairMaster should license its technology because its competing machines infringed on Biosig's patents. StairMaster declined and, in the early 2000s, Nautilus, Inc. ("Nautilus") acquired the StairMaster brand.
In 2004, Biosig sued Nautilus for patent infringement in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York. In response, Nautilus asked the United States Patent and Trademark Office to reexamine the '753 patent to determine whether it had been properly issued. The Patent Office subsequently agreed to conduct the reexamination and the parties voluntarily dismissed the district court suit pending the outcome of the reexamination.
In 2010, the Patent Office issued a ruling that the '753 patent had been properly issued and the parties returned to the district court. In 2011, Judge Alvin Hellerstein held a claim construction hearing in which he interpreted the claims of the '753 patent. Relevant here, Judge Hellerstein held that the term "spaced relationship" meant that "'there is a defined relationship between the live electrode and the common electrode on one side of the cylindrical bar and the same or a different defined relationship between the live electrode and the common electrode on the other side of the cylindrical bar,' without any reference to the electrodes' width." In response to this construction, Nautilus moved for summary judgment of invalidity. Nautilus argued that because the term "spaced relationship" did not provide any guidance as to how far apart the electrodes should be, a person of ordinary skill in the art would not be able to determine where Biosig's invention began and ended and could not determine whether or not they were infringing the '753 patent. Thus, Nautilus argued, the '753 patent was invalid under 35 U.S.C. § 112 ¶ 2 for failing to "particular point out and distinctly claim" the invention. Judge Hellerstein agreed with Nautilus and ruled that because the term "spaced relationship" "'did not tell the court or anyone what precisely the space should be,' or even supply 'any parameters' for determining the appropriate spacing" the '753 patent failed to comply with 35 U.S.C. § 112 ¶ 2 and was indefinite.
In 2013, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit reversed Judge Hellerstein's ruling. Considering the "spaced relationship" language, the Federal Circuit held that this language was not "insolubly ambiguous" because a person having ordinary skill in the art would understand that the electrodes would need to be spaced close enough that a user's hands would be able to touch both of them while also not being so close as to merge.
Supreme Court decision
alt=Official portrait of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg as of 2016.|thumb|Justice Ginsburg delivered a unanimous decision for the Court.
Nautilus subsequently appealed the Federal Circuit's ruling to the Supreme Court. On January 10, 2014, the Supreme Court granted Nautilus's request for review and oral argument occurred on April 24, 2014. On June 12, 2014, the Court handed down its decision, which was a unanimous one written by Justice Ginsburg.
The Court first noted that 35 U.S.C. § 112 ¶ 2 requires patentees to "particularly point[] out and distinctly claim[] the subject matter which the applicant regards as [the] invention." The Court acknowledged that this requirement must strike a "delicate balance" between the "inherent limitations of language" and the expectation that the public have notice of what exactly falls within the scope of the patent so as to avoid a "zone of uncertainty" that deters lawful conduct. Recognizing this tension, the Court adopted the standard that a patent fails to comply with the requirements of 35 U.S.C. § 112 ¶ 2 when the patent's claims, read in light of the specification and the prosecution history, "fail to inform, with reasonable certainty, those skilled in the art about the scope of the invention."
The Court went on to reject the Federal Circuit's interpretation of Section 112, Paragraph 2 that had held that a claim was indefinite only if it was "insolubly ambiguous". The Court held that this standard imposed too loose of a standard for indefiniteness as "[i]t cannot be sufficient that a court can ascribe some meaning to a patent's claims; the definiteness inquiry trains on the understanding of a skilled artisan at the time of the patent application, not that of a court viewing matters post hoc."Nautilus Inc. v. Biosig Instruments, Inc., 134 S.Ct. 2120, 2130 (2014) available at https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/13pdf/13-369_1idf.pdf To allow such a loose standard would be to endorse the "zone of uncertainty" that the Court cautioned to avoid.
Recognizing that the decision announced a new standard for the indefiniteness analysis, the Court remanded the case for further proceedings by the lower courts in the first instance.
Subsequent proceedings
On remand and applying the Supreme Court's new test for indefiniteness, the Federal Circuit again reversed the district court's finding of indefiniteness and remanded the case to the Southern District of New York. Nautilus subsequently sought en banc review and further Supreme Court review but both requests were denied.
Reactions to the decision
Reaction to the Supreme Court's decision was mixed with some commentators suggesting that the decision would have limited impact while others hailed the Court's ruling as a new standard that would reshape the landscape on indefiniteness. Writing for Law360, Ryan Davis interviewed a number of attorneys who believed that the decision would make little practical difference, including one who called the Supreme Court's decision "the same standard by a different name". Ronald Mann of SCOTUSblog remarked that, while the decision did seem likely to push the Federal Circuit to raise the standard for definiteness, he "doubt[ed] that many members of the patent bar will find much of clarification in the Court’s opinion." Jason Rantanen at PatentlyO identified at least one post-Nautilus decision from the Federal Circuit that had, in his view correctly, held that "Nautilus changed the law of indefiniteness" and imposed a stricter standard. Other commentators similarly noted the impact that the decision had in expanding the range of indefiniteness challenges being brought by patent defendants.
References
External links
Text of the decision (supremecourt.gov by way of archive.org)
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Patent law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Navarette v. California" ==> """
Navarette v. California, 572 U.S. 393 (2014), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court clarified when police officers may make arrests or conduct temporary detentions based on information provided by anonymous tips.Prado Navarette v. California, No. 12–9490, 572 U.S. ___, slip. op. at 8-11 (2014). In 2008, police in California received a 911 call that a pickup truck was driving recklessly along a rural highway. Officers spotted a truck matching the description provided in the 911 call and followed the truck for five minutes, but did not observe any suspicious behavior. Nevertheless, officers conducted a traffic stop and discovered  of marijuana in the truck. At trial, the occupants of the car argued that the traffic stop violated the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution, because the tip was unreliable, and officers did not personally observe criminal activity. Writing for a majority of the Court, Justice Clarence Thomas held that the 911 call was reliable, and that officers need not personally observe criminal activity when acting upon information provided by an anonymous 911 call.
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a "scathing" dissenting opinion, in which he argued that the tip was unreliable, and that the majority's opinion threatened the freedom and liberty of all citizens.Nina Totenberg, Supreme Court Gives Police New Power To Rely On Anonymous Tips, NPR, April 22, 2014 (characterizing Justice Scalia's dissent as "scathing"). Likewise, many commentators have noted Navarette represented a departure from earlier precedent, and that the opinion opened the door for expansive new police powers.See, e.g., Christopher D. Sommers, Presumed Drunk Until Proven Sober: The Dangers and Implications of Anonymous Tips Following Navarette v. California, 60  327, 352 (2015). Some commentators have also noted that the case leaves open several important questions, including the unanswered question of whether anonymous reports of extremely dangerous behavior require fewer indicia of reliability before police may act upon those reports.Andrew B. Kartchner, J.L.'s Time Bomb Still Ticking: How Navarette's Narrow Holding Failed to Address Important Issues Regarding Anonymous Tips, 44  1, 19–20 (2014). Other scholars have argued it was highly unlikely that Lorenzo and Jose Prado Navarette were actually driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol when they were stopped by police.Joshua C. Teitelbaum, Probabilistic Reasoning in Navarette v. California, 62  158, 167 (2014) (claiming there was likely a 1/100 chance Lorenzo and Jose Prado Navarette were driving while drunk).
Background
Fourth Amendment guidelines for traffic stops
Although criminal detentions usually require probable cause that the suspect has engaged in criminal activity, an officer may conduct a traffic stop if the officer has a reasonable, articulable suspicion that the driver is engaging in criminal activity.Berkemer v. McCarty, ; Delaware v. Prouse, ; Pennsylvania v. Mimms, ; see also Terry v. Ohio,  (defining standards for investigatory stops). Officers may not rely upon a mere "hunch", but the level of suspicion required to conduct a traffic stop is “considerably less than proof of wrongdoing by a preponderance of the evidence”, and less than is necessary for probable cause.Terry, 392 U.S. at 27; United States v. Sokolow, . However, the Supreme Court of the United States has clarified that the reasonable suspicion required to justify a traffic stop depends upon "both the content of information possessed by police and its degree of reliability", while taking into account “the totality of the circumstances — the whole picture.”Alabama v. White, ; United States v. Cortez, .
Fourth Amendment searches and seizures based on anonymous tips
In Illinois v. Gates, the Supreme Court established that courts should apply a "totality of the circumstances" test to determine whether an anonymous tip is sufficiently reliable to provide probable cause to issue an arrest warrant.Illinois v. Gates, . Although officers in Gates did not personally witness any criminal activity, the Supreme Court held that the anonymous tip in question was reliable, because officers could verify several events predicted by the anonymous tip.Gates, 462 U.S. at 245. Seven years after Gates, the Supreme Court held in Alabama v. White that an anonymous tip was sufficiently reliable to provide reasonable suspicion to justify a temporary detention, because the tip accurately predicted several key details.Alabama v. White, . Although the Court conceded that White was a "close case", the tip in question "exhibited sufficient indicia of reliability" to justify a temporary detention.White, 496 U.S. at 332. The Court explained that  if "an informant is shown to be right about some things, he is probably right about other facts that he has alleged, including the claim that the object of the tip is engaged in criminal activity."White, 496 U.S. at 331.
However, in Florida v. J.L., the Supreme Court ruled that police officers did not have reasonable suspicion to detain a suspect based on an anonymous tip “that a young black male standing at a particular bus stop and wearing a plaid shirt was carrying a gun.”Florida v. J.L., . The Court held that the tip "lacked the moderate indicia of reliability present in White and essential to the Court’s decision in that case. The anonymous call concerning J.L. provided no predictive information, and therefore left the police without means to test the informant’s knowledge or credibility.”Florida v. J.L., 529 U.S. at 271. The Court declined to create a "firearm exception" for anonymous tips, but the court noted in dicta that a tip describing a bomb threat need not bear the indicia of reliability otherwise required of other anonymous tips.Florida v. J.L., 529 U.S. at 273–74 ("We do not say, for example, that a report of a person carrying a bomb need bear the indicia of reliability we demand for a report of a person carrying a firearm before the police can constitutionally conduct a frisk.”). The Supreme Court of California would later rely upon this "bomb exception" in People v. Wells, when it ruled that an anonymous tip that accurately described a vehicle “weaving all over the roadway” justified a traffic stop.People v. Wells, 38 Cal. 4th 1078, 1088 (2006). The California court held that “considerations of public safety and common sense” permit officers to conduct traffic stops based on anonymous tips "to confirm the officer’s reasonable suspicion of intoxicated driving before a serious traffic accident can occur.”Wells, 8 Cal. 4th at 1080–81, 1088.
Arrest and trial of Lorenzo and Jose Prado Navarette
thumb|upright=1.8|right|A portion of California State Route 1 near Fort Bragg, California, where Lorenzo and Jose Prado Navarette were arrested in August 2008.
On August 23, 2008, a California Highway Patrol ("CHP") dispatcher in Humboldt County, California received a 911 call from an anonymous caller.Joint Appendix, Prado Navarette v. California, 134 S. Ct. 1683 (U.S. 2014) at 10–14. According to the dispatcher, the caller reported a silver Ford F150 pickup with the license plate number "8D94925" ran them off the highway.Joint Appendix, Prado Navarette v. California, 134 S. Ct. 1683 (U.S. 2014) at 14–15. The caller stated that the truck was last seen heading southbound on California State Route 1.Joint Appendix, Prado Navarette v. California, 134 S. Ct. 1683 (U.S. 2014) at 15. CHP dispatchers relayed the report to officers in the geographic area, and the vehicle was soon spotted traveling southbound at mile marker 66 near Fort Bragg, California.Joint Appendix, Prado Navarette v. California, 134 S. Ct. 1683 (U.S. 2014) at 30–31. Officers pulled over the vehicle and discovered that Lorenzo Prado Navarette and Jose Prado Navarette were the only occupants.Joint Appendix, Prado Navarette v. California, 134 S. Ct. 1683 (U.S. 2014) at 32–35. After standing next to the cab of the pickup truck, the officers noticed "a very distinct smell of marijuana coming from the vehicle".Joint Appendix, Prado Navarette v. California, 134 S. Ct. 1683 (U.S. 2014) at 34. Officers then searched the vehicle and found four large bags containing  of marijuana, an unopened box of oven bags, clippers, and fertilizer in the bed of the truck.Joint Appendix, Prado Navarette v. California, 134 S. Ct. 1683 (U.S. 2014) at 35–36; Navarette, slip op. at 2.
On August 26, 2008, a felony complaint was filed in Mendocino County Superior Court, charging Lorenzo Prado Navarette and Jose Prado Navarette with transportation of marijuana in violation of section 11360(a) of the California Health and Safety Code, and possession of marijuana for sale in violation of section 11359 of the California Health and Safety Code.Joint Appendix, Prado Navarette v. California, 134 S. Ct. 1683 (U.S. 2014) at 2, 11. On June 26, 2009, Lorenzo Prado Navarette and Jose Prado Navarette filed a motion to suppress evidence, claiming that the traffic stop violated the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution, because officers "lacked reasonable suspicion of criminal activity".Joint Appendix, Prado Navarette v. California, 134 S. Ct. 1683 (U.S. 2014) at 2; Navarette, slip op. at 2. However, the magistrate who presided over the suppression hearing, and the superior court, both rejected the motion.Joint Appendix, Prado Navarette v. California, 134 S. Ct. 1683 (U.S. 2014) at 1–2; Navarette, slip op. at 2. Lorenzo Prado Navarette and Jose Prado Navarette subsequently pleaded guilty to transporting marijuana, and were sentenced to 90 days in prison and three years of probation.Navarette, slip op. at 2.
Lorenzo Prado Navarette and Jose Prado Navarette filed an appeal in the California Court of Appeal, but the court affirmed the judgment of the Superior Court.People v. Navarette, 2012 Cal. App. Unpub. LEXIS 7415 at *23–24, 32–33 (Cal. Ct. App., Oct. 12, 2012). Relying on the "public safety" exception established in People v. Wells, the court held that "ongoing danger to other motorists [justified] the stop without direct corroboration of the vehicle's illegal activity".People v. Navarette, 2012 Cal. App. Unpub. LEXIS at *23 7415 (Cal. Ct. App., Oct. 12, 2012) (citing Wells, 38 Cal. 4th at 1080). The court noted that the vehicle was traveling on an "undivided two-lane road, thus raising the risk of a collision with oncoming traffic, which poses a particular risk to human life and limb."People v. Navarette, 2012 Cal. App. Unpub. LEXIS at *30–31 7415 (Cal. Ct. App., Oct. 12, 2012). However, the court also held that the "anonymous tip itself had several indicia of reliability — the content of the tip strongly suggested it came from the victim and the tipster accurately described the appearance, location and direction of the vehicle."People v. Navarette, 2012 Cal. App. Unpub. LEXIS at *31 7415 (Cal. Ct. App., Oct. 12, 2012). Lorenzo and Jose appealed again to the Supreme Court of California, but the Court declined to review their case.People v. Navarette (Lorenzo Prado), 2013 Cal. LEXIS 141 (Cal., Jan. 3, 2013). They then appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States, which granted their petition for certiorari on October 1, 2013.Navarette v. California, 134 S. Ct. 50 (2013).
Opinion of the Court
Writing for a majority of the Court, Justice Clarence Thomas held that the 911 call contained sufficient indicia of reliability to justify the traffic stop.Navarette, slip op. at 5, 11 (noting that although the caller identified herself, the Court will still treat the phone call as an anonymous tip). Although he acknowledged that this was a "close case", Justice Thomas concluded that indicia of the 911 caller's reliability were stronger than those in Florida v. J.L., where the Court held a "bare-bones" tip was unreliable.Navarette, slip op. at 10–11 Justice Thomas began his opinion by emphasizing that the Supreme Court had "firmly rejected the argument that reasonable cause for an investigative stop can only be based on the officer’s personal observation, rather than on information supplied by another person.”Navarette, slip op. at 3 (citing Adams v. Williams, ) (internal quotations and brackets omitted). By identifying the make, model, and license plate number of the pickup truck, Justice Thomas argued that "the caller necessarily claimed eyewitness knowledge of the alleged dangerous driving," and that basis of knowledge supported the tip's reliability.Navarette, slip op. at 5. Furthermore, Justice Thomas concluded that "[a] driver’s claim that another vehicle ran her off the road, however, necessarily implies that the informant knows the other car was driven dangerously."Navarette, slip op. at 6. Justice Thomas also noted that the calls made through the 911 emergency system are particularly reliable, because calls are recorded and individuals may face prosecution for making false reports.Navarette, slip op. at 7.
Justice Thomas also clarified that officers need not "rule out the possibility of innocent conduct" before making a traffic stop based on an anonymous tip.Navarette, slip op. at 9 (citing United States v. Arvizu, ). In light of the facts described in the 911 call, Justice Thomas argued that the reckless driving described in the 911 call "[bear] too great a resemblance to paradigmatic manifestations of drunk driving to be dismissed as an isolated example of recklessness."Navarette, slip op. at 9. He concluded that officers therefore acted reasonably "under these circumstances in stopping a driver whose alleged conduct was a significant indicator of drunk driving". Justice Thomas noted that many drivers will behave more cautiously when followed by police officers, and he concluded that there was no need to conduct "[e]xtended observation" in this case, because "allowing a drunk driver a second chance for dangerous conduct could have disastrous consequences".Navarette, slip op. at 10.
Dissenting opinion of Justice Scalia
thumb|upright=1.0|right|Justice Antonin Scalia called the majority's opinion a "freedom-destroying cocktail".
In his dissenting opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia argued that the majority's opinion was a "freedom-destroying cocktail."Navarette, slip op. at 10 (Scalia, J., dissenting). Although he recognized anonymous tips may sometimes be reliable, he rejected the majority's conclusion that "anonymous 911 reports of traffic violations are reliable so long as they correctly identify a car and its location." He wrote, "[t]his is not my concept, and I am sure would not be the Framers’, of a people secure from unreasonable searches and seizures."Navarette, slip op. at 1 (Scalia, J., dissenting). Justice Scalia argued that anonymous tips are inherently unreliable, because anonymous tipsters can "lie with impunity."Navarette, slip op. at 2 (Scalia, J., dissenting) (internal citations and quotations omitted). While he admitted 911 calls are, in fact, easily traceable, Justice Scalia argued that there was no evidence the 911 caller knew they could be identified when they placed the call.Navarette, slip op. at 5–6 (Scalia, J., dissenting). Additionally, Justice Scalia distinguished the tip in this case from the tip in White, where "the reliability of the tip was established by the fact that it predicted the target’s behavior in the finest detail — a detail that could be known only by someone familiar with the target’s business."Navarette, slip op. at 3 (Scalia, J., dissenting). He argued that the general details provided in this case's 911 call were unreliable, because "everyone in the world who saw the car would have that knowledge, and anyone who wanted the car stopped would have to provide that information." Likewise, Justice Scalia argued that there was no evidence that the report of being run off the road was actually true.Navarette, slip op. at 3-4 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
Justice Scalia also criticized the majority's conclusion that the tip provided reasonable suspicion that Lorenzo and Jose Prado Navarette were driving while drunk, because "the truck might have swerved to avoid an animal, a pothole, or a jaywalking pedestrian .... Or, indeed, he might have intentionally forced the tipster off the road because of some personal animus, or hostility to her 'Make Love, Not War' bumper sticker."Navarette, slip op. at 6-7 (Scalia, J., dissenting). Furthermore, Justice Scalia argued that one discrete instance of irregular driving does not give rise to the reasonable suspicion of an ongoing threat of an intoxicated driver on the road.Navarette, slip op. at 7 (Scalia, J., dissenting). Justice Scalia also argued that the anonymous tip's claims of reckless driving were ultimately discredited by the fact that officers followed Lorenzo and Jose for five minutes, but observed nothing suspicious.Navarette, slip op. at 8–10 (Scalia, J., dissenting) He wrote, "I take it as a fundamental premise of our intoxicated-driving laws that a driver soused enough to swerve once can be expected to swerve again — and soon. If he does not, and if the only evidence of his first episode of irregular driving is a mere inference from an uncorroborated, vague, and nameless tip, then the Fourth Amendment requires that he be left alone." In his concluding remarks, Justice Scalia wrote "[d]runken driving is a serious matter, but so is the loss of our freedom to come and go as we please without police interference .... After today’s opinion all of us on the road, and not just drug dealers, are at risk of having our freedom of movement curtailed on suspicion of drunkenness, based upon a phone tip, true or false, of a single instance of careless driving."Navarette, slip op. at 10–11 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
Subsequent developments
Many federal circuit courts and state supreme courts interpreting Navarette have affirmed the rule that officers need not personally corroborate incriminating details before making an arrest based on information provided by an anonymous tip.See, e.g., United States v. Aviles-Vega, 783 F.3d 69 (1st Cir. 2015); United States v. Edwards, 761 F.3d 977 (9th Cir. 2014); People v. Brown, 61 Cal. 4th 968 (2015). However, other courts interpreting Navarette have held that uncorroborated anonymous tips are not sufficient to provide reasonable suspicion of ongoing criminal activity.Evans v. State, 2015 Ark. 50, 7, 454 S.W.3d 744, 748 (Ark. 2015). Additionally, courts in some jurisdictions have held that in order for officers to act upon an anonymous tip, the tip must provide a report of an ongoing crime, rather than a report of an isolated event that occurred in the past.State v. Rodriguez, 288 Neb. 878, 891 (2014) ("the fact that the reported crime was seen as ongoing was critical to the outcome in Navarette"). Some courts have also rejected the assertion that the availability of caller information makes 911 calls inherently reliable.Matthews v. State, 431 S.W.3d 596, 604 (Tex. Crim. App. 2014) (noting in dicta that access to a caller's information does not "necessarily increase the likelihood that a tip is reliable"). However, some courts have agreed with the notion that 911 calls are more reliable because callers may face criminal prosecution for making false reports.Dale v. Ciccone, 233 W. Va. 652, 661 (2014). Other courts interpreting Navarette have held that the case established that less reliability is required when anonymous tips report "serious crime[s] or potential danger".State v. Z.U.E., 183 Wn.2d 610, 623 (2015) ("when a tip involves a serious crime or potential danger, less reliability may be required for a stop than is required in other circumstances").
Analysis and commentary
Immediate reactions
After the Court released its opinion, many commentators suggested that Navarette represented a significant expansion of the police's power to stop drivers on the road. Lyle Denniston, for example, remarked that the Court's opinion "gave police broad new authority."Lyle Denniston, Opinion analysis: Big New Role for Anonymous Tipsters, SCOTUSblog (Apr. 22, 2014, 9:10 PM). In its review of cases from the 2013 term, the Harvard Law Review suggested that "Navarette may add to the police's already expansive power," and that the case "heralds unwarranted curtailment of Fourth Amendment protections."The Supreme Court 2013 Term: Leading Case: Constitutional Law: Fourth Amendment — Search and Seizure — Anonymous Tips and Suspected Drunk Driving — Navarette v. California, 128  231, 240 (2014). Other commentators remarked that the case "seemed to lower the bar for assessments of anonymous tipsters."Ariel C. Werner, What's in a Name? Challenging the Citizen-Informant Doctrine, 89  2336, 2340 n.15 (2014). Paul Kleven, attorney for Lorenzo and Jose Prado Navarette, said that the ruling "makes it easier for anonymous tipsters to call in and sic police on people they don't like," while a spokesperson for the California Attorney General's office said "[w]e are pleased with the court's ruling, which supports the hard work of law enforcement."Bob Egelko, Supreme Court Rules Anonymous Tip Is Enough to Stop Driver, , April 23, 2014.
Scholarly analysis
Scholars have observed that Navarette marked a departure from earlier precedent on the subject of anonymous tips, and some have argued that the case signifies a "dilution" of the Fourth Amendment's reasonable suspicion standard.Christopher D. Sommers, Presumed Drunk Until Proven Sober: The Dangers and Implications of Anonymous Tips Following Navarette v. California, 60  327, 352 (2015) (discussing departure from earlier precedent); George M. Dery III & Kevin Meehan, The Devil Is in the Details: The Supreme Court Erodes the Fourth Amendment in Applying Reasonable Suspicion in Navarette v. California, 21  275, 277 (2015) (discussing "dilution" of the reasonable suspicion standard). One analyst argued that this departure "could encourage passive and sloppy policing, for officers will be tempted to rely on easily acquired anonymous tips rather than engage in arduous collection of evidence."George M. Dery III & Kevin Meehan, The Devil Is in the Details: The Supreme Court Erodes the Fourth Amendment in Applying Reasonable Suspicion in Navarette v. California, 21  275, 277 (2015). Commentators have argued that Justice Kennedy's endorsement of the reliability of anonymous 911 calls signified a departure from earlier decisions that analyzed the reliability of tips under a totality of the circumstances framework.Christopher D. Sommers, Presumed Drunk Until Proven Sober: The Dangers and Implications of Anonymous Tips Following Navarette v. California, 60  327, 352 (2015). These commentators suggest that this departure "increases the risk of fabricated tips." Some analysts have also observed that the Court's opinion left several questions unanswered from earlier anonymous tip cases, including the question of whether there was an exception for dangerous crimes, and that the Court "missed an opportunity to give lower courts some much needed guidance."Andrew B. Kartchner, J.L.'s Time Bomb Still Ticking: How Navarette's Narrow Holding Failed to Address Important Issues Regarding Anonymous Tips, 44  1, 19–20 (2014) (noting the Court "neglected to hold that (1) reports of openly observable crimes are more reliable than tips of concealed crimes, and (2) police need a lesser quantum of suspicion to justify stops when acting pursuant to tips of dangerous activity such as drunk driving"); The Supreme Court 2013 Term: Leading Case: Constitutional Law: Fourth Amendment — Search and Seizure — Anonymous Tips and Suspected Drunk Driving — Navarette v. California, 128  231, 240 (2014) ("Importantly, the Court has not yet allowed the threshold for reliability of an anony- mous tipster to vary based on the gravity of the harm."). One commentator wrote, "[t]he time bomb mentioned in J.L. is still ticking".Andrew B. Kartchner, J.L.'s Time Bomb Still Ticking: How Navarette's Narrow Holding Failed to Address Important Issues Regarding Anonymous Tips, 44  1, 20 (2014). Another commentator argued that because Lorenzo Prado Navarette's driving was "irreproachable" for at least five minutes, "the probability that Lorenzo Navarette was legally drunk was surely less than the probability for the average daytime driver of a pickup truck; indeed, it ostensibly was all but zero."Joshua C. Teitelbaum, Probabilistic Reasoning in Navarette v. California, 62  158, 167 (2014).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 572
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2014 in United States case law
"""

From "NCAA v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma" ==> """
NCAA v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma, 468 U.S. 85 (1984), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) television plan violated the Sherman and Clayton Antitrust Acts, which were designed to prohibit group actions that restrained open competition and trade. 
The NCAA is an organization that regulates college athletics, and membership is voluntary, although NCAA schools are not allowed to play against non-NCAA teams. The case dealt with television rights to college football games, which were controlled by the NCAA and limited the appearance of university teams in each season. The NCAA believed that their control of television rights protected live attendance, which was disputed by a number of colleges.
These larger colleges formed the College Football Association to negotiate television contracts, until the NCAA advised the colleges that they would be banned from all NCAA competitions, not just in football. The Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma and the University of Georgia Athletic Association sued to force the NCAA to stop the practice.  The Supreme Court held that the NCAA's actions were a restraint of trade and ruled for the universities.
Background
Antitrust law
The Sherman Antitrust Act was enacted in 1890 to oppose the use of combinations, monopolies or cartels that harmed free and open trade.  It prohibited the restraint of trade.Sherman Antitrust Act,  (1978).  The Clayton Antitrust Act was enacted in 1914 to address shortcomings discovered in the Sherman Act.  It specified the prohibited conduct, an enforcement scheme, and remedial measures.  The Clayton Act allows for private parties to bring suit for treble damages and for injunctive relief.Clayton Antitrust Act,  and  (1978).  From 1922 (when Federal Baseball Club v. National League ruled that baseball was not considered interstate commerce) until the late 1950s, sporting events were considered to be exempt from both acts, until the Supreme Court decision in International Boxing Club v. United States.International Boxing Club v. United States, ; Thomas Scully, NCAA v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma: The NCAA's Television Plan is Sacked by the Sherman Act 34  857 (1985).
Control of televised games
The National Collegiate Athletics Association (NCAA) is a private non-profit organization founded in 1910 to regulate collegiate athletics.  In the 1980s it consisted of approximately 900 college and university members, although only 187 participated in Division I football.James S. Arico, NCAA v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma: Has the Supreme Court Abrogated the Per Se Rule of Antitrust Analysis 19  437 (1985).  In 1938, the first college football game was commercially televised by the University of Pennsylvania.  From 1940 to 1950, all of Pennsylvania's home games were televised. Beginning in 1952 and continuing through 1957, the NCAA commissioned a study by National Opinion Research Center to determine the effect of televising college football games on a number of areas, including live attendance.  The studies indicated that live television coverage of college football decreased attendance for teams that were not being televised.  Based on these studies, the NCAA began to institute controls beginning in 1953 through its Football Television Committee (Committee).  The Committee initially determined that there would be only one televised game every Saturday and that no team would appear in a televised game more than once per season.  In addition, it was determined that the revenue would be shared by the teams playing the televised game and the NCAA.Bd. of Regents, 468 U.S. at 85; NCAA I, 546 F.Supp. at 1276; Scully, at 857; ,  1 (2011).
The initial restriction was supported by all of the NCAA member schools with the exception of Pennsylvania, who stated that they would continue to televise their home games.  The NCAA declared that Pennsylvania was a member in bad standing, and the four schools scheduled to play them at home refused to do so.  Pennsylvania then agreed to abide by the NCAA rules on televising games.  From 1952 to 1977, the NCAA submitted an annual plan to all member schools, who voted on it by mail.  After 1977, the member schools voted on "Principles of Negotiation" instead of the actual plan.  Only one network would hold a contract with the NCAA to broadcast games at a time.Eric A. Seiken, College Football on Television in  56-62 (Charles E. Quirk, ed., 1999)  Although all major television networks had held the contract at various times, from 1965 to 1981, the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) had held the contract.Bd. of Regents, 468 U.S. at 85; NCAA I, 546 F.Supp. at 1276.
College Football Association
Partially as a result of dissatisfaction with the NCAA's control of the television market, the College Football Association (CFA) was formed, consisting of major college football programs.  In 1979, the CFA, through its executive director Chuck Neinas,  began to negotiate a television contract for its members with the National Broadcasting Company (NBC), despite the then ongoing NCAA negotiations with both ABC and the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS).Arico, at 437; , at 1.  On learning of the CFA's negotiations, the NCAA issued an "Official Interpretation" stating that "The Association shall control all forms of televising of the intercollegiate football games of member institutions during the traditional football season..."NCAA I, 546 F.Supp. at 1276.  The CFA continued to work on a contract with NBC and came to an agreement on August 8, 1981.  The NCAA swiftly stated that universities that participated in the CFA contract would face NCAA sanctions, not just in football, but in all other sports as well.  Two member schools of the CFA, the University of Oklahoma and the University of Georgia, filed suit in the United States District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma seeking an injunction to prevent the NCAA from taking action against CFA members.Bd. of Regents, 468 U.S. at 85; NCAA I, 546 F.Supp. at 1276; James E. Hartley, The rule of reason 23  76-81 (1999); Arico, at 437; Scully, at 857; Seiken, at 56-62; ,  1 (2011).
District court
On being filed on September 8, 1981, District Judge Lee Roy West recused himself from the case, being an alumnus of the University of Oklahoma for both his undergraduate and law degrees.  Judge Juan Guerrero Burciaga of New Mexico was then appointed to hear the case., at 1.   During the trial, the NCAA claimed that it was a voluntary organization and if the plaintiffs or other schools did not wish to abide by the NCAA rules, they were free to terminate their membership.  It was shown that the amount of money paid by ABC to teams appearing on television was established by Thomas C. Hansen, the NCAA Television Program Director.  Universities were not allowed to negotiate their own terms. Burciaga pointed out an example of the control and price fixing by noting that in 1981, Oklahoma and the University of Southern California (both then ranked in the top 5 of the AP Poll and the Coaches' Poll) appeared on 200 stations in a regional broadcast.  On the same weekend, ABC televised a game between The Citadel and Appalachian State on four stations.  All four teams received the same amount of money for appearing.
Burciaga found that not only did the NCAA engage in price fixing, they acted to limit production by restricting the number of games that could be broadcast.  The NCAA further threatened universities with a group boycott if they did not agree to the terms dictated by the NCAA.  He noted that ABC had encouraged the NCAA to seek an exemption from antitrust laws from Congress, but that the NCAA did not believe that they could obtain the exemption.
Burciaga then examined the conduct of the NCAA under both the  rule and the rule of reason.  Finding that the NCAA violated antitrust laws under both evaluations, Burciaga issued both a declaratory judgment and a permanent injunction prohibiting the NCAA from interfering with the individual universities' television contracts and declaring the NCAA-ABC contract null and void.  The NCAA then appealed the decision to the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals.Bd. of Regents, 468 U.S. at 85; Bd. of Regents of the Univ. of Okla. v. Nat'l Collegiate Athletic Ass'n, 707 F.2d 1147 (10th Cir. 1983) (hereinafter cited as NCAA II); NCAA I, 546 F. Supp. at 1276; Arico, at 437.
Circuit Court of Appeals
The Tenth Circuit heard the case before Chief Judge James E. Barrett and Judges James K. Logan and Stephanie K. Seymour.  In the appeal, the NCAA argued that Oklahoma and Georgia did not have standing to bring the suit, claiming that the schools suffered no actual injury.  Logan, who wrote the opinion, flatly rejected that argument.NCAA II, 707 F.2d at 1147.
The court then turned to whether the case should be evaluated under the  rule or the rule of reason.  Deciding on the  rule, the court rejected the NCAA arguments that the television plan promoted live attendance, that it promoted balanced athletic competition, and that televised football competed with other, non-sports programs.  The court noted that the NCAA plan restricted output and affirmed the trial court's  ruling, while also holding that the district court erred in ruling television plan and contract constituted a group boycott.Bd. of Regents, 468 U.S. at 85; NCAA II, 707 F.2d at 1147; Arico, at 437.
Chief Judge Barrett dissented, believing that the restraints were reasonable under the rule of reason and that the NCAA has an overwhelming interest in preserving the amateur nature of intercollegiate athletics.  He would have reversed the district court, quashed the injunction, and held that there was no antitrust violation.
The NCAA again appealed, and the Supreme Court granted  to hear the case.Bd. of Regents, 468 U.S. at 85.
Opinion of the Court
Arguments
Frank H. Easterbrook argued the case for the NCAA and Andy Coats represented Oklahoma and Georgia.  The United States Solicitor General, Rex E. Lee, filed an  brief in support of Oklahoma and Georgia, and argued the cause to the court.  Other  briefs were filed by the National Federation of State High School Associations (supporting the NCAA) and the Association of Independent Television Stations (supporting Oklahoma and Georgia).
Majority opinion
thumb|right|alt=portrait of Justice John Paul Stevens|Justice John P. Stevens, author of the majority opinion
Justice John Paul Stevens delivered the opinion of the court.  Stevens stated that "There can be no doubt that the challenged practices of the NCAA constitute a 'restraint of trade'" but noted not all restraints of trade were unreasonable, and that only an unreasonable restraint was prohibited by the Sherman Antitrust Act.  Stevens noted that a league governing body was necessary for sporting events to take place and determined that the rule of reason, not  rules applied to the case.Arico, at 437.  Stevens determined that since the NCAA restrained price and output, it created a system that was unrelated to a free and competitive market., 1 , 1-52.1, 1-53 (Supp. 2004).  Since the NCAA television plan constituted a restraint of trade on its face, it placed the burden on the NCAA of establishing an affirmative defense that would justify the deviation from a free market.Bd. of Regents, 468 U.S. at 85; Arico, at 437; Hartley, at 76-81.
Stevens then went through the justifications that were offered by the NCAA.  First, although the NCAA claimed that the television plan was a joint venture, he noted that unlike Broadcast Music, Inc. v. Columbia Broadcast System, Inc.,Broadcast Music, Inc. v. Columbia Broadcast System, Inc., . the NCAA was not acting as a selling agent and that the sales occurred in a noncompetitive market.  Stevens evaluated the NCAA's claim that the television plan enhanced the competitiveness of college football. Since the district court found no procompetitive efficiencies from the arrangement, Stevens rejected this justification.  He also said that there was no need to penetrate the market against "nonexistent" competitors.  Stevens likewise rejected the defense that the television plan was designed to protect live attendance, stating " The NCAA's argument that its television plan is necessary to protect live attendance is not based on a desire to maintain the integrity of college football as a distinct and attractive product,  but rather on a fear that the product will not prove sufficiently attractive to draw live attendance when faced with competition from televised games."Bd. of Regents, 468 U.S. at 85; Arico, at 437; Hartley, at 76-81.
The NCAA position that an interest in maintaining a competitive balance justified the television plan was also rejected.  While agreeing with the desire to maintain such a balance, Stevens noted that there was no evidence that the plan succeeded in that effort.  The decision of the circuit court was affirmed.Bd. of Regents, 468 U.S. at 85; Hartley, at 76-81; Seiken, at 56-62.
Dissent
thumb|left|alt=portrait of Justice Byron White|Justice Byron White, author of the dissent
Justice Byron White, joined by Justice William Rehnquist, dissented from the majority opinion.  White, a former college football star at Colorado, stated that while intercollegiate athletics bore a superficial resemblance to professional sports, it was clear that other, non-commercial goals played the main role.  Its actions are based on the unique nature of college athletics, and White felt that the restrictions were reasonable.  He would have overturned the circuit court.  White did not find the majority's deference to the District Court's economic findings, and was not convinced that Oklahoma nor Georgia had shown either an increase in prices or a decrease in output.Bd. of Regents, 468 U.S. at 85; Arico, at 437; Hartley, at 76-81; Seiken, at 56-62.
Subsequent developments
As a direct result of this ruling, more games were televised which had the initial effect of driving television revenues down.Koch, at 9. This trend reversed, and by 2005, Notre Dame had signed a contract with NBC to broadcast all home games for a five-year period.Seiken, at 56-62.  In 2009-10, the University of Texas at Austin reported profits of almost $69 million just from football. Most of this money was earned in television contracts before UT added its own Longhorn Network which will pay approximately $15 million per year.,  183-85 (2012). The major conferences have reshuffled multiple times, most dramatically in the early 2010s and early 2020s, and the landscape of college football has changed significantly. Individual universities, their associated athletic conferences, and the individual bowl games continue to increase their revenue streams from television. As the profits for the universities and their athletics departments have grown, some have argued that the sense of exploitation of the amateur athlete has also grown.,  377 (2011).
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 468
 National Collegiate Athletic Association v. Smith
Footnotes
References
External links
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:National Collegiate Athletic Association litigation
Category:University of Georgia
Category:Georgia Bulldogs football
Category:University of Oklahoma
Category:Oklahoma Sooners football
Category:College football controversies
"""

From "NCAA v. Smith" ==> """
National Collegiate Athletic Association v. Smith, 525 U.S. 459 (1999), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the NCAA's receipt of dues payments from colleges and universities which received federal funds, was not sufficient to subject the NCAA to a lawsuit under Title IX..
 Background 
Renee M. Smith, an intercollegiate volleyball player, had played volleyball for two seasons from the fall of 1991 to 1993 at St. Bonaventure University. Smith graduated from St. Bonaventure University during the 1994 - 1995 athletic year and later enrolled in a postgraduate program at the University of Pittsburgh for the 1995 - 1996 athletic year. Smith had hoped to play volleyball for the University of Pittsburgh but was denied athletic eligibility by the NCAA on the basis of its Post Baccalaureate restrictions. Smith and The University of Pittsburgh applied for a waiver from the National Collegiate Athletic Association, to lift the restrictions on the athletic eligibility of graduate students. However the waiver was denied by the NCAA.
Procedural history
In August 1996, Smith filed a lawsuit pro se against the NCAA, alleging that the NCAA’s decision to not allow her to play intercollegiate volleyball at the University of Pittsburgh and Hofstra University on the basis of her sex, in that the NCAA grants more waivers for athletic eligibility restrictions to male than female post graduate student athletes. The NCAA attempted to have the case dismissed on the grounds that it did not receive federal assistance. This would exempt the NCAA from compliance with Title IX which states that "No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance..." The district court dismissed the case, claiming that Smith could not claim that Title IX was applicable. Smith then amended her claim.
The Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit later reversed the district court's decision. The NCAA then petitioned for Supreme Court review. They claimed that the court decision did not agree with the previous court case Department of Transportation v. Paralyzed Veterans of America,. which prohibits discrimination against any handicapped person in “any program or activity receiving any federal financial assistance.” The Supreme Court granted certiorari, in order to find out if a private organization such as the NCAA, that does not receive federal financial assistance, can be subject to Title IX simply because it receives funds from organizations that do receive federal financial assistance, making the NCAA indirectly federally funded.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court came to a unanimous decision ruling that the NCAA cannot be sued under Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 and remanded the case for further proceedings complying with this decision. The Supreme Court held that allegations did not exist that state that the NCAA uses the funds from its institutions that are federally funded, to provide any students with any form of financial aid. They stressed that only institutions that are federally funded directly can be subject to coverage by Title IX.
The NCAA was represented on its appeal to the Supreme Court by John Roberts, who would later become Chief Justice of the United States in 2005.
See also
NCAA v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 525
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1999 in American sports
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:College volleyball in the United States
Category:National Collegiate Athletic Association litigation
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:University of Pittsburgh
Category:Women and sports
Category:History of women in Pennsylvania
Category:Higher education case law
"""

From "National Credit Union Administration v. First National Bank & Trust Co." ==> """
National Credit Union Administration v. First National Bank & Trust Co., 522 U.S. 479 (1998), is a 1998 legal case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that banks had prudential standing to challenge regulations that permitted credit unions to enroll unaffiliated members.Nat'l Credit Union Admin. v. First Nat'l Bank & Trust Co., .
 Background 
The case involves the Federal Credit Union Act,. which limits federal credit union membership to “groups having a common bond of occupation or association, or to groups within a well-defined neighborhood, community or rural district.”.  There are three permitted types of common bonds:  occupational, associational, and community.  Until 1982, federal credit unions formed along occupational lines consisted of the employees of one employer.  In 1982, NCUA announced a multiple group occupational credit union policy that resulted in large, interstate, credit unions that offer banks competition for consumer products and services. 
Because of their mutual form of ownership, credit unions are not subject to corporate taxes. Banks argue that since credit unions do not pay taxes, they may offer consumer banking products at prices lower than banks and thrifts. Credit unions do not come under the requirements of the Community Reinvestment Act, 12 U.S.C. §§ 2901 -2906, as they solely lend to their membership.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court affirmed First National Bank and Trust Company v. National Credit Union Administration which had remanded the case to the district court.  This meant that, without legislation changing the language of the statute, a broad order could have been issued enjoining the admission of members to any federal occupational credit union who did not share the original single common bond of occupation.  All parties to the suit, however, asked the court to delay acting while Congress considered legislation.  Without legislation, it was feared that many of the large credit unions already in existence would face the likelihood that their stream of new members would slow to a trickle and, thus, their long term viability prospects diminish.
 Subsequent developments 
P.L. 105-219 contains clauses to preserve all existing multiple bond arrangements and permit new members to be added to all current groups.  It includes provisions to curb future growth of multiple-group credit unions—instructions to NCUA with respect to chartering single groups where possible and providing geographic components to affiliations.  Groups of more than 3,000 would generally not be permitted to affiliate with an existing credit union.  Multiple group credit unions could extend their membership to persons and organizations located within areas underserved by other depository institutions.  From the Senate-reported version (S.Rept. 105-193), capital standards are prescribed—7% of net worth for a well-capitalized credit union—and a cap is placed on commercial loans—1.75% of net worth.  This limits the total amount of member business loans over $50,000 that a well-capitalized credit union may carry to 12.25% of net worth. 
Also from the version reported by the Senate Banking Committee, a sequence of prompt corrective actions is prescribed for implementation as a federally insured credit union's net worth declines below prescribed levels. There are also new auditing procedures and voting requirements for a credit union to convert to a bank or thrift charter. 
The legislation mandates studies on the differences between the regulatory and tax treatment accorded credit unions and other federally insured financial institutions.  It requires the federal banking agencies to detail their progress in efforts to streamline regulatory burdens.  It also imposes a requirement that the Secretary of the Treasury recommend, within one year, legislative and administrative action to reduce and simplify the tax burden on small banking institutions:  insured depository institutions having less than $1 billion in assets and banks having total assets between $1 and $10 billion.Murphy, M. Maureen. CRS Report for Congress. Congressional Research Service.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 522
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1998 in United States case law
"""

From "Near v. Minnesota" ==> """
Near v. Minnesota, 283 U.S. 697 (1931), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court under which prior restraint on publication was found to violate freedom of the press as protected under the First Amendment. This principle was applied to free speech generally in subsequent jurisprudence. The Court ruled that a Minnesota law that targeted publishers of "malicious" or "scandalous" newspapers violated the First Amendment to the United States Constitution (as applied through the Fourteenth Amendment).. Legal scholar and columnist Anthony Lewis called Near the Court's "first great press case".
It was later a key precedent in New York Times Co. v. United States (1971), in which the Court ruled against the Nixon administration's attempt to enjoin publication of the Pentagon Papers..
Background of the case
thumb|The October 15, 1927 edition of The Saturday Press
In 1927, Jay M. Near, who has been described as "anti-Catholic, anti-Semitic, anti-black, and anti-labor"By Fred W. Friendly in Minnesota Rag: Corruption, Yellow Journalism, and the Case That Saved Freedom of the Press, his book on the case. began publishing The Saturday Press in Minneapolis with Howard A. Guilford, a former mayoral candidate who had been convicted of criminal libel.
The paper claimed that Jewish-American organized crime was "practically ruling" the city along with the police chief, Frank W. Brunskill, whom Near accused of  corruption. Among the paper's other targets were mayor George E. Leach, Hennepin County attorney and future three-term governor Floyd B. Olson, and the members of the grand jury of Hennepin County, who, the paper claimed, were either incompetent or willfully failing to investigate and prosecute known criminal activity.
Shortly after the first issue was distributed, Guilford was shot and hospitalized, where a further attempt on his life was made. At least one of the stories printed in The Saturday Press led to a successful prosecution of a gangster called Big Mose Barnett who had tried to extort protection money from a local dry cleaner by destroying his customers' clothing.
First trial court proceeding
Olson filed a complaint against Near and Guilford under the Public Nuisance Law of 1925.The law was passed to suppress Ripsaw, a newspaper first published in 1917 by a self-proclaimed Christian reformer in Duluth, Minnesota who criticized local business and politics.  The city was at the heart of the "Iron Range", a region integral to the nation's steel interests, and so the paper's editorial attacks on local leaders eventually motivated members of the Minnesota Legislature from Duluth to pass the law.  Ripsaw was the first target to be prosecuted under the new law, but its publisher died before his first day in court. Also known as the "Minnesota Gag Law", it provided permanent injunctions against those who created a "public nuisance," by publishing, selling, or distributing a "malicious, scandalous and defamatory newspaper." Olson claimed that the allegations raised against him and the other named public officials in all nine issues published between September 24, 1927, and November 19, 1927, as well as the paper's overall anti-Semitic tone, constituted a violation of this law. On November 22, 1927, Judge Matthias Baldwin of the Hennepin County District Court issued a temporary injunction that barred the defendants from editing, publishing, or circulating The Saturday Press or any other publication containing similar material. This injunction was granted without notice to either defendant on an ex parte hearing between Olson and the judge, and was to extend until the hearing on the judge's order for the defendants to show cause as to why they should not be permanently enjoined from publishing their paper. The hearing was held December 9, and future Minneapolis mayor Thomas Latimer argued that the defendants' activities were protected by the U.S. and Minnesota constitutions and demurred to the complaint.
Judge Baldwin denied the demurrer and was affirmed by the Minnesota Supreme Court on appeal.
First Minnesota Supreme Court decision
The State Supreme Court wrote that a scandalous publication "annoys, injures and endangers the comfort and repose of a considerable number of persons," and so constituted a nuisance just as surely as "places where intoxicating liquor is illegally sold," "houses of prostitution," "dogs," "malicious fences" "itinerant carnivals," "lotteries," and "noxious weeds." The court considered that a newspaper may also endanger safety, because "scandalous material" tended to disturb the peace and provoke assaults. The court cited previous Minnesota decisions that upheld the right of the state to enjoin the publication of "details of execution of criminals" and the teaching of "things injurious to society." Restricting the publication of a newspaper based on its harmful content accordingly fell within the legitimate power of "the people speaking through their representatives" to preserve "public morals" and the "public welfare." The court stated that it had to give heavy deference to such decisions, because "it is the prerogative of the legislature to determine not only what the public interests require but also the measures necessary to protect such interests."
Regarding Near and Guilford's defense of freedom of the press under article 1, section 3 of the Minnesota Constitution, the State Supreme Court did not believe that the right was intended to protect the publishing of "scandalous material", but that it only provided "a shield for the honest, careful and conscientious press," not the "defamer and the scandalmonger." Instead, "he who uses the press is responsible for its abuse." The court also ruled that the state constitution's due process clause did not extend any additional protection.
The trial court's decision after remand
The case then returned to the Hennepin County District Court, and Near and Guilford renewed their objection to the constitutionality of the Public Nuisance Law. Judge Baldwin again overruled their objection. Only the verified complaint that Olson had filed and the newspaper issues themselves were entered as evidence, and the defendants did not try to argue that the Saturday Press did not fit the definition under the statute, or that their published stories were in fact true. Baldwin ruled that the newspapers contained nothing but scandalous and defamatory material, and permanently enjoined the defendants "from producing, editing, publishing, circulating, having in their possession, selling or giving away any publication whatsoever which is a malicious, scandalous or defamatory newspaper, as defined by law," and also "from further conducting said nuisance under the name and title of said The Saturday Press or any other name or title."
The description of the proceedings after remand were found in the brief of the Minnesota attorney general to the U.S. Supreme Court, which offered a more detailed description though did not appear to contradict Near's account in his own brief.  The order granting and describing the permanent injunction was quoted in the U.S. Supreme Court's opinion.
Second Minnesota Supreme Court decision
On appeal once again, the Minnesota Supreme Court ruled that its first decision left little question as to the constitutionality of the statute, both under the defendants' state constitutional challenge and a new argument based on due process under the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The defendants also argued that the trial court's injunction went too far because it effectively prevented them from operating any newspaper, but their appeal did not request a modification of the order. The court in any case disagreed with their interpretation of the order's scope, stating that it did allow them to publish a newspaper, so long as it was operated "in harmony with the public welfare."
Only Near appealed from this decision to the U.S. Supreme Court, thanks to last-minute financial help from Col. Robert R. McCormick, the publisher of the Chicago Tribune. A quotation from the U.S. Supreme Court's decision written by Hughes is engraved in the lobby of the Tribune today.
The Court's decision
The U.S. Supreme Court, in a 5–4 decision, reversed the decision of the Minnesota Supreme Court and ruled that the Public Nuisance Law of 1925 was unconstitutional. The U.S. Supreme Court held that, except in rare cases, censorship is unconstitutional. The Court held:
Note that the paragraph above cites the Fourteenth Amendment and not the First Amendment. This is because the Fourteenth Amendment incorporates the First and makes it applicable to the States. As literally written, the First Amendment applies to Congress and the federal government, not the states.
This case strengthened the notion that a prior restraint of the press violates the First Amendment. However, it left a loophole which would be used later for other prior restraint cases, citing certain circumstances in which prior restraint could potentially be used:
Hughes (Ct):
Subsequent developments
Near returned to publishing The Saturday Press, calling it "the paper that refused to stay gagged". Guilford later joined the staff of the Twin City Reporter.  He continued to draw the ire of organized crime in Minneapolis and was shot and killed on September 6, 1934.
The Court closed off one of the few outlets remaining to censor the press under Near in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964), which seriously limited the grounds upon which a public official could sue for libel.  Statements made regarding their official conduct were only actionable if made with "actual malice", meaning a knowing or reckless disregard for the truth..
Hustler Magazine v. Falwell (1988) excluded parodies from even this limited standard, as they included no actionable statements of fact.  Hustler made clear this protection extended beyond merely defamation suits to cover other torts such as intentional infliction of emotional distress..
Basic case law resulting from this case
No prior restraint of the content of news by the government is allowed unless it reveals crucial military information, contains obscenity, or may directly incite "acts of violence".
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 279
Pentagon Papers
Yellow journalism
Muckraking
Kid Cann
Thomas E. Latimer
References
Further reading
External links
Friendly, Fred W. Minnesota Rag May 1981 (Random House) ; Reprinted  May 2003 (University of Minnesota Press) 
Lewis, Anthony  Make No Law, pp. 90–99
The Supreme Court and the Second Bill of Rights, by Richard C. Cortner.
http://www.class.uh.edu/comm/classes/comm4303/section3/nearvsminnesota.html#nvm
Category:1931 in United States case law
Category:History of mass media in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States defamation case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:Legal history of Minnesota
Category:Censorship in the United States
Category:Mass media in Minneapolis–Saint Paul
"""

From "Nebbia v. New York" ==> """
Nebbia v. New York, 291 U.S. 502 (1934), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States decided that New York State could regulate the price of milk for dairy farmers, dealers, and retailers..
History
New York State dairy farmers were disproportionately harmed by the decline in farm prices after World War I, and the Great Depression further worsened the problems they faced. To tackle the problem, the New York legislature created a joint legislative committee, headed by State Senator Perley A. Pitcher.Henry S. Manley, Nebbia Plus Fifteen, 13 Albany Law Review 11 (1949), at 12.
Following the hearings, the state of New York established a Milk Control Board in 1933 that was empowered to set maximum and minimum retail prices. The board set the price of a quart of milk at 9¢. The price reflected the market price at some point in the past and the order was designed to prevent price cutting. Nevertheless, the public suspected that the board's intent was to benefit dairy dealers, instead of farmers, because the minimum prices for the two sides were not the same. Tensions ran so high that violent milk strikes took place throughout the state, with two deaths and a great amount of property damage.Manley, supra, at 13. Every public hearing of the Milk Control Board resulted in a "tumultuous, popular assemblage" and its every action was "Statewide news."
A search began for a case that would challenge the constitutional basis of the statute. Leo Nebbia, the owner of a grocery store, sold two quarts of milk and a 5¢ loaf of bread for 18¢. He was found guilty of violating the price regulations and was fined $25. He challenged the conviction, arguing the statute and order violated the Equal Protection Clause and Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The county court and the Court of Appeals affirmed the conviction, and the case was appealed to the Supreme Court.
Decision
Justice Owen J. Roberts delivered the majority opinion.
He began by examining the legislative intent of the statute in question and briefly discussing on the effects of the Great Depression on milk prices and the significance of milk production to the agriculture of the United States. He then noted that although use of property and making of contracts are typically private matters and so remain free of government interference, "neither property rights nor contract rights are absolute."291 U.S. at 523.
He added that occasional regulation by the state is requisite for the proper government function, especially if such regulation is used to promote general welfare. The Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments do not prohibit governmental regulation for the public welfare. Instead, they only direct the process by which such regulation occurs. As the Court has held before, such due process "demands only that the law shall not be unreasonable, arbitrary, or capricious, and that the means selected shall have a real and substantial relation to the object sought to be attained."291 U.S. at 525.
Roberts noted also that the New York milk industry had long been the subject of public interest regulation. He claimed that because a legislative investigation had resulted in the establishment of the Milk Control Board, it was well aware of the insufficiency of regular laws of supply and demand to correct the issues with milk prices so "the order appears not to be unreasonable or arbitrary."291 U.S. at 530.
Further addressing the due process challenge, Roberts wrote that in absence of other constitutional restrictions, a state may both adopt an economic policy that can reasonably be said to promote public welfare and enforce such policy by appropriate legislation. Courts, however, have no authority to create such policy or to strike it down when it has been properly enacted by the legislature. He added, "With the wisdom of the policy adopted, with the adequacy or practicability of the law enacted to forward it, the courts are both incompetent and unauthorized to deal."291 U.S. at 537.
He concluded that the majority found no basis in the Due Process Clause to strike down the challenged provisions of the Agriculture and Markets law.
Dissent
Justice James C. McReynolds dissented from the majority opinion. His dissent was joined by Justice Willis Van Devanter, Justice George Sutherland, and Justice Pierce Butler. The four became nicknamed the Four Horsemen for their rejection of New Deal regulation.
McReynolds brought up many examples, such as New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, where the court ruled that states may not legislate over private businesses. He further questioned the rational basis of fixing milk at a higher price than the market value. He reasoned that the extra expense would drive down sales, thus doing little to help the dairy farmer, and furthermore, deprive the poorest among milk consumers. He ultimately concluded that although "regulation to prevent recognized evils in business has long been upheld as permissible legislative action... fixation of the price at which A, engaged in an ordinary business, may sell, in order to enable B, a producer, to improve his condition, has not been regarded as within legislative power." He added, "This is not regulation, but management, control, dictation."291 U.S. at 554 (McReynolds, J., dissenting).
References
External links
Category:1934 in United States case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
"""

From "Nebraska Press Ass'n v. Stuart" ==> """
Nebraska Press Association v. Stuart, 427 U.S. 539 (1976), was a landmark Supreme Court of the United States decision in which the Court held unconstitutional prior restraints on media coverage during criminal trials.
Background
Nebraska Press Association v. Stuart involved a debate over whether the press may be prevented from publishing aspects of a criminal trial (or pre-trial proceedings) seen to be "implicative of guilt", in other words, evidence tending to show that the defendant was in fact guilty of the charges. In 1971 the Supreme Court ruled in New York Times Co. v. United States that gag orders, viewed as form of prior restraint are presumptively unconstitutional. In Nebraska Press Ass'n the Supreme Court imposed a high burden on the government in order to sustain a prior restraint against the press. Prior to the 1976 ruling by the Supreme Court, lower courts trying criminal cases across the United States initiated a practice of enjoining the press from reporting certain details in criminal cases that the courts had determined might interfere with a defendant's right to a fair trial by prejudicing potential (or actual) jurors; media coverage of such rulings referred to such judicial orders as gag orders.
Prior litigation
In relation to a sexual assault in 1975 in Sutherland, Nebraska, six people of Henry Kellie's family were killed. Police discovered the six bodies on October 18, 1975, when Sutherland had a population of 850. After defendant Erwin Charles Simants was detained by law enforcement, there was a high level of media coverage of the criminal justice proceedings. Police talked to media who had traveled to the location of the incident, and informed them of descriptive characteristics of the suspect. After surrendering to the police, Simants had an arraignment in Lincoln County Court in North Platte, Nebraska, on October 20, 1975.
The attorney for the defendant, in addition to the prosecutor handling the case, requested the state court system in Nebraska reduce the intensity of the reporting on the incident due to a concern over neutral jury selection. Simants had given law enforcement a confession during the course of the case. After the requests by the attorneys for the defense and present danger that pre-trial publicity could infringe upon the defendant's right to a fair trial".  Nebraska state trial judge Hugh Stuart entered an order restraining members of the press from publishing or broadcasting accounts of confessions made by the accused to the police. The judge felt that this measure was necessary to guarantee a fair trial to the accused.
Several media organizations sued, with the Supreme Court of Nebraska upholding the judges' order. The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari and oral arguments were held April 19, 1976.
Decision
Chief Justice of the United States Warren E. Burger wrote the opinion of the court. Burger wrote, "prior restraints on speech and publication are the most serious and least tolerable infringement on First Amendment Rights". The court ruled this was particularly at issue when dealing with "communication of news and commentary on current events". According to the ruling, it was inappropriate to bar media reporting on a criminal case prior to the trial itself, except in matters where a "clear and present danger" existed that would impede the process of a fair trial. The court characterized the press as "the handmaiden of effective judicial administration, especially in the criminal" process.
Burger noted, "The press does not simply publish information about trials but guards against the miscarriage of justice by subjecting the police, prosecutors, and judicial processes to extensive public scrutiny and criticism". The court commented on the action of the trial court's order, which had delayed the release of information from the press to the public, writing that prompt reporting is needed if "press coverage is to fulfill its traditional function of bringing news to the public promptly". The decision questioned whether or not it was allowable for the role of government to "insinuate itself into the editorial rooms of this Nation's press".
The court noted that the trial court in the case could have availed itself of other means in order to ensure the process of a fair trial, including: moving the location of the trial to "a place less exposed to the intense publicity", delaying the criminal proceedings until after media attention had died down, querying jurors to make certain they are impartial, issue instructions to the jury telling them to only consider the evidence presented in the trial, and sequester the jury during the proceedings. Burger critically analyzed whether the trial court would even be able to maintain the status of its prior restraint order, external to its specific jurisdictional locale. The court compared the potential harm of press reporting versus the alternative in its absence—rumors spread among individuals in the town, "one can only speculate on the accuracy of such reports, given the generative propensities of such rumors, they could well be more damaging than reasonably accurate news accounts". The court concluded, "but plainly a whole community cannot be restrained from discussing a subject intimately affecting life within it".
Analysis
In their 2006 work Contemporary Supreme Court Cases: Landmark Decisions Since Roe v. Wade, authors Donald E. Lively and Russell L. Weaver wrote, "Nebraska Press is an important decision because it reaffirms the nation's commitment to free speech, and the general impermissibility of prior restraints". Lively and Weaver concluded, "while the Court was sensitive to the important governmental interest in ensuring that criminal defendants receive fair trials, untainted by the threat of excessive and prejudicial publicity, the Court concluded that a trial court has other means, besides prior restraints, for ensuring the right to a fair trial".
Anthony Lewis commented on the outcome of the case, in his 2007 book Freedom for the Thought That We Hate: A Biography of the First Amendment, writing that  Nebraska Press Association v. Stuart was "a great victory for the press. If a bar on publishing a confession was wrong in so aggravated a situation—a gruesome multiple murder in a small town—it was hard to see when one would be permissible". Furthermore, Lewis noted, "none was sustained on appeal" afterwards. Paul Siegel noted in his 2007 book Cases in Communication Law, "There is an unavoidable tension between jurors' argued privacy rights and the right of the accused to be judged by impartial peers". Siegel pointed out, "Chief Justice Burger emphasizes that the juror selection process has traditionally been considered a public event and that this openness serves important societal functions".
See also
Alien and Sedition Acts
Civil liberties in the United States
Censorship in the United States
Freedom of speech in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 427
Media transparency
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:Nebraska Supreme Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Nebraska v. Parker" ==> """
Nebraska v. Parker, 577 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that Congress's 1882 Act did not diminish the Omaha Indian Reservation. The disputed land is within the reservation's boundaries., 136 S. Ct. 1072 (2016).SCOTUSblog coverage
 Background 
In 2006, the Omaha Tribe "amended its Beverage Control Ordinance and sought to subject Pender retailers to the amended ordinance." The city and its retailers sued the Omaha Tribal Council members in their official capacities in federal district court. The suit challenged the ordinance and the tribe's ability to impose the ordinance on Pender retailers. Nebraska intervened on behalf of the petitioners, while the United States federal government intervened on behalf of the Omaha Tribal Council members.
The District Court found that the 1882 Act did not diminish the Omaha Reservation. On appeal, the Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's ruling.
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Clarence Thomas authored a unanimous decision, holding that the sale of lands authorized under the 1882 Act did not diminish the boundaries of the reservation. The Court applied the test laid out Solem v. Bartlett, 465 U.S. 463 (1984)..
First, and most important, the Court looks for Congress' clear, expressed intent to diminish the reservation in the text of the statute.136 S. Ct. at 1079 For example, the Court would look for "[e]xplicit reference to cession or other language evidencing the present and total surrender of all tribal interests" or "an unconditional commitment from Congress to compensate the Indian tribe for its opened land."136 S. Ct. at 1079 (quoting Solem at 470). The Court found no indication from the text of the 1882 Act that Congress intended to diminish the reservation. Instead, the language resembled similar legislation that merely opened up reservation land for non-Native settlement.136 S. Ct. at 1079–80.
Second, the Court may evaluate the circumstances surrounding the sale of land on the reservation and whether contemporaneous evidence demonstrates an understanding that the Act diminished the reservation. While the historical record was "mixed," it certainly did not "unequivocally reveal[s] a widely held, contemporaneous understanding that the affected reservation would shrink as a result of the proposed legislation" as required under Solem.136 S. Ct. at 1080.
Finally, and "to a lesser extent", the Court may examine the "demographic history" of the land (whether there is still a Native presence on the land in dispute) and the federal government's "treatment of the affected areas" in the years following enactment of the statute. Although the Tribe had been absent from the land in dispute for  about 120 years and did not enforce its regulations or offer any services in the area, the demographic history could not overcome the lack of explicit intent to diminish the Tribe's reservation.136 S. Ct. at 1081–82.
 See also 
 Wilson v. Omaha Tribe
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Omaha (Native American) people
Category:United States Native American treaty case law
Category:Thurston County, Nebraska
Category:Native American history of Nebraska
"""

From "Nectow v. City of Cambridge" ==> """
Nectow v. City of Cambridge, 277 U.S. 183 (1928), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court reversed the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court ruling, and found that the invasion of the plaintiff's property right was "serious and highly injurious," and that the placement of the locus of the zoning ordinance would not promote the health, safety, convenience or general welfare of the inhabitants of Cambridge.. It, along with Euclid v. Ambler, constituted the Supreme Court's case law on zoning until 1974.
 References 
External links
Case Brief is available from CaseBriefs.com
Category:1928 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States land use case law
Category:Zoning in the United States
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:History of Cambridge, Massachusetts
"""

From "Negusie v. Holder" ==> """
Negusie v. Holder, 555 U.S. 511 (2009), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court involving whether the bar to asylum in the United States for persecutors applies to asylum applicants who have been the target of credible threats of harm or torture in their home countries for refusing to participate further in persecution.. The petitioner, Daniel Negusie, claimed he was forced to assist in the mistreatment of prisoners in Eritrea under threat of execution, and that because any assistance he rendered was provided under duress he should still be eligible for asylum.
The Court held that the Board of Immigration Appeals and United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit erred in their interpretation of the Court's holding in Fedorenko v. United States (1981) when they evaluated Daniel's asylum petition, as they presumed that an alien's claimed coercion to participate in persecution was immaterial to determining whether the "persecutor bar" applies.
 See also 
Fedorenko v. United States (1981)
References
 Further reading 
External links
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Penal system in Eritrea
Category:Eritrean emigrants to the United States
"""

From "Nelson v. Campbell" ==> """
Nelson v. Campbell, 541 U.S. 637 (2004), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court considering whether a prisoner's appeal of proposed execution procedures was equivalent to a habeas corpus petition. The court held unanimously that an appeal of proposed execution procedures is different from a habeas corpus petition because it is not an appeal of a conviction or sentence.
Background
On January 1, 1978, David Larry Nelson killed Wilson Woodrow Thompson and James Dewey Cash, a cab driver. Nelson had previously pleaded guilty to beating an eighty-two-year-old man, Oliver King, to death in a Birmingham, Alabama, parking lot. Nelson served three years in prison for King's death.
In 1979, a jury found Nelson guilty of capital murder and he was sentenced to death. Nelson was resentenced twice, receiving the death penalty both times. Nelson filed a federal habeas petition challenging the most recent death sentence, which was denied by the United States District Court for the Middle District of Alabama. On June 3, 2002, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit affirmed the District Court's denial of Nelson's first federal habeas petition, claiming it was essentially the same a second habeas petition. Alabama's sole method of execution was electrocution until July 1, 2002, when they changed to lethal injection. Alabama allowed inmates to opt for electrocution within until July 1, 2002. Nelson did not file a punctual request opting for execution, resulting in a waiver of this option.
Nelson then filed a civil rights action against officials three days prior to his scheduled execution, pusuant to 42 USC § 1983 of the Civil Rights Act of 1871. Because Nelson's veins were compromised from long-term drug use, Alabama planned to use a "cut-down" procedure to access Nelson's veins, which required making a two-inch incision into his arm or leg to bypass veins that had collapsed. Nelson claimed that the use of this procedure would violate the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution because potential complications from the procedure included hemorrhage, death by asphyxia, and cardiovascular collapse. Both the District Court and the Eleventh Circuit refused to allow Nelson's claim to be heard. Nelson sought a permanent injunction against use of the cut-down procedure as well as a temporary stay of execution a stay of execution so that the District Court could consider the merits of his claim. On October 9, 2003, less than three hours before he was scheduled to be executed, the Supreme Court granted Nelson a temporary stay of execution.
Supreme Court decision
The Supreme Court unanimously held that an appeal of proposed execution procedures is different from a habeas corpus petition because it is not an appeal of a conviction or sentence, so a prisoner challenging the procedures for his execution can base his Eighth Amendment claim on Section 1983. Furthermore, the opinion claimed that Alabama had conceded a prisoner who needed medical treatment that required access to a vein could challenge the procedure as inadequate medical care. The Court stated that the cut-down procedure was "dangerous and antiquated," arguing that they saw "no reason on the face of the complaint to treat petitioner's claim differently solely because he has been condemned to die."
References
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Nelson v. Colorado" ==> """
Nelson v. Colorado, 581 U.S. ___ (2017), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States.. In a 7-1 decision written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the Court held that a state had no right to keep fines and other money based on an invalid conviction. Justice Samuel Alito wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment, Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, and Justice Neil Gorsuch did not take part in the consideration or decision of the case.
Background
The case combined lawsuits by two petitioners: Shannon Nelson and Louis Madden. Nelson was convicted of child abuse and sentenced to 20 years to life, and assessed $8,192 in various fees and restitution. Madden was convicted of attempting to patronize a prostituted child and attempted sexual assault, and received an indeterminate sentence and had to pay $4,413. Both convictions were overturned on appeal and the petitioners were considered factually innocent.
Colorado's Exoneration ActA Bill for an Act Concerning Compensation for Persons who are Exonerated of Their Crimes after a Period of Incarceration, Colorado House Bill 13-1230 (2013). requires that a person who is exonerated after being convicted must petition a Colorado District Court for an order entitling them to receive compensation.
On January 9, 2017, oral arguments were heard, where Professor Stuart Banner appeared for the accused, and the Colorado Solicitor General appeared for that state.
Opinion of the Court
On April 19, 2017, the Supreme Court delivered judgment in favor of the accused, voting 7-1 to reverse and remand to the state court.  Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the opinion of the Court, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts, Justice Kennedy Anthony Kennedy and Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan.The Supreme Court, 2016 Term — Leading Cases, 131 Harv. L. Rev. 283 (2017).  This decision held that the part of the law regarding "any fine, penalty, court costs, or restitution imposed upon and paid by the wrongfully convicted person" violated the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantee of due process. The petitioners are entitled to prompt repayment of the money that they paid in regard to the wrongful conviction.
Justice Samuel Alito concurred only in the judgment.
Justice Clarence Thomas dissented.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2017 in United States case law
"""

From "Nestlé USA, Inc. v. Doe" ==> """
Nestlé USA, Inc. v. Doe, 593 U. S. ___ (2021), is a United States Supreme Court decision regarding the Alien Tort Statute (ATS), which provides federal courts jurisdiction over claims brought by foreign nationals for violations of international law. Consolidated with Cargill, Inc. v. Doe, the case concerned a class-action lawsuit against Nestlé USA and Cargill for aiding and abetting child slavery in Côte d’Ivoire by purchasing from cocoa producers that utilize child slave labor from Mali. The plaintiffs, who were former slave laborers in the cocoa farms, brought their claim in U.S. district court under the ATS.
The U.S. District Court for the Central District of California dismissed the suit on the basis that corporations cannot be sued under the ATS, and that the plaintiffs failed to allege the elements of an aiding and abetting claim. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed, holding that corporations are liable for aiding and abetting slavery, in part because norms against slavery are "universal and absolute" and thus provide a basis for an ATS claim against a corporation; however, it did not address the argument by the defendant corporations that the complaint sought an extraterritorial application of the ATS, which the U.S. Supreme Court had recently rejected in Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co..
On remand, the district court again dismissed the claims, finding that the plaintiffs sought an impermissible extraterritorial application of the ATS. In the interim, the U.S. Supreme Court decided Jesner v. Arab Bank, PLC, which held that foreign corporations cannot be sued under the ATS., 138 S. Ct. 1386,  200 L. Ed. 2d 612 (2018). The Ninth Circuit reversed, finding that the holding in Jesner does not disturb its prior holding as to the domestic defendants, Nestle USA, Inc., and Cargill, Inc., and that the specific domestic conduct alleged by the plaintiffs falls within the focus of the ATS and does not require extraterritorial application of that statute.
In an 8–1 opinion authored by Justice Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court held that respondents improperly sought extraterritorial application of the ATS given the presumption of domestic application and that the conduct relevant to the statute's focus did not occur in the United States.US Supreme Court blocks child slavery lawsuit against chocolate firms, BBC news, 18 June 2021., 141 S. Ct. 1931, 210 L. Ed. 2d 207 (2021). Justice Thomas reasoned that nearly all the conduct alleged as the company's aiding and abetting forced labor—providing training, equipment, and cash to overseas farmers—occurred in the Ivory Coast, not the United States, and that "mere corporate presence" in the United States was not sufficient to establish the extraterritorial connection. The case was reversed and remanded. Justice Samuel Alito filed a dissenting opinion.
Background
Six Malians, identified as John Doe I through VI, were trafficked into Côte d’Ivoire as children and enslaved on cocoa plantations. The children, aged 12–14, were kept in harsh living conditions at the plantations, and they were forced under threat of violence to cultivate cocoa for up to fourteen hours per day without pay.https://www.supremecourt.gov/DocketPDF/19/19-416/125373/20191212153213243_Nestle%20BIO.pdf  The children witnessed slaves who were caught trying to escape from the plantation being tortured by guards.
Most of the cocoa that the slaves cultivated on Côte d’Ivoire plantations was sold to U.S. companies such as the Nestlé and Cargill corporations and imported to U.S. markets. Nestlé and Cargill encouraged the use of child slave labor on Côte d’Ivoire plantations by supporting farmers through capital investments in equipment, training, and cash advances. They also facilitated child slavery by lobbying "against legislation intended to make the use of child slavery transparent to the public" and mislead consumers on their actions in the region. The corporations also sent representatives to inspect plantations. In return, Nestlé and Cargill get cheaper cocoa imports, increasing their profit margins.
History
The case was initially filed in 2005 but dismissed by the District Court for the Central District of California in 2010. The Ninth Circuit remanded this decision, stating that the plaintiffs had standing to sue under the Alien Tort Statute—but the case was again dismissed by the district court.
In oral arguments, the Malians were represented by Paul L. Hoffman, while Nestlé and Cargill were represented by Neal Katyal.
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Alien Tort Statute case law
"""

From "Nevada Commission on Ethics v. Carrigan" ==> """
Nevada Commission on Ethics v. Carrigan, 564 U.S. 117 (2011), was a Supreme Court of the United States decision in which the Court held that the Nevada Ethics in Government Law, which required government officials recuse in cases involving a conflict of interest, is not unconstitutionally overbroad. Specifically, the law requires government officials to recuse themselves from advocating for and voting on the passage of legislation if private commitments to the interests of others materially affect the official's judgment. Under the terms of this law, the Nevada Commission on Ethics censured city councilman Michael Carrigan for voting on a land project for which his campaign manager was a paid consultant. Carrigan challenged his censure in court and the Nevada Supreme Court ruled in his favor, claiming that casting his vote was protected speech. The Supreme Court reversed, ruling that voting by a public official on a public matter is not First Amendment speech.
Background
235px|thumb|Sparks, Nevada, where Michael Carrigan was elected City Councilman
Nevada's Ethics in Government Law
Nevada's Ethics in Government law states that "a public officer shall not vote upon or advocate the passage or failure of, but may otherwise participate in the consideration of, a matter with respect to which the independence of judgment of a reasonable person in the public officer’s situation would be materially affected by... the public officer’s commitment in a private capacity to the interests of others."§281A.420(3) The law further defines commitment in a private capacity to the interests of others as "a commitment to a person who is a member of the public officer’s or employee’s household; is related to the public officer or employee by blood, adoption or marriage within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity; employs the public officer or employee or a member of the public officer’s or employee’s household; whom the public officer or employee has a substantial and continuing business relationship; or any other commitment or relationship that is substantially similar to a commitment or relationship described."§281A.420(8)(a)-(e)
Investigation of Michael Carrigan
The Nevada Commission on Ethics, the body responsible for administering and enforcing the Ethics in Government law, opened an investigation into Michael Carrigan.§281A.280(1) In 2007, the Commission found that Michael Carrigan, an elected member of the City Council of Sparks, Nevada, had violated the law for not abstaining from voting on a hotel/casino project known as the Lazy 8 project."Councilman Carrigan violated NRS 281.501, subsection 2, by not abstaining from voting on the Lazy 8 matter at the August 23, 2006 Council meeting." p. 5 The Commission held that Carrigan's relationship with Carlos Vasquez—Carrigan's friend, former political advisor, and a paid consultant on the Lazy 8 project—was significant enough to warrant recusal under the ethics law."The independence of judgement of a reasonable person in Councilman Carrigan's position would be affected by the commitment and relationship Councilman Carrigan shares with Mr. Vasquez. Therefore, the Commission ruled that during the August 23, 2006 Council meeting, when the Lazy 8 matter was heard, Councilman Carrigan had a commitment in a private capacity to the interest of Mr. Vasquez" p. 8 However, the Commission found that Carrigan's violation was not willful"Councilman Carrigan's violation… was not willful" p. 5 and that Carrigan did not use his position to secure or grant unwarranted privileges for Vasquez."[Councilman Carrigan] did not use his position in the government to secure or grant unwarranted privileges, preferences, exemptions or advantages for Carlos Vasquez" p. 4 Carrigan petitioned for judicial review of the decision, which was denied by a district court but granted by the Supreme Court of Nevada."Appeal from a district court order denying a petition for judicial review… reversed." Opinion p. 1
Nevada Supreme Court Ruling
In 2010, a majority of the Nevada Supreme Court held that voting by public officers on public issues is protected speech under the First Amendment and that the ethics law was unconstitutionally overbroad in violation of the First Amendment."we first conclude that voting by public officers on public issues is protected speech under the First Amendment… we conclude that NRS 281A.420(8)(e) is unconstitutionally overbroad in violation of the First Amendment" Opinion p. 3 The dissent argued that there was no previous decision that held that a public official voting was core political speech."Before today, no published decision has held that an elected local official engages in core political speech when he or she votes" Dissent p. 1  The Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari in January 2011."Petition GRANTED." Entry for Jan 7 2011
Opinion of the Court
left|150px|thumb|Justice Scalia delivered the opinion for the Court.
Justice Scalia wrote the opinion of the Court, which reversed the Supreme Court of Nevada, holding that the Ethics Act did not violate the First Amendment. Scalia wrote, "a 'universal and long-established' tradition of prohibiting certain conduct creates a strong presumption that the prohibition is constitutional"p. 4(citing Republican Party of Minnesota v. White) and that "the Nevada Supreme Court and Carrigan have not cited a single decision invalidating a generally applicable conflict-of-interest recusal rule-- and such rules and have been commonplace for over 200 years".p. 4 The Court held that the Nevada Supreme Court's belief that recusal rules violate legislators' First Amendment rights is inconsistent with long-standing traditions of Congress,"Within 15 years of the founding, both the House of Representatives and the Senate adopted recusal rules.  " p. 4  the judiciary,"Federal conflict-of-interest rules applicable to judges also date back to the founding." p. 5 and the States."The Nevada Supreme Court’s belief that recusal rules violate legislators’ First Amendment rights is also inconsistent with long-standing traditions in the States". p. 6
Further, the Court found that a legislator's vote is representative of the legislator's power, but rather belongs to the legislator's constituents."The answer is that a legislator’s vote is the commitment of his apportioned share of the legislature’s power to the passage or defeat of a particular proposal.  The legislative power thus committed is not personal to the legislator but belongs to the people; the legislator has no personal right to it." p. 8 Therefore, restrictions on legislators' voting cannot infringe on the legislator's individual right to speech. The Court held that even if a vote could express personal views, the ethics law would still not be a violation of Carrigan's First Amendment rights because "this Court has rejected the notion that the First Amendment confers a right to use governmental mechanics to convey a message."p. 9
Kennedy's Concurrence
In his concurrence, Justice Kennedy voiced concern that the ethics law had vague language"The application of the statute’s language to the case just supposed, and to any number of variations on the supposition, is not apparent." p. 3 and was an invitation for selective enforcement." A statute of this sort is an invitation to selective enforcement" p. 3 Kennedy joined the Court's opinion because "the act of casting an official vote is not itself protected by the Speech Clause of the First Amendment",p. 1 however he noted that "as the Court observes, however, the question whether Nevada’s recusal statute was applied in a manner that burdens the First Amendment freedoms discussed above is not presented in this case".p. 4 The Court did not consider the issue because such an argument was not raised in the Nevada Supreme Court case or Carrigan's brief in opposition to the writ of certiorari."Carrigan raises two additional arguments in his brief: 
that Nevada’s catchall provision unconstitutionally burdens the right of association of officials and supporters, and that the provision is unconstitutionally vague.  Whatever the merits of these arguments, we have no occasion to consider them.  Neither was  decided below: The Nevada  Supreme Court made no mention of the former argument and said that it need not address the latter given its resolution of the overbreadth challenge... Nor was either argument raised in Carrigan’s brief in opposition  to the petition for writ of certiorari. Arguments thus omitted are normally considered waived" p. 11
Alito's Concurrence
Justice Alito concurred in part and concurred in judgment."JUSTICE ALITO, "concurring in part and concurring in the judgment" p. 1 Alito disagreed with the Court in finding that restrictions upon legislators' voting are not restrictions upon legislators' speech."I concur in the judgment, but I do not agree with the opinion of the Court insofar as it suggests that restrictions upon legislators’ voting are not restrictions upon legislators’ speech." p. 1 Alito argued that "the act of voting is not drained of its expressive content when the vote has a legal effect".p. 3 Despite disagreement on whether legislators' voting constitutes speech, Alito concurred in judgement based on the Court's arguments that legislative recusal laws have historically been long standing and not overturned."In Part III of its opinion, the Court demonstrates that legislative recusal rules were not regarded during the founding era as impermissible restrictions on freedom of speech.  On that basis, I agree that the judgment below must be reversed." p. 3
Notes
References
External links
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:2011 in Nevada
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
"""

From "Nevada Department of Human Resources v. Hibbs" ==> """
Nevada Department of Human Resources v. Hibbs, 538 U.S. 721 (2003), was a United States Supreme Court case which held that the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 was "narrowly targeted" at "sex-based overgeneralization" and was thus a "valid exercise of [congressional] power under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment.", 726-27 & n.1 (2003).
The law
The FMLA
The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) allows eligible employees to take up to 12 work weeks of unpaid leave annually for several reasons, including the birth of a child or the "serious health condition" of the employee's spouse, child, or parent..  The FMLA also authorizes employees whose rights under the FMLA have been violated to sue their employer for equitable relief and money damages..
In enacting the FMLA, Congress invoked two of the powers it possesses under the Constitution.  In regulating private employers under the FMLA, it invoked its power under the Commerce Clause.  In regulating public employers, it relied on its power under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment. Section 5 gives Congress the power "to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of [the Fourteenth Amendment]."  One of these provisions is the Equal Protection Clause, which prohibits states from denying to persons within their jurisdiction "the equal protection of the laws."  It was its power to enforce the Equal Protection Clause which Congress invoked in enacting the FMLA.538 U.S. at 727 n.1 (quoting , (5)).
State sovereign immunity
In Hans v. Louisiana (1890), the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Eleventh Amendment prohibits states from being sued in federal court without their consent by their own citizens, despite the Eleventh Amendment's literal language.The Eleventh Amendment prohibits suits "against one of the United States by Citizens of another State." U.S. Const., amend. XI (emphasis added).  See also  ("[W]e have understood the Eleventh Amendment to stand not so much for what it says, but for the presupposition of our constitutional structure which it confirms.")  Congress, however, when acting under its Section 5 power, may abrogate state sovereign immunity and allow states to be sued for money damages.  The Supreme Court has held that Congress may do this only if the private remedies it enacts under Section 5 have "congruence and proportionality" to the constitutional wrongs which it seeks to redress..  Without the requisite congruence and proportionality, Congress cannot constitutionally authorize private litigants to recover money damages from the states, although such litigants can sue for equitable relief.See , 374 n.9 (2001) (citing ).
Facts and procedural history of the case
William Hibbs worked for the Nevada Department of Human Resources in its Welfare Division.  He requested leave from the Department under the FMLA in order to care for his wife, who had been in a car accident and undergone neck surgery.  The Department granted the request and told Hibbs he could use the full 12 weeks of FMLA leave intermittently as needed between May and December 1997.  He used the leave intermittently until August 5 of that year, after which he did not return to work.  In October the Department informed Hibbs that he had exhausted his FMLA leave and was required to report to work by November 12.  When he failed to report, he was fired.
Hibbs then sued the Department in the United States District Court for the District of Nevada for alleged violations of the FMLA.  He sought money damages and other relief.  The district court granted the Department summary judgment, finding that Hibbs's claim under the FMLA was barred by the Eleventh Amendment.  Hibbs appealed the ruling to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which held that the FMLA was a valid exercise of Congress's power under the Fourteenth Amendment, and reversed the district court's grant of summary judgment.  Thereafter the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Majority opinion
The majority, in an opinion authored by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, began by reaffirming City of Boerne v. Flores (1997), which was the first case to set down the "congruence and proportionality" requirement for laws enacted under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment.  The Court stated that while "Congress' power to enforce' the [Fourteenth] Amendment includes the authority both to remedy and to deter violation of rights guaranteed thereunder by prohibiting a somewhat broader swath of conduct, including that which is not itself forbidden by the Amendment's text",538 U.S. at 727 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). the remedies which Congress enacts to enforce the Amendment must not constitute "an attempt to substantively redefine the States' legal obligations."538 U.S. at 728 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).  To prevent Congress from doing this, the Court said, its case law required Section 5 legislation to "exhibit 'congruence and proportionality between the injury to be prevented or remedied and the means adopted to that end.'"538 U.S. at 728 (quoting City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S. at 520).
The Court acknowledged that Congress, by enacting the FMLA, had sought "to protect the right to be free from gender-based discrimination in the workplace."538 U.S. at 728.  The FMLA was meant to protect that right by guaranteeing to working women, who Congress found usually bear the primary responsibility for family caretaking, the right to take unpaid leave to deal with this responsibility while still retaining employment.538 U.S. at 728 n.2  Whether the FMLA was constitutional depended on whether Congress had evidence that the states were systematically violating women's workplace rights.  Citing Bradwell v. Illinois and Goesaert v. Cleary, the majority acknowledged that there was a long history of legally sanctioned discrimination against women in employment opportunities.
Congress, the majority said, first responded to this inequality by passing Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.  Title VII's abrogation of state sovereign immunity was upheld in Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer, "[b]ut," the Court said, "state gender discrimination did not cease."538 U.S. at 730.  The Court noted that "the persistence of such unconstitutional discrimination by the States justifie[d]" the passage of the FMLA, which was designed to prevent further discrimination.
Moreover, continued the majority, Congress had evidence that state-offered parental leave for fathers was rare, and stated that "[t]his and other differential leave policies were not attributable to any differential physical needs of men and women, but rather to the pervasive sex-role stereotype that caring for family members is women's work."538 U.S. at 731.  Even in states where the laws were supposed to offer parental leave for fathers, such laws "were applied in discriminatory ways."  Taking these conditions into account, the majority concluded, Congress was justified in passing the FMLA.
The Court added that earlier cases which had struck down laws passed under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment — cases such as Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents and Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett — were distinguishable.  Those cases concerned legislation which Congress had enacted in order to combat what it considered discrimination on the basis of age and disability.  The Court stated that because such discrimination is not subjected to heightened scrutiny under the Constitution, and because the laws invalidated in Kimel and Garrett prohibited almost all such discrimination, the previous cases struck down laws which bore little "congruence and proportionality" to the wrongs they sought to remedy.  Gender-based discrimination, by contrast, is subjected to intermediate scrutiny under the Constitution, and so in enacting the FMLA "it was easier for Congress to show a pattern of state constitutional violations."538 U.S. at 736.  In addition, the majority noted, the FMLA placed certain limitations on the right of employees to take leave and limited the amount of damages which aggrieved plaintiffs could recover for violations.  For those reasons, the Court said, "we conclude that [the FMLA's private remedy] is congruent and proportional to its remedial object, and can 'be understood as responsive to, or designed to prevent, unconstitutional behavior.'"538 U.S. at 740 (quoting Boerne, 521 U.S. at 532).
Concurrences
Justice Souter and Justice Stevens both wrote brief concurrences.  Justice Souter, in whose concurrence Justices Ginsburg and Breyer joined, concurred in the Court's opinion.  He believed that "[e]ven on this Court's view of the scope of congressional power under § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment," the FMLA was a valid enactment.  He emphasized, however, that he still disagreed with the Court's interpretation of Congress's power of enforcement under the Fourteenth Amendment, citing dissents in Kimel, Garrett, and Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Education Expense Board v. College Savings Bank.
Justice Stevens concurred in the judgment only.  He doubted that the FMLA was independently valid under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment, but believed that it was a constitutional use of congressional power under the Commerce Clause.  Reiterating a position he and other justices had taken in past decisions, Justice Stevens stated that the Eleventh Amendment did not prevent Congress from enacting legislation under the Commerce Clause to allow citizens to sue their own states for money damages.  Thus, he concluded, Hibbs's suit was not barred by sovereign immunity and could proceed.
Dissents
Both Justice Scalia and Justice Kennedy filed dissents.  Justice Scalia joined Justice Kennedy's dissent but wished to "add one further observation." A legal action filed against Nevada under legislation enacted in order to protect against future violations of the Equal Protection Clause, Justice Scalia said, could not be justified by showing "violations by another State, or by most other States, or even by 49 other States." Rather, the plaintiff had to show that Congress was preventing violations of the Fourteenth Amendment "by the State against which the enforcement action is taken,"538 U.S. at 741 (emphasis in the original). which in this case was Nevada. Because Congress could not rely on what he termed "guilt by association", and because he believed the majority had not shown that each of the 50 states had engaged in gender-based violations of the Equal Protection Clause, Justice Scalia concluded that the FMLA was unconstitutional.
Justice Kennedy's dissent, joined by both Justice Scalia and Justice Thomas, argued that Congress simply had not established that the states "engage[d] in widespread discrimination on the basis of gender in the provision of family leave benefits."  Justice Kennedy believed the evidence summarized by the Court was too isolated and anecdotal to established such a pattern of discrimination. He also argued that the states had actually "been ahead of Congress in providing gender-neutral family leave benefits." The fact that gender classifications are subjected to heightened scrutiny, he said, "[did] not alter [his] conclusion," because Hibbs still bore the "burden to show that Congress identified a history and pattern of unconstitutional employment discrimination by the States." This was a burden, said Justice Kennedy, which Hibbs had not met. Thus the FMLA amounted to a substantive change in the reach of the Fourteenth Amendment, not an enforcement of its provisions, and under Boerne, this was unconstitutional.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 538
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment, section five case law
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:United States public employment case law
"""

From "Nevada v. Hall" ==> """
Nevada v. Hall, 440 U.S. 410 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court case that ruled that U.S. states lack sovereign immunity from private lawsuits filed against them in the courts of another state. The majority opinion held that "nothing in the Constitution authorizes or obligates" states to grant sister states immunity in court..  States may grant sister states immunity if they choose.  This decision was overturned by the 2019 case Franchise Tax Board of California v. Hyatt..
Case
On May 13, 1968, Helmut Kurt Bohm, an administrative employee of the University of Nevada-Reno, drove a university-owned car to pick up office supplies at a location in California. On his way back to Reno, Bohm lost control of his car during a rainstorm on Interstate 80 near Penryn, California."Sparks Man Is Killed On I-80 Near Penryn", Roseville Press-Tribune, May 14, 1968, front page. Investigators said Bohm may have fallen asleep at the wheel. His car crossed the divider into oncoming traffic, and collided with a car occupied by John and Patricia Hall, their three children, and another passenger, all California residents. Bohm was killed in the collision, and all six passengers in the other car were injured. In particular, the Halls' youngest child John Michael, 20 months old at the time of the crash, was comatose for 40 days after the crash, and subsequently developed significant mental and developmental disabilities. Patricia sustained brain damage and was forced to leave her job."Court case pends on Nevada matter", Reno Gazette-Journal, July 13, 1972, page 10.Hunter, Havelock. "Crash Injuries: $1,150,000 to Mother, Son", Oakland Tribune, August 12, 1976, page 13.
The Halls attempted to claim damages from the state of Nevada, but the Nevada Board of Examiners denied their claim. Since California state law allowed motorists residing in other states to be sued in its state courts, the Halls sued Bohm's estate, the University of Nevada-Reno, and the state of Nevada in the Superior Court of the City of San Francisco. The Superior Court ordered that the state of Nevada be left out of the suit, thinking that sovereign immunity would prevent the state from being sued in an out-of-state court. However, the California Supreme Court reversed that order, arguing that state law permitted other states to be sued within its courts. Nevada petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court to overturn this decision, but the Court denied certiorari.University of Nevada v. Hall, 414 U.S. 820 (1973).Nevada v. Hall, 440 U.S. 410 (1979).
In a pretrial motion, Nevada argued that any damages awarded to the Halls had to follow Nevada state law, which set a maximum of $25,000 for damages awarded in tort actions against the state. The argument rested on the Constitution's Full Faith and Credit Clause, which requires states to recognize and enforce the laws and judicial proceedings of other states. The Superior Court denied this motion, and in 1976 a jury awarded the Halls $1,150,000 in damages.
Nevada sought to appeal the ruling, but the California Court of Appeal upheld it and the California Supreme Court declined to hear the case. The case was then brought to the U.S. Supreme Court, which now granted a writ of certiorari. In the majority opinion, delivered by Justice Stevens, the Court found that the concept of "sovereign immunity" only applied within a state's own jurisdiction, and did not protect states from prosecution outside that jurisdiction. It found that "the Full Faith and Credit Clause does not require a State to apply another State's law in violation of its own legitimate public policy", and that no other part of the Constitution protected a state from prosecution outside its boundaries. Thus, it concluded that the doctrine of sovereign immunity, although well established, was nothing "more than a matter of comity", and upheld the original ruling.
In a dissenting opinion, Justice Blackmun wrote that the decision could have sweeping consequences: "I suspect that the Court has opened the door to avenues of liability and interstate retaliation that will prove unsettling and upsetting for our federal system."
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 440
Hollingsworth v. Virginia, a decision which held that the Eleventh Amendment is retroactive.
Hans v. Louisiana, a decision which re-affirmed state immunity in federal courts.
 References 
 Further reading 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:United States state sovereign immunity case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
"""

From "Nevada v. Hicks" ==> """
Nevada v. Hicks, 533 U.S. 353 (2001), is a United States Supreme Court case regarding the jurisdiction of Tribal Courts when state officials are sued by tribal members in tribal court..  The Supreme Court unanimously decided that Tribal courts lack jurisdiction to decide tort claims or §1983. claims related to State law enforcement's process on the reservation, but related to a crime that allegedly occurred off the reservation nor must the parties exhaust their claims in Tribal court before filing in federal court.
 Background 
Hicks was a member of the Fallon Paiute-Shoshone Tribes of western Nevada and lived on tribal land. State of Nevada Game Wardens executed state and tribal search warrants for evidence that Hicks was in possession of two California Bighorn Sheep heads, a crime which had been committed off-reservation. He then filed suit in Tribal Court against the wardens and the State of Nevada for alleging trespass, abuse of process, and violation of constitutional rights under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The Tribal Court ruled that it had jurisdiction over the tribal tort and federal civil rights claims and the Tribal Appellate court affirmed. The State of Nevada argued before Federal District Court that the Tribal Court had no such authority. The District Court agreed with the tribe, arguing that the Wardens had to exhaust immunity claims in tribal court. The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed stating that the fact that Hicks lived on the reservation is enough to give the tribal courts jurisdiction.
 Opinion of the Court 
In the unanimous decision of the Court, Justice Scalia held that the tribal courts did not have the authority over the Wardens' allegedly tortious acts. Tribal authority over non-members beyond what is necessary to protect tribal self-government is not available without express congressional delegation, since delegation did not exist the tribal court had no jurisdiction. Finally, the tribal court has no authority to regulate state officers in their official capacities, stating that tribal law hinders state law no more than state law inhibits federal law.
The Court applied Montana, which asserts that Tribes lack civil jurisdiction over conduct of nonmembers on lands where they lack the right to exclude unless (1) the nonmember entered a "consensual relationship with the Tribe or its members" or (2) the nonmember's "conduct threatens or has some direct effect on the political integrity, the economic security, or the health or welfare of the tribe." Until this case, Montana was never explicitly invoked when the conduct occurred on Indian-owned land. However, the Court finds that the "general rule of Montana applies to both Indian and non-Indian land." While "[t]he ownership status of land" may sometimes be "dispositive," in general, it "is only one factor to consider in determining whether regulation of the activities of nonmembers is necessary to protect tribal self-government or to control internal relations."533 U.S. at 360 (internal quotations omitted).
The Court found that "tribal authority to regulate state officers in executing process related to the violation, off reservation, of state laws is not essential to tribal self-government or internal relations."533 U.S. at 364. Analogizing to the relationship between federal law enforcement and state governments, the Court considered the abrogation of Tribal authority necessary in light of the State's "considerable" interest in effectuating searches on Indian-fee land.
References
External links
 onecle
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Native American history of Nevada
"""

From "New England Mutual Life Insurance Co. v. Woodworth" ==> """
New England Mutual Life Insurance Co. v. Woodworth, 111 U.S. 138 (1884), was a U.S. Supreme Court case.
 The case 
On September 21, 1869, Ann E. Woodworth took out a life insurance policy on herself with the New England Mutual Life Insurance Company in Michigan.  Her husband Stephen E. Woodworth was the beneficiary.  She then died in New York, and her husband moved to Illinois.  The company did not pay the policy, and he sued in Illinois.  The Illinois court passed judgment against the insurance company.  The insurance company appealed saying that the suit should not have been filed in Illinois.
The Supreme Court reaffirmed the general rule that simple contract debts, such as a policy of insurance not under seal, are, for the purpose of founding administration, assets where the debtor resides, without regard to the place where the policy is found.NEW ENGLAND MUTUAL LIFE INS. CO. v. WOODWORTH, Adm'r, etc. Decision Cornell Legal Information Institute
Used as precedent
This case was used as a precedent in 8 SCOTUS cases and 21 cases by other courts.  The SCOTUS precedent citations include:  
 Southern Pacific Co. v. Denton (1892)
 Shaw v. Quincy Mining Co. (1892), 
 Fitzgerald & Mallory Constr. Co. v. Fitzgerald (1890)
 Barrow SS Co. v. Kane (1898), 
 In Re the Louisville Underwriters (1890)
 In Re Keasbey & Mattison Co. (1895)
 Equitable Life Assurance Soc. v. Brown (1902)28 Opinions cite New England Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Woodworth, 111 U.S. 138 Decision Court Listener
 Connecticut Mut. Life Ins. Co. V. Moore (1948)"CONNECTICUT MUT. LIFE INS. CO. V. MOORE, 333 U.S. 541 (1948) FindLaw
Side effect of the case
The plaintiff, Stephen E. Woodworth, was both the Step-Father and Uncle of noted entomologist Charles W. Woodworth. C.W. Woodworth's mother became a widow and married her late husband's brother who was a widower. The judgment arrived when C.W. Woodworth was 19 and likely helped pay for his education at the University of Illinois.
See also
 Metropolitan Life Insurance Company – acquired New England Mutual in 1996
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 111
References
External links
Category:1884 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:MetLife
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States federal jurisdiction case law
"""

From "New Hampshire v. Maine" ==> """
New Hampshire v. Maine, 426 U.S. 363 (1977), was an original jurisdiction case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the boundary between the states of New Hampshire and Maine was fixed by the 1740 decree of King George II of Great Britain..  Both sides entered into a consent decree which was accepted by the special master appointed by the Court.
See also
Florida v. Georgia (1855)
Piscataqua River border dispute, New Hampshire v. Maine, No. 130 Original, 532 U.S. 742 (2001)
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 426
New Mexico v. Texas
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Internal territorial disputes of the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:1977 in New Hampshire
Category:1977 in Maine
"""

From "New Jersey v. Delaware" ==> """
New Jersey v. Delaware, 552 U.S. 597 (2008), is a United States Supreme Court case in which New Jersey sued Delaware, invoking the Supreme Court's original jurisdiction under (a), following Delaware's denial of oil company BP's petition to build a liquefied natural gas pipeline and loading facility on the New Jersey side of the Delaware River.  Delaware denied BP's petition because it violated Delaware's Coastal Zone Act. BP then sought New Jersey's approval of the project.  Delaware objected because the construction would require dredging of underwater land within Delaware's borders, which extend to the low-tide mark of the New Jersey shore. BP's proposal had not yet passed New Jersey's approval process when New Jersey and BP filed suit against Delaware.
Jurisdiction over rivers that form a border between states is usually determined by dividing the river down the middle between the states; this is not the case with the Delaware River.  Delaware-New Jersey's curious border is the result of a grant by King Charles II in 1681, when the Delaware Colony was leased by William Penn from King Charles to become the three lower counties of Pennsylvania.  The grant extended Delaware's northern border by The Twelve-Mile Circle in New Castle, Delaware, extending across the Delaware River.  If the circle were to be extended fully, it would have included a portion of New Jersey, but this was unacceptable because that land had already been granted.  As a result, the 12-Mile-Circle terminated at the mean low water mark on New Jersey's shore.  The post-1681 border gave present-day Delaware full ownership of the Delaware River along a stretch of the New Jersey border.
The case adjudicated by the Supreme Court is the third incarnation of this litigation.  The dispute over the border reaches back to the nation's creation.  A settlement was reached between the States at the beginning of the 20th century because the costs of litigation had grown too high.  The issue remained settled until New Jersey sued Delaware regarding the BP pipeline.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court appointed a special master to review. The Special Master was a practitioner in Maine who had experience in original jurisdiction land disputes. He oversaw production and heard oral arguments in the Third Circuit's court in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The Special Master made a recommendation to the Supreme Court, and the Court held, in a 6-2 decision, that Delaware has jurisdiction over the subaqueous soil, even though BP proposed to build on New Jersey's side of the Delaware River. 
The only two dissenting Justices (Scalia and Alito) are both from New Jersey.  Scalia wrote in his opinion, "The New Jersey-Delaware Compact of 1905 (Compact or 1905 Compact), Art. VII, 34 Stat. 860, addressed the “exercise [of] riparian jurisdiction,” and the power to “make grants … of riparian … rights.” The particular riparian right at issue here is the right of wharfing out. All are agreed that jurisdiction and power over that right were given to New Jersey on its side of the Delaware River."
Justice Stephen Breyer recused himself from the case; according to his financial disclosure form, he owned between $15,001 and $50,000 in BP stock.
References
External links
New York Times article about the dispute
 Today's Sunbeam, November 28, 2007.
Courier-Post, November 28, 2007
Philadelphia Inquirer
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Internal territorial disputes of the United States
Category:Borders of Delaware
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:Environment of Delaware
Category:Environment of New Jersey
Category:Borders of New Jersey
Category:Legal history of New Jersey
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:2008 in Delaware
Category:2008 in New Jersey
Category:2008 in the environment
Category:BP litigation
"""

From "New Jersey v. New York" ==> """
New Jersey v. New York, 523 U.S. 767 (1998), was a U.S. Supreme Court case that determined that roughly 83% of Ellis Island was part of New Jersey, rather than New York State. 
Because the New Jersey original 1664 land grant was unclear, the states of New Jersey and New York disputed ownership and jurisdiction over the Hudson River and its islands. The two states entered into a compact ratified by Congress in 1834, which set a boundary line to be the middle of the Hudson River, but giving all islands in the river (including Ellis Island) to New York. From 1890 to 1934, the federal government expanded Ellis Island through land reclamation to accommodate its immigration station. Starting in the 1980s, New Jersey contended that the new portions of the Ellis Island were part of New Jersey. New Jersey filed suit in 1997.
In a 6–3 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that because the 1834 compact gave New Jersey jurisdiction over submerged land around Ellis Island, the new land was in New Jersey, not New York. The ruling changed little in practice, because Ellis Island is federal land. The ruling changed allocation of sales tax revenue, and future development plans for the island.
History
After the British takeover of New Netherland in 1664, the Province of New Jersey was founded as a separate entity from the Province of New York. An unusual clause in New Jersey's colonial land grant named the territory as being "westward of Long Island, and Manhitas Island and bounded on the east part by the main sea, and part by Hudson's river," rather than at the river's midpoint, as was common in other colonial charters.
The boundary between the states of New York and New Jersey remained disputed around the Hudson River. The states convened conferences as early as 1807 to resolve the state line but did not reach agreement.GSA 1963 pp. 9–10 (pp. 12–13 in PDF). "Numerous attempts mere made to settle the dispute. Commissioners representing the two states met at Newark in 1807, but no agreement was reached." In 1831, New Jersey sued New York in the Supreme Court over the dispute, but dropped the case in 1836.GSA (1963).  Instead, the two states negotiated a compact in 1833, ratified by the US Congress in 1834. Among other agreements, the compact established that New York owned Ellis Island, but New Jersey owned the submerged lands around Ellis Island.
thumb|left|upright=1.4|Map of Ellis Island showing New York in dark green surrounded by New Jersey
The federal government, which owned Ellis Island, expanded it from  to  by land reclamation between 1890 and 1934 to support its use as an immigration station.To see the series of enlargements, see Beyer Blinder Belle (1988) pp. 47–60 New Jersey contended that the artificial portions of the island were part of New Jersey because the submerged land under it belonged to New Jersey. Jurisdictional disputes re-emerged in the 1980s, with the renovation of Ellis Island, and then again in the 1990s, with proposed redevelopment of the south side. 
In 1992, the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled that New York's law should apply in a case that happened on the new part of the island.
 Court case 
New Jersey sued in 1993. The Supreme Court appointed Paul R. Verkuil to be special master to gather evidence in the decision. In 1997, Verkuil recommended in favor of New Jersey's claim to the artificial parts of Ellis Island. In 1998, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of New Jersey. Since the land added by the federal government was not expressly granted to New York by the interstate compact, and it had been placed in water that had been expressly granted to New Jersey, the majority ruled that the "new" land, which was now decades old, must belong to New Jersey. The minority used historical reasons and "common-sense inference" as its basis for supporting New York's claim.
According to the court decision, the original 2.74-acre Ellis Island remains under the jurisdiction of New York, but land reclaimed from the waters afterward is under the jurisdiction of New Jersey. The island covers a land area of .
Aftermath
Both states jointly negotiated a post-trial settlement to decide the borders in accordance with the Supreme Court's decision. The  original island and other areas negotiated in the post-trial settlement, totaling  (17.0%), remain part of New York, which is a landlocked enclave within New Jersey.
The case is possibly the first to use a geographic information system in determining a Supreme Court decision.
Although the court decision has changed the state territorial sovereignty of most parts of the island, the actual current landowner and holder of the title of Ellis Island is the federal government. Very few activities on the island were directly affected by the transfer of sovereignty, but the decision affected some instances of sales taxes.
References
 General references 
 Beyer Blinder Belle; Anderson Notter Finegold (1988). Ellis Island, Statue of Liberty National Monument. Historic Structure Report: Main Building. U.S. Department of the Interior / National Park Service. 
 General Services Administration [GSA] Office of Legal Counsel. Ellis Island: Its Legal Status. February 11, 1963. Archived from the original on August 4, 2012. 
 Verkuil, Paul R. Final Report of the Special Master. March 31, 1997. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. 
 New Jersey v. New York 1998. 523 U.S. 767. pp. 767-832 (PDF pp. 891–956). 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1998 politics in New York (state)
Category:1998 in New Jersey
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:Borders of New York (state)
Category:Borders of New Jersey
Category:Internal territorial disputes of the United States
Category:Ellis Island
Category:Legal history of New Jersey
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
"""

From "New Jersey v. T. L. O." ==> """
New Jersey v. T. L. O., 469 U.S. 325 (1985), is a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States which established the standards by which a public school official can search a student in a school environment without a search warrant, and to what extent.
The case centered around a student at Piscataway High School in Middlesex County, New Jersey, known then only by her initials T. L. O., who was searched for contraband after she was caught smoking in a school bathroom. She was sent to the principal's office, where the vice principal searched her purse and found marijuana, drug paraphernalia, and documentation of drug sales. She was expelled from the school and charged by police for the paraphernalia found in the search, but fought the charges on the basis that the search of her purse violated the Fourth Amendment's prohibition against unreasonable search and seizure.
The New Jersey Superior Court affirmed the constitutionality of the search, but the Supreme Court of New Jersey reversed, holding that the search of her purse was unreasonable. On appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court, the Court held that the Fourth Amendment applies to searches conducted by school officials in a school setting. However, school officials do not need to have probable cause nor obtain a warrant before searching a student. Instead, in order for a search to be justified, school officials must have "reasonable suspicion" that the student has violated either the law or school rules. In a 6–3 decision delivered by Justice Byron White, the Court ruled that the school's search of T. L. O.'s purse was constitutional, setting a new precedent for school searches and student privacy.
Background
On March 7, 1980, a teacher at Piscataway High School in Piscataway, New Jersey discovered two 14-year-old freshmen smoking in the girl's bathroom, in violation of school rules. While students were permitted to smoke in designated smoking areas, the bathroom was not one of them. The two were sent to principal's office, where they were questioned by vice principal Theodore Choplick. One of the students admitted to smoking and was assigned to complete a three-day smoking clinic before being sent back to class.State in Interest of T. L. O., 94 N.J. 331, 463 A.2d 934 (1983). The other student, whose initials were T. L. O., denied ever having smoked in her life.
Choplick brought T. L. O. into his private office and demanded to see her purse. Upon searching it, Choplick found a pack of Marlboro cigarettes and rolling paper in plain view. These findings prompted Choplick to conduct a more thorough search of T. L. O.'s purse, revealing a small amount of marijuana, a tobacco pipe, an index card with the names of students who owed her money, and two letters linking her to dealing marijuana. Choplick notified the police and T. L. O.'s mother, who both arrived at the school shortly after. A police officer requested for T. L. O. to be brought to the police station for questioning, and T. L. O.'s mother drove her from the school to the police station. During questioning, T. L. O. admitted to selling marijuana on school property.
She was convicted of dealing and use of illicit drugs. She was expelled from the school and fined $1,000. She was charged as a juvenile for the drugs and paraphernalia found in the search.
Opinion of the Court
Oral arguments were initially heard on March 28, 1984. A rehearing was ordered by the Court and the case was reargued on October 2, 1984. The Supreme Court of the United States, in a 6–3 decision issued by Justice Byron White, balancing between the legitimate expectation of privacy of the individual, even a child, and the school's interest in maintaining order and discipline, held for the appellant (the state). According to school officials, they do require a "reasonable suspicion" to perform a search.
Her possession of any cigarettes was relevant to whether or not she was being truthful, and since she had been caught in the bathroom and taken directly to the office, it was reasonable to assume she had the cigarettes in her purse. Thus, the vice-principal had reasonable cause to suspect a school rule had been broken, and more than just a "hunch" to search the purse. When the vice-principal was searching for the cigarettes, the drug-related evidence was in plain view. Plain view is an exception to the warrant requirement of the Fourth Amendment. Thus, the reasonable search for cigarettes led to some of the drug related material being discovered, which justified a search (including the zippered compartments inside the bag) resulting in the discovery of the cigarettes and other evidence including a small bag of marijuana and cigarette rolling papers. 
 Other opinions 
In a separate concurring opinion, Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr. (joined by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor) stated that while he agreed with the Court's opinion, he felt that students in primary and secondary educational settings should not be afforded the same level of protection for search and seizures as adults and juveniles in non-school settings.T. L. O., 469 U.S. at 348-50 (Powell, J., concurring).
Justice William J. Brennan, joined by Justice Thurgood Marshall, agreed with the majority's conclusions about the applicability of the Fourth Amendment to school teachers but dissented from the new standard set down by the Court, which he felt was a departure from the traditional "probable cause" approach. 
Brennan went on to argue that for the government to justify a warrantless search, some "special governmental interest" outside of standard law enforcement interests was required. This idea was later adopted by the Court as the special needs exception.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 469
 Vernonia School District 47J v. Acton, 515 U.S. 649 (1995)
 Board of Education v. Earls, 536 U.S. 822 (2002)
 Safford Unified School District v. Redding, 557 U.S. 364 (2009)
 Special needs exception
 Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968)
Cohen v. California, 403 U.S. 15 (1971)
Footnotes
References
 References
 Sources
 New Jersey v. T. L. O., 469 U.S. 325 (1985)
External links
 Summary on LandmarkCases.org
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Student rights case law in the United States
Category:United States children's rights case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:1985 in education
Category:Piscataway, New Jersey
Category:Cannabis in New Jersey
Category:Education in Middlesex County, New Jersey
Category:Smoking in the United States
"""

From "New Mexico v. Mescalero Apache Tribe" ==> """
New Mexico v. Mescalero Apache Tribe, 462 U.S. 324 (1983), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the application of New Mexico's laws to on-reservation hunting and fishing by nonmembers of the Tribe is preempted by the operation of federal law.New Mexico v. Mescalero Apache Tribe, .
Background
The Mescalero Apache Tribe is a Native American (Indian) tribe with a reservation in south central New Mexico in the Rocky Mountains, generally south of Ruidoso and west of Tularosa. The current reservation was established by a series of Executive Orders, with the most recent dating from 1883. The tribe is governed by the Indian Reorganization Act,Indian Reorganization Act, ,  et seq which provided for self-government of the tribe and reservation, subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior.
The tribe's major source of income, lumber, was in decline and the tribe started looking at other sources of income. These included a casino resort complex, Inn of the Mountain Gods, a ski resort, Ski Apache, and development of fish and game resources. All of these programs provided revenue for the tribal government to provide services to tribal members. In the hunting and fishing areas, the tribe entered into a sustained collaborative effort with the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.  This included creating eight lakes, stocking the lakes with fish, and the federal government operating a hatchery on the reservation. The state was not involved in these efforts. The federal government also provided a herd of 142 elk, which the tribe's game management program has increased to 1,200.  New Mexico was not involved in these efforts, nor of the other game on the reservation. The tribe and the federal government jointly conduct a fish and game management program. Every year the tribe adopts hunting and fishing ordinances based on the recommendations of the federal government. These ordinances are then approved by the Interior Secretary. The state of New Mexico also has hunting and fishing regulations.
The two sets of regulations are often in conflict as regards to the hunting seasons, bag limits, and the fact that the tribe does not require a state license to hunt tribal lands, regardless of whether the individual is an Indian or non-Indian. In 1977, the New Mexico Department of Game and Fish began to enforce state game laws by arresting non-Indian hunters for illegal possession of game that was taken from the reservation in accordance with tribal laws, but that were not in compliance with state law.
Lower courts
The tribe then filed suit against the State of New Mexico in the United States District Court for the District of New Mexico to prevent New Mexico from enforcing state hunting and fishing regulations on the reservation. The District Court granted declaratory relief and granted the tribe an injunction preventing the state from enforcing its regulations. The state then appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit, which affirmed the decision of the District Court.
The state appealed to the Supreme Court, which vacated the decision of the Tenth Circuit and remanded the case for reconsideration in view of the Supreme Court's decision in Montana v. United States, . On remand, the Tenth Circuit again affirmed the decision of the District Court, which was a victory for the tribe. The state again appealed to the Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the appeal by granting certiorari.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|alt=Justice Thurgood Marshall portrait|Justice Thurgood Marshall, author of the majority opinion
Justice Marshall delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court. Marshall first distinguished the case before the court from the facts and decision in Montana v. United States, noting that non-tribal lands were interspersed with tribal lands in the Montana case and that the ruling in that case turned on whether the Crow Tribe could regulate hunting that was within reservation boundaries but not on tribal land.  He then discussed the concept of tribal sovereignty and its history from Worcester v. Georgia,  to more modern decisions. Marshall noted that although there are some cases where a state may regulate non-Indians on a reservation, it may only do so if it is not preempted by federal law.
Marshall noted that New Mexico conceded that the tribe had the authority to regulate hunting and fishing for both tribal and non-tribal members on reservation land, but claimed concurrent jurisdiction over the non-tribal members. Marshall observed that Public Law 280 specifically granted tribes the authority to regulate on-reservation hunting and fishing, and made it a federal crime to enter a reservation to hunt or fish without the consent of the tribe. Marshall rejected the state's claim of concurrent jurisdiction, noting that the state could "effectively nullify" tribal authority. Based in large part on the BIA involvement with the tribe in establishing regulations, Marshall held that federal law preempted state law and affirmed the decision of the Tenth Circuit Court.
References
External links
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:Mescalero Apache
Category:Legal history of New Mexico
Category:Native American history of New Mexico
"""

From "New Mexico v. Texas" ==> """
New Mexico v. Texas, 275 U.S. 279 (1927), was a United States Supreme Court case that determined the boundary between Texas and New Mexico in the vicinity of El Paso, Texas.
Background
350px|thumb|Map showing the disputed area
This suit was brought by the State of New Mexico against the State of Texas in 1913 to settle a controversy concerning the location of their common boundary in the valley of the Rio Grande about  from the parallel of 32 degrees north latitude to the parallel of 31 degrees 47 minutes on the international boundary between the United States and Mexico. 
Each State asserted that the true boundary line is the middle of the channel of the Rio Grande in 1850. Neither alleged that there had been any change in this line by accretions. And the only issue was as to the true location of the channel in that year.  New Mexico believed it was closer to the then-present course of the river.  Texas had been issuing deeds for the area known as the Country Club Area, as this was the land in dispute, the case became known by the moniker the Country Club Dispute.
History of the case
This case was filed by the State of New Mexico in the Supreme Court of the United States under the original jurisdiction provisions of Article III, Section 2 of the U.S. Constitution.  A master was appointed by the Supreme Court in 1924 to make determinations of fact, and the master made extensive findings.  "The master concluded on all the evidence that the allegations in New Mexico's bill as to the location and course of the Rio Grande 'as it existed in the year 1850' were not sustained, and that the river did not then flow on the eastern side of the valley as claimed by New Mexico; that its location and course in 1850 was, in general, as alleged in the cross- bill of Texas.". 
Supreme Court holding
The unanimous Court held that "the testimony of ancient witnesses called by New Mexico as
to their recollection of the old river, is far from satisfactory, and
does not, in view of the other evidence, sustain the burden resting
on New Mexico".
See also
Florida v. Georgia
New Hampshire v. Maine
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:Internal territorial disputes of the United States
Category:1927 in United States case law
Category:1927 in New Mexico
Category:1927 in Texas
Category:Legal history of New Mexico
Category:Legal history of Texas
Category:Geography of El Paso County, Texas
Category:Texas border disputes
"""

From "New Negro Alliance v. Sanitary Grocery Co." ==> """
New Negro Alliance v. Sanitary Grocery Co., 303 U.S. 552 (1938), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court which affects US labor law, safeguarding a right to boycott and in the struggle by African Americans against discriminatory hiring practices.  Sanitary Grocery Co. was at the time of the case owned by Safeway Inc.
Judgment
The court concluded that according to the United States Congress "peaceful and orderly dissemination of information by those defined as persons interested in a labor dispute concerning 'terms and conditions of employment' in an industry or a plant or a place of business should be lawful; that, short of fraud, breach of the peace, violence, or conduct otherwise unlawful, those having a direct or indirect interest in such terms and conditions of employment should be at liberty to advertise and disseminate facts and information with respect to terms and conditions of employment, and peacefully to persuade others to concur in their views respecting an employer's practices." 
See also
US labor law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 303
References
External links
 New Negro Alliance's Sanitary Grocery Protest Site
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:History of labor relations in the United States
Category:1938 in United States case law
Category:African-American history between emancipation and the civil rights movement
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "New Prime Inc. v. Oliveira" ==> """
New Prime Inc. v. Oliveira, 586 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the classification of employees hired as contractors in relation to exceptions to arbitration set forth in the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA). The Court ruled unanimously that the exceptions set forth in the FAA, principally for those involved in foreign and interstate commerce such as truck drivers, do apply to contractors as they would to regular employees.
 Background 
The Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) of 1925 () allows employers in the United States to include binding arbitration language in their employment contracts that require employees to agree to use designated arbitration methods to resolve disputes with the company rather than seeking action in the court system. Section 1 of the FAA sets out exemptions for employees involved in foreign or interstate commerce activities, leading that "nothing herein contained [within the Statute] shall apply to contracts of employment of seamen, railroad employees, or any other class of workers engaged in foreign or interstate commerce."9 U. S. C. §1.
In the present case, Dominic Oliveira sought employment with New Prime Inc., an American trucking company. When he was hired, he first had to drive 10,000 miles as an unpaid "trainee", followed by 30,000 miles as an "apprentice" working at  an hour. Oliveira was then brought into the company proper, he was given the option to be hired as an employee, or as an independent contractor, which the company asserted would be more economical for Oliveira. Oliveira opted to be hired as a contractor. However, because he was an independent contractor, this allowed New Prime to charge Oliveira and other drivers through leasing of the New Prime vehicles and to pay for their own fuel and equipment through deductions from their paychecks, items that the company would normally pay for if the person was an employee. Oliveira frequently found these costs exceeded his base rate, effectively paying New Prime for his employment. While the terms of his independent contract allow him to drive for other companies, Oliveira found that his schedule was heavily dictated by New Prime. Oliveira eventually dropped the independent contractor and was rehired as an employee of New Prime, where his work duties and commitment were essentially identical to what he had done as an independent contractor, but taking home much more from his paycheck.
In 2015, Oliveira started a class-action lawsuit against New Prime, representing all other contracted drivers they had hired, arguing the company was not paying fair wages to its independent contractors. New Prime attempted to stop the lawsuit by referring to their company's arbitration agreement; while the FAA as written allows for exceptions for employees involved in commerce, New Prime argued that Oliveira was a contractor, and thus not covered by the "contracts of employment" exception, and thus his complaints must be heard by arbitration. This led to the case first hearing in District Court, where the court could not answer the question of whether Oliveira's time as an independent contractor fell within the Section 1 exception of the FAA, and thus ordered a discovery phase to evaluate the nature of his employment. The District Court thus refused to issue a summary judgment in the lawsuit as requested by New Prime. New Prime appealed this decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, believing that the question of Section 1 of the FAA applicability should be decided by the arbitrator and not the court system. The First Circuit held in favor of Oliveira in two parts, first by asserting that it was the court's responsibility to determine if Section 1's exceptions applied in this case, and second that Oliveira, even as an independent contractor, fell within these exceptions, which would allow the class-action suit to proceed.
 Supreme Court 
New Prime petitioned for a writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court in September 2017 to challenge both facets of the First Circuit's decision. The Court accepted the case for its 2018 term, and oral hearing was held on October 3, 2018; this date was prior to Brett Kavanaugh's appointment to the court, so he took no part in any of the case's proceedings. It was the first of three cases the Court agreed to hear during the term related to arbitration. Some observers to the Court feared that the case would weigh in favor of New Prime, as the Court's recent decisions related to arbitration had favored employers, and with Kavanaugh, a conservative, set to join, further cases related to arbitration would continue to weigh in favor of employers.
The Court issued its decision on January 15, 2019. In a unanimous decision, the Court upheld the findings of the First Circuit, affirming that judgment of whether Section 1 exceptions applied or not was a role for the courts and not arbitration, and that within Oliveira's case, the written intent of the FAA covered any type of employer-employee agreement, including the independent contractor construct, and thus Oliveira was not bound by the FAA to seek arbitration. Justice Neil Gorsuch, writing the majority opinion, explained that the way that the FAA was written used the term "contracts of employment"; reviewing dictionaries and other works published around 1925, it was clear that Congress' intent was not specifically tailored to the specific term "employees" but instead to a broader classification of "workers", which would readily cover independent contractors. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote a concurring opinion, mirroring Gorsuch and noting the importance of language evolution in law.
The decision briefly hit the stocks of several transportation companies, as the use of the independent contracting mechanic for employment has been a common practice in the industry; the Court's ruling would mean these companies would need to be able to prepare to treat these contractors as employees, which will impact their operating costs. This would then have a ripple effect on the US economy since the price of shipping goods would likely increase to cover these costs.
 References 
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United States class action case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:Trucking industry in the United States
"""

From "New Process Steel, L.P. v. NLRB" ==> """
New Process Steel, L.P. v. NLRB, 560 U.S. 674 (2010), is a US labor law case of the United States Supreme Court holding that the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) cannot make decisions without at least three members on a panel.
Background: the NLRA's quorum requirement
When the National Labor Relations Act (also known as the Wagner Act) was passed in 1935, the NLRB had three members,https://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/events/labor_law/basics_papers/nlra/overview_nlra.pdf  with two members "at all times" constituting a quorum.https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/uscode/uscode1934-00502/uscode1934-005029007/uscode1934-005029007.pdf  In 1947, Congress passed the Taft-Hartley Act, which increased the size of the Board from three to five members, with the powers of the Board delegated to three-member panels who issued decisions in cases.https://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/events/labor_law/basics_papers/nlra/overview_nlra.pdf 
According to Section 3(b) of the Act, as amended by Taft-Hartley,
Between 1993 and 2007, there were brief periods when the Board had only two members, but these have rarely extended beyond a few days and the two-member Board did not issue decisions.
The two-member Board
In December 2007, the terms for three of the Board's five members were set to expire. President George W. Bush's nominees were blocked by Senate Democrats. On December 16, 2007, Chairman Robert J. Battista's term expired and member Wilma Liebman took over as chairwoman for the remaining four-person Board. On December 28, 2007, with the terms of members Peter Kirsanow and Dennis Walsh set to expire on New Year's Eve, the four-member Board delegated all of its powers to the three-person panel of Chairwoman Liebman and members Kirsanow and Peter Schaumber. By doing so, the Board operated under the assumption that the two remaining members, Liebman and Schaumber, were able to make decisions as a majority of the designated three-person Board.
That same day, the General Counsel issued an unfair labor practice complaint against employer New Process Steel in their dispute with the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers. On May 1, 2008, an administrative law judge issued a decision against New Process Steel. The General Counsel followed with another complaint on May 29, 2008, and filed for summary judgment with the Board. In late September 2008, the Board found New Process Steel to have violated Sections 8(a)(1) and (5) of the NLRA in both cases.
New Process Steel appealed the Board's decisions, arguing in part that the Board lacked the required three-person quorum to make decisions. The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals denied the appeal and enforced the Board's order on May 1, 2009. New Process Steel then appealed to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari on November 2, 2009, due to conflicting circuit court decisions and a request from the Department of Justice to review the issue given the stakes. The First, Second, Fourth, Seventh and Tenth Circuit Courts of Appeals had ruled in favor of the government; however, the United States Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit ruled against it.
Between January 2008 and June 2010, according to then-Solicitor General Elena Kagan, the two-member Board of Liebman and Schaumber issued nearly 600 decisions. During that time, they informally agreed to hear only noncontroversial cases until a third member was confirmed. Retrieved on 4 August 2013
Judgment
The question before the Court was; Does the NLRB have legally recognized authority to decide cases with only two sitting members, where 29 U.S.C. § 153(b) provides that "three members of the Board shall, at all times, constitute a quorum of the Board"?
The Court ruled for the plaintiffs. The NLRB lacked the authority to issue official rulings with only two members, regardless if a majority of the Board had delegated its power to a smaller group. The Court determined that as the statute was written Congress only allowed the NLRB to delegate power to three of the five members. If Congress had wanted to allow two members the full powers of the Board, then it would have written it into the statute. It rejected the government's argument for the sake of efficiency.
 See also 
US labor law
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 560
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:United States labor case law
Category:Steel industry of the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Quorum
Category:International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers
"""

From "New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann" ==> """
New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 285 U.S. 262 (1932), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States.
Facts
The New State Ice Company, which was properly licensed in by the Corporation Commission of Oklahoma, brought suit against Liebmann to prevent him from selling ice in Oklahoma City without a license. At that time, electric refrigerators were expensive; thus, most people used block ice for cooling food.
The lower courts had relied on Frost v. Corporation Commission  to conclude that a license is not necessary if existing businesses are "sufficient to meet the public needs therein."285 U.S. 262, 272, citing Oklahoma law, 147, Session Laws 1925, Sec. 3.
Decision
The Supreme Court struck down the requirement that businesses selling ice obtain a license as violating the Due Process clause of the Constitution. The Court distinguished the case from Frost, which was concerned with businesses that grind grain. It found a public interest key to feeding the population that was not comparable to the ice market.
Justice Brandeis dissented from the court's opinion and was joined by Justice Stone:
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 285
Laboratories of democracy, a concept in political theory that takes its name from Justice Brandeis' dissent
References
External links
Category:1932 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Ice trade
Category:Ice companies
"""

From "New York City Board of Education v. Tom F." ==> """
New York City Board of Education v. Tom F., 552 U.S. 1 (2007), is a legal case in the United States. The case involves the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and tuition reimbursement. The case was granted certiorari by the Supreme Court. Oral arguments took place October 1, 2007. The Court ruled in favor of Tom F. nine days later, on October 10, 2007, affirming the appellate court's decision with a 4–4 split.  The decision did not list which justices voted which way, except that Associate Justice Anthony Kennedy did not take part.  Note that as a majority of justices failed to adopt an opinion in favor of either the school district or the student, the decision of the lower appellate court, permitting tuition reimbursement, remained unaltered.
Facts
The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) requires the U.S. states to provide students with disabilities a "free appropriate public education." Because the New York City Department of Education did not have an "Individualized Education Program" for former Viacom executive Tom Freston's son Gilbert, Freston enrolled his son in the Stephen Gaynor School, a private school for special needs students. The school district reimbursed Freston for tuition to the school. Two years later the school district offered a place for Gilbert at a different public school. Freston declined the offer and again sought reimbursement for private school tuition. 
A United States district court ruled that because Gilbert had never been enrolled in public school, IDEA did not require the 
school district to reimburse Freston. As Oyez notes, the IDEA act "authorizes reimbursement for a child 'who previously received special education and related services under the authority of a public agency,' but it does not explicitly state that parents of children who have never received public education are not entitled to reimbursement." 
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit vacated the decision of the district court on August 9, 2006, reasoning by comparing the disputed section of the act with other sections that IDEA was not intended to deny reimbursement for students never enrolled in public school. The court held that upholding the district court ruling would require parents to enroll their children in inadequate public schools as a condition of eligibility for tuition reimbursement.
The school district appealed to the Supreme Court in a November 3, 2006 petition for a writ of certiorari. The Court granted certiorari on February 26, 2007. Oral arguments were scheduled for October 1, 2007.
Amicus curiae briefs were filed by:
On behalf of the New York City Board of Education by the Board of Education of the City School District of the City of New York, the National School Boards Association, the New York State School Boards Association, and the Council of the Great City Schools 
On behalf of Tom F. by the United States (by the Solicitor General), International Dyslexia Association (with the New York branch of the IDA, National Alliance on Mental Illness, Mental Health America, and the Bazelon Center for Mental Health Law), Autism Speaks, the Council of Parent Attorneys and Advocates (with the New Jersey Special Education Practitioners), and National Disability Rights Network (with the New York Lawyers for the Public Interest), and Agudath Israel of America
Question
Does the holding of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, stating that the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act permits tuition reimbursement where a child has not previously received special education from a public agency, stand in direct contradiction to the plain language of 20 U.S.C. §1412(a)(10)(C)(ii) which authorizes tuition reimbursement to the parents of a disabled child "who previously received special education and related services
under the authority of a public agency"?
See also
Burlington School Comm. v. Mass. Dept. Of Ed.
Winkelman v. Parma City School District
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 552
External links
9 Could Rescue Disabled Pupils from the New York Sun
Article from Medill News Service
Article from Wrightslaw
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States disability case law
Category:United States education case law
Category:United States case law
Category:New York City Department of Education
Category:City of New York litigation
Category:Tie votes of the United States Supreme Court
"""

From "New York City Transit Authority v. Beazer" ==> """
New York City Transit Authority v. Beazer, 440 U.S. 568 (1979), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court in which the constitutionality of an employer's refusal to hire methadone users was upheld.
Background
The New York City Transit Authority (NYCTA) adopted a rule prohibiting the employment of anyone who used narcotic drugs.  This rule was applied to persons using methadone, a drug used to treat heroin addiction.  Two former NYCTA employees who had been fired while receiving methadone treatment and two applicants who were denied employment because of their use and past use of methadone sued the TA in federal district court.
The court for the Southern District of New York ruled in favor of the plaintiffs and found the policy unconstitutional.  While the district court enjoined the NYCTA from denying employment solely on the basis of past or current participation in a methadone maintenance program, it did authorize the transit authority to exclude methadone users from certain safety-related positions, as well as to condition employment on satisfactory performance in a methadone program for at least one year.  This decision was affirmed by the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
Issues presented
The Court was confronted with the question of whether a government could choose not to employ, as an entire class, users of narcotic drugs.
Decision
The Court, in an opinion delivered by Justice Stevens, reversed the decision of the lower courts and found that the NYC Transit Authority had a rational basis for its classification of narcotics users and the extension of this rule to cover methadone users.
Dissent
Justices Brennan and White wrote separate dissents.  Justice Brennan dissented on the grounds that the Title VII claim had been proven.  Justice White, joined by Justice Marshall, argued that the classification of persons successfully participating in a methadone program as dispositively different from the general population was without justification.  They believed that this classification violated the equal protection clause as irrational and invidious.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
External links
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:Metropolitan Transportation Authority
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:City of New York litigation
"""

From "New York ex rel. Cutler v. Dibble" ==> """
New York ex rel. Cutler v. Dibble, 62 U.S. (21 How.) 366 (1858), was a companion case to the more well-known Fellows v. Blacksmith (1857).  At the time Fellows was decided, this case had reached the U.S. Supreme Court but had not yet been argued.Joshua L. Brown, The Tonawanda Indians, Letter to the Editor of the New York Times (February 4, 1858).
Members of the Seneca tribe had obtained a writ from the New York courts, under New York's state nonintercourse act, expelling the Ogden Land Company and their grantees. The defendants, before the Court, unsuccessfully challenged the state statute under the Indian Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution, the federal Nonintercourse Act and the Treaty of Buffalo Creek between the federal government and the Senecas.  Because the Senecas relied on state law, and the defendants relied on federal law, the case is essentially the inverse of the litigation of aboriginal title in the United States over the next 150 years.
Background
The Treaty of Buffalo Creek (1838) provided for the removal of the Senecas to modern-day Kansas, with their land to pass to the Ogden Land Company.  The Tonawanda Band of Seneca Indians on the Tonawanda Reservation condemned the treaty, arguing that no sachem from their Band had signed.  Prominent Seneca Ely S. Parker had retained lawyer John H. Martindale, who had brought four lawsuits against the Ogden Land Company and their grantees.  The first two failed in the New York Supreme Court and New York Court of Appeals, respectively.  The third, Fellows v. Blacksmith (1857), prevailed in the Court of Appeals and U.S. Supreme Court.  In the fourth, New York ex rel. Cutler v. Dibble, a divided Court of Appeals had sided with the Seneca and the U.S. Supreme Court had agreed to hear the case at the time Fellows was decided.
Prior history
The district attorney of Genesee County, New York brought suit on behalf of the Senecas against Asa Cutler, John Underhill, and Arza Underhill under a March 31, 1821 New York statute prohibiting non-Indians from settling or residing on lands belonging to or occupied by Indians. The statute provided that the county court should issue a warrant directing the sheriff to remove such persons: Specifically, the statute provided:
[I]t shall be unlawful for any person or persons, other than Indians, to settle or reside upon any lands belonging to or occupied by any nation or tribe of Indians within this state; and that all leases, contracts and agreements made by any Indians, whereby any person or persons, other than Indians, shall be permitted to reside upon such lands, shall be absolutely void; and if any person or persons shall settle or reside on any such lands, contrary to this act, it shall be the duty of any judge of any court of Common Pleas of the county within which such lands shall be situated, on complaint made to him, and on due proof of the fact of such settlement or residence, to issue his warrant, under his hand and seal, directed to the sheriff of such county, commanding him, within ten days after the receipt thereof, to remove such person or persons so settling or residing, with his, her or their families, from such lands.16 N.Y. 203 (citing Laws of 1821, 183, §§ 1, 5).
The defendants claimed title from the Treaty of Buffalo creek and requested a jury trial.62 U.S. at 369. The county court sided with the Seneca and the proceedings were removed to the New York Supreme Court by certiorari.
The New York Supreme Court heard voluminous testimony and evidence, and held that "the Seneca nation had not duly granted and conveyed the reserve in question to Ogden and Fellows," but the U.S. Supreme Court did not reach this question, noting that it was not "material to our inquiry."
The New York Court of Appeals affirmed, holding that the 1821 New York statute did not violate the New York Constitution, and thus that the defendants had not acquired any property rights entitling them to a jury trial.62 U.S. at 369--70.
The U.S. Supreme Court granted a writ of error..
Opinion
thumb|right|Justice Robert Cooper Grier delivered the judgement of the Court.
Justice Robert Cooper Grier delivered the opinion of the unanimous Court, affirming the judgement of the New York Court of appeals, with costs. The Court limited itself to examining whether the state statute and proceedings had violated any federal law, whether the Indian Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution, the federal Nonintercourse Act or the Treaty of Buffalo Creek between the federal government and the Senecas.62 U.S. at 370 ("The only question which this court can be called on to decide is, whether this law is in conflict with the Constitution of the United States, or any treaty or act of Congress, and whether this proceeding under it has deprived the relators of property or rights secured to them by any treaty or act of Congress.").
Federal constitution
The Court held that the state statute was a constitutional exercise of the state's police power:
The statute in question is a police regulation for the protection of the Indians from intrusion of the white people, and to preserve the peace. It is the dictate of a prudent and just policy. Notwithstanding the peculiar relation which these Indian nations hold to the Government of the United States, the State of New York had the power of a sovereign over their persons and property, so far as it was necessary to preserve the peace of the Commonwealth, and protect these feeble and helpless bands from imposition and intrusion. The power of a State to make such regulations to preserve the peace of the community is absolute, and has never been surrendered. The act is therefore not contrary to the Constitution of the United States.62 U.S. at 370.
Federal statute
The Court also held that the state statute did not violate any federal statute because "no law of Congress can be found which authorizes white men to intrude on the possessions of Indians."
Federal treaty
Finally, the Court held that the state statute did not violate the treaty because, pursuant to the Court's prior holding in Fellows v. Blacksmith (1856), the Seneca's removal was enforceable only by, and at the discretion of the federal government:
If the treaty of 1842 had been executed; if the United States, in their character of sovereign guardian of this nation, had delivered up the possession to these purchasers, then this statute of New York, when applied to them, would clearly be in conflict with their rights acquired under the treaty. But, by the case, it is admitted that the Indians have not been removed by the United States. The Tonawanda band is in peaceable possession of its reserve, and has hitherto refused to surrender it. Unless, therefore, these persons claiming under Ogden and Fellows have by the treaty a right of entry into these lands, and, as a consequence, to forcibly oust the possessors or turn them out by action of ejectment, they cannot allege that this summary removal by authority of the statute of New York is in conflict with the treaty, or any rights secured to the purchasers under it. This proceeding does not affect their title. The question of the validity of this treaty to bind the Tonawanda band is one to be decided, not by the courts, but by the political power which acted for and with the Indians. So far as the statute of New York is concerned, it only requires that the Indians be in possession; they are not bound to show that they are owners. They may invoke the aid of the statute against all white intruders, so long as they remain in the peaceable possession of their lands.62 U.S. at 370--71.
The Court reiterated the importance of the trust relationship between the federal government and the tribes from the Fellows precedent (the only case law cited in the opinion):
The Indians are to be removed to their new homes by their guardians, the United States, and cannot be expelled by irregular force or violence of the individuals who claim to have purchased their lands, nor even by the intervention of the courts of justice. Until such removal and surrender of possession by the intervention of the Government of the United States, the Indians and their possessions are protected, by the laws of New York, from the intrusion of their white neighbors.62 U.S. at 371.
Notes
External links
Category:Seneca
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:Aboriginal title in New York
Category:1858 in United States case law
"""

From "New York Life Insurance Co. v. Dunlevy" ==> """
New York Life Ins. Co. v. Dunlevy, 241 U.S. 518 (1916), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held that a court can exert personal jurisdiction over a nonresident party in an interpleader if that party is served with process while physically present within the state.N.Y. Life Ins. Co. v. Dunlevy, .
Factual and procedural background
Joseph W. Gould, obtained a life insurance policy on his life from New York Life Insurance Company which his daughter, Effie J. Gould Dunlevy, claimed had been assigned to her in 1893. At that time both Mr Gould and his daughter were citizens and domiciliaries of Pennsylvania.
In 1907, Boggs & Buhl, a law firm, recovered a valid  default judgment against Mrs. Dunlevy, in the Common Pleas Court at Pittsburgh here she then resided, after obtaining personal jurisdiction domiciliary service,  During 1909, "the tontine dividend period" of the life insurance policy having expired, the insurance company became liable for $2,479.70, and this sum was claimed both by Gould, and his daughter, Mrs. Dunlevy, who had moved to California and became a domiciliary there. In November, 1909, Boggs & Buhl caused issue of an execution attachment on their judgment in Court of Common Pleas at Pittsburgh and both the insurance company and Gould were summoned as garnishees. He appeared, denied assignment of the policy, and claimed the full amount due thereon.
On January 14, 1910 Mrs. Dunlevy instituted this suit in the Superior Court, Marin County, California, against the insurance company and to recover $2,479.70, the surrender value of a policy on his life which she claimed had been assigned to her, and both were duly served with process while in that state.
On February 5, 1910, after this suit was begun in California, the company answered, admitted its indebtedness, set up the conflicting claims to the fund, and prayed to be advised as to its rights. At the same time it filed a petition asking for an  interpleader, and thereby ascertain who was lawfully entitled to the proceeds, and, further, that it might be allowed to pay amount due into court for benefit of proper party.on March 21, 1910 an order granted the requested, and directed that notice be given to Mrs. Dunlevy in California. This was done, but she made no answer and did not appear. Later, the insurance company filed a second petition, and, upon leave obtained thereunder, paid $2,479.70 into court, . All parties except Mrs. Dunlevy having appeared, the suit was tried on a feigned issue to determine validity of alleged transfer of the policy. The jury found, October 1, 1910, there was no valid assignment, and thereupon, under a court order the fund was paid over to Gould.
The California suit was removed to the United States district court, February 16, 1910, and tried there by the judge in May, 1912, a jury having been expressly waived. The judgment for Mrs. Dunlevy in amount claimed was affirmed by the Circuit Court of Appeals, Ninth Circuit.N.Y. Life Ins. Co. v. Dunlevy, 
In 1909 under Pennsylvania law, a judgment debtor is not a party to a garnishment proceeding to condemn a claim due the judgment debtor from a third person, nor is the judgment debtor bound by a judgment discharging the garnishee.
Issue and result
The Supreme Court was asked to determine whether the Pennsylvania proceeding was a bar to the action in California. The Supreme Court found for Dunlevy; holding A party to an action does not, after final judgment, still remain in court and subject, without further personal service, to whatsoever orders may be entered under the title of that cause. Interpleader proceedings brought by a garnishee are not essential concomitants of the original action in which the judgment was rendered on which the garnishment is based, but are collateral, and require personal service on the judgment debtor.  Smith v. Woolfolk, ; Reynolds v. Stockton, ; Owens v. Henry, ; Hovey v. Elliott, ; Freeman on Judgments, 4th ed., § 143. Any personal judgment which a state court may render against one not voluntarily submitting to its jurisdiction, nor a domiciliary of the state nor served with process within its border, no matter what the mode of service, is void because the court has no personal jurisdiction. Pennoyer v. Neff, .
Subsequent history
The Federal Interpleader Act of 1917  was enacted by the 64th United States Congress approved February 22, 1917 to over come this problem in this case for insurance companies to bring an interpleader against beneficiaries in different states. Federal Interpleader Act of 1917 allowed an insurance company, or fraternal benefit society subject to multiple claims on the same policy to file a suit in equity by a bill of interpleader in United States District Courts and providing nationwide service of process, minimal diversity jurisdiction of two or more of the beneficiaries must live in different states and a lower amount in controversy of at least $500.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 241
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
 [ Official Website of the Supreme Court of the United States]
Category:New York Life Insurance Company
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:1916 in United States case law
"""

From "New York State Board of Elections v. Lopez Torres" ==> """
N.Y. State Bd. of Elections v. Lopez Torres, 552 U.S. 196 (2008), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court that involved a constitutional challenge brought against New York State's judicial election law, alleging that it unfairly prevented candidates from obtaining access to the ballot. The Supreme Court rejected this challenge and held that the state's election laws did not infringe upon candidates' First Amendment associational rights. Several concurring justices emphasized, however, that their decision reflected only the constitutionality of the state's election system, and not its wisdom or merit.
Background: New York state judicial election process
In New York, political party judicial candidates for the Supreme Courts (the state's general jurisdiction trial court) are elected through a three-part scheme that involves a primary election, a nominating convention, and a general election. Independent candidates need only meet general signature requirements to obtain a place on the general ballot.
During the primary election, judicial delegates (not candidates) are elected by the parties' rank and file members for each assembly district. The chosen delegates are sent to the judicial convention for the judicial district in which the assembly district is located. (The state is split into twelve judicial districts, each having up to several dozen assembly districts.) The judicial delegates vote for their parties' judicial nominees, whose names are listed on the general ballot.
A person seeking a political party judicial nomination, accordingly, must assemble a delegate (or group of delegates, who run together) for each assembly district in their judicial district. They must collect separate signatures in each assembly district to get supporting delegate(s) onto the primary ballot and, because delegate nominees cannot disclose which candidate they are affiliated with, they must also mount separate voter education campaigns in each assembly district to explain to the voters which delegates are representing which candidate. After being elected, the delegates can theoretically choose any judicial candidate they wish, but the short timeframe between the primary election and the convention (about two weeks), and the overriding influence of the party establishment, mean that delegates typically do not exercise independent judgment in choosing which candidates to support. The process is too onerous for candidates without significant financial resources or the support of their political party's apparatus, reducing opportunity for independent candidates.Lopez Torrez v. N.Y. State Bd. of Elections, 462 F.3d 161, 171-178 (2d Cir. 2006), overruled 552 U.S. 196.See also  Norman L. Greene, "Advancing the Rule of Law Through Judicial Selection Reform: Is the New York Court of Appeals Judicial Selection Process the Least of Our Concerns in New York?", 72 Alb. L. Rev. 633, 645-6464 (2009).
Facts and procedural posture
Margarita Lopez Torres received the Democratic Party nomination and was elected to the civil court for Kings County in 1992, becoming the first Latina to be elected to the court. She allegedly fell out of favor with local party leaders shortly thereafter for refusing to make patronage hires. She claimed that party leaders later refused to support her candidacy for the Supreme Court in 1997, 2002, and 2003. Lopez Torres, along with similarly situated candidates, their supporters, and the public interest group Common Cause, brought suit in federal court against the state Board of Elections, claiming that the nomination system deprived voters and their candidates of their rights to gain access to the ballot and to associate in their parties' primaries.
The District Court for the Eastern District of New York and the Second Circuit held in favor of Lopez Torres, finding that the voters and candidates possessed a First Amendment right to a 
'realistic opportunity to participate in [a political party's] nominating process, and to do so free from burdens that are both severe and unnecessary.' New York's electoral law violated that right because of the quantity of signatures and delegate recruits required to obtain a Supreme Court nomination at a judicial convention ..., and because of the apparent reality that party leaders can control delegates. ....
Supreme Court's decision
A nearly unanimous court in Lopez Torres overruled the Second Circuit and upheld the constitutionality of New York's judicial election system. The Court explained that although a political party has a First Amendment associational right to choose its candidates, that right is circumscribed when the party is given a role in the state's election process. Parties that are formally involved in the election process, for example, may be required to comply with a primary process and may be prohibited from maintaining racially discriminatory policies (which could become impermissible state action).
But, the Court explained, the political parties' associational rights were not at issue in the case; rather, the "weapon wielded by these plaintiffs is their own claimed associational right not only to join, but to have a certain degree of influence in, the party."Lopez Torrez, 552 U.S. at 203. In refusing to acknowledge the existence of such a right, the Court explained that nothing in the law prohibited the candidates from attending the convention and lobbying the delegates, and nothing in the law compelled the delegates to vote for their parties' preferred candidates. As the Court explained, 
Our cases invalidating ballot-access requirements have focused on the requirements themselves, and not on the manner in which political actors function under those requirements. ... None of our cases establishes an individual's constitutional right to have a 'fair shot' at winning the party's nomination.Lopez Torrez, 552 U.S. at 205.
The Court also rejected the plaintiffs' contention that the existence of entrenched "one-party rule" rendered the general election uncompetitive. As the Court noted, candidates could obtain a place on the ballot, without party affiliation, via New York's general petition-signature requirements.
Concurring opinions
Justice Stevens, joined by Justice Souter, wrote a concurring opinion to emphasize that the court's decision dealt with the constitutionality of New York's judicial election system, and not its wisdom. He quoted Justice Thurgood Marshall, saying "The Constitution does not prohibit legislatures from enacting stupid laws."
Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion emphasized that the political party nomination was not the sole method of securing a place on the ballot. As he explained, a person seeking a Supreme Court judgeship could alternatively meet general petition-signature requirements, these being the lesser of either (1) five percent of the number of votes last cast for governor in the judicial district or (2) either 3,500 or 4,000 signatures (depending on the district). Were this route to the ballot not available, he suggested that the constitutionality of New York's election laws would be in greater doubt. In the second part of his opinion, which was joined by Justice Breyer, Justice Kennedy discussed the important role that elections can play in the selection of judges, but warned that they might also foster abuse and manipulation. He stated: 
If New York statutes for nominating and electing judges do not produce both the perception and the reality of a system committed to the highest ideals of the law, they ought to be changed and to be changed now. But, as the Court today holds, ... the present suit does not permit us to invoke the Constitution in order to intervene.Lopez Torrez, 552 U.S. at 213 (Kennedy, J., concurring).
See also
 Elections in New York
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Campaign finance in the United States
Category:United States elections case law
Category:New York state elections
Category:2008 in United States case law
"""

From "New York State Department of Social Services v. Dublino" ==> """
New York State Dept. of Social Servs. v. Dublino, 413 U.S. 405 (1973), was a Supreme Court of the United States case that primarily dealt with the issue of post-enactment legislative history.
 Background 
The case involved the interaction of a New York state law and a provision of the federal Social Security Act.  In 1967 an amendment to the Social Security Act was passed that mandated that states had to incorporate a new program, the Work Incentive Program (WIN), into their existing state Aid to Families with Dependent Children plans.42 U.S.C. § 630  The New York law in question was the New York Work Rules which were enacted in 1971 that mandated various conditions for unemployed New Yorkers to continue receiving public assistance.N.Y. Soc. Serv. §131 (McKinney 2011)  Recipients of public assistance in New York sued claiming that the Work Rules were preempted by the federal WIN provision of the Social Security Act.
 Decision 
In overturning the New York District Court’s ruling that the New York statute was preempted by the federal statute the Supreme Court relied heavily on legislative history.  The Court found persuasive the legislative debates that occurred after the District Court’s ruling in which senators and representatives stated that they did not believe that Congress had intended for the federal statute to preempt the state statute.  The legislators felt that as long as state courts did not contravene federal law then states were free to operate their programs as supplementary to WIN.
The Court reasoned that if Congress had intended for the federal statute to preempt any future state plans for employment then they would have expressed that intention expressly and in “direct and unambiguous language.”413 U.S. 414 The Court found no manifestation of congressional intent for the federal statute to preempt state statutes.    
Finally, the majority opinion also found persuasive that the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) is the government agency that administers the Social Security Act and that agency never considered the WIN statute to preempt state laws.  HEW, as the legislators suggested in the floor debates, routinely approved state laws such as New York’s Work Rules as long as the requirements were not arbitrary or unreasonable.  Quoting Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U.S. 367 at 381, the Court stated that “the construction of a statute by those charged with its execution should be followed unless there are compelling indications that it is wrong...”413 U.S. 421.  The Court found no indication that HEW was wrong to approve state programs.
 Post-Enactment Legislative History 
This case is important for its use of post-enactment statutory interpretation.  This type of legislative history is most commonly used by courts to determine what the congress who enacted the statute intended to include or not include in the statutory language; thus, it is a record of what occurred before the statute was enacted.  The Court's analysis centered heavily on Congressional debates about WIN that occurred after the statute had been passed.
 Subsequent History 
The WIN program was repealed by Congress on October 13, 1988.See 42 U.S.C. § 630
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1973 in United States case law
"""

From "New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, Inc. v. City of New York" ==> """
New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, Inc. v. City of New York, New York, 590 U.S. ___ (2020), abbreviated NYSRPA v. NYC and also known as NYSRPA I to distinguish it from the subsequent case, was a case addressing whether the gun ownership laws of New York City, which restrict the transport of a licensed firearm out of one's home, violated the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution, the U.S. Constitution's Commerce Clause, and the right to travel. It was the first major gun-related case that the Supreme Court had accepted for review in nearly ten years, after District of Columbia v. Heller (2008) and McDonald v. City of Chicago (2010). After the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case, New York City and New York state amended its laws to allay the challenged provision. In a per curiam decision in April 2020, the Supreme Court determined that the case was moot, vacating and remanding the case to lower courts to determine "whether petitioners may still add a claim for damages in this lawsuit with respect to New York City's old rule".New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, Inc. v. City of New York, New York, No. 18–280 (April 27, 2020).
Prior to the city's amendments to its laws, the case was seen as a possible vehicle for the Supreme Court's conservative majority to expand gun rights in the United States. In a dissent, Justice Samuel Alito, joined by Justices Neil Gorsuch and Clarence Thomas, expressed their belief that the New York case was not moot, the New York law had violated the petitioners' Second Amendment rights, and Heller had been interpreted too narrowly in the lower courts. Justice Brett Kavanaugh wrote a concurrence but also agreed with Alito's stance that the Supreme Court should review the current application of Heller in lower courts.
 Background 
The Supreme Court's landmark decision in District of Columbia v. Heller (2008) affirmed that the Second Amendment protected the right of U.S. citizens to own guns within the privacy of their own home but that the sale, possession, and carrying of guns, including specific limitations on weapon types, may be regulated. McDonald v. City of Chicago (2010) affirmed the constitutional right to be incorporated to the states and so prohibited regulations that completely prevent gun ownership. Justice Antonin Scalia, in his majority opinion for Heller, wrote that the Supreme Court was not upholding "a right to keep and carry any weapon whatsoever in any manner whatsoever and for whatever purpose." As a result, there is a wide variety of state legislation stating the types of guns that can be purchased, if a permit and/or license is required before they are owned, if they can be carried in public, and so forth.
The gun laws of New York State are generally considered highly restrictive, and New York City's own ordinances on guns are even more restrictive than those on the state level. Other than certain professions in which gun ownership is considered a necessity, gun owners in New York City may possess a gun within their home only under a "premises license" and the gun must be kept unloaded and in a locked container. Also, gun owners may not transport the guns except directly to and from one of the city's seven shooting ranges. That includes prohibiting the transport of guns to outside the city limits, even to an external shooting range or to a second residence owned by the gun owner. Prior to 2001, the city offered "target licenses" to allow owners to transport their guns to authorized shooting range outside of the city. However, after the city's police had found the licenses to be abused, the city revoked granting the licenses and altered the language of the premises license to emphasize the restriction on travel. Violations of the ordinance could include up to a year in prison.
District court and court of appeals
The New York State Rifle & Pistol Association Inc. and several gun owners in New York City filed suit against the City in 2013 in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York after they had affirmed with the New York City Police that they could not take their guns in the city out of it to shooting competitions in New Jersey or to homes that they had owned for years.New York State Rifle & Pistol Ass'n v. City of New York, No. 1:13-cv-02115. The plaintiffs argued that the ordinance violated their Second Amendment rights, affirmed by Heller, as well as the Dormant Commerce Clause and the right to travel. The District Court issued summary judgment for the City in 2015 and dismissed the plaintiffs' claims. The ruling found the city to have a compelling interest to limit firearms transport to support public safety and affected gun owners not to have been prevented from traveling out of the city without their guns or to use shooting ranges with guns purchased outside the city. 
The plaintiffs appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in 2015. The Second Circuit affirmed in early 2018. Applying intermediate scrutiny, the Second Circuit held that the law served an important governmental interest, promoting public safety, and that "the City has met its burden of showing a substantial fit between the Rule and the City's interest in promoting public safety." The Second Circuit also noted that Heller and McDonald affirmed the constitutional right to own guns only to defend one's home, not for transport or use outside the home.
Supreme Court
Grant of certiorari
The plaintiffs petitioned for writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court, challenged the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit's decisions, and specifically asked if the restriction on gun transport violated their Second Amendment rights, their Dormant Commerce Clause rights, and their right to travel. The Supreme Court granted the petition on January 22, 2019. Because of the case, the Supreme Court placed on hold the decision on whether to take Rogers v. Grewal, a New Jersey case involving the right to carry a loaded gun in public. The issue has resulted in a split among the courts of appeal.
The Supreme Court, until it accepted the New York case in 2019, had denied petitions for certiorari on other gun ownership cases. In one of the most recent denials, issued in February 2018 (during the 2017 term), Justice Clarence Thomas dissented from the denial of certiorari and complained that in his view, "the Second Amendment is a disfavored right in this Court." Justice Anthony Kennedy retired in 2018; his opinion on gun rights was generally considered balanced between government and individuals, which made it difficult for the justices to find the necessary majority to take a case. During the 2018 term, Judge Brett Kavanaugh of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit was appointed as Kennedy's replacement and holds conservative views and in previous opinions favored gun ownership. After the Supreme Court granted certiorari, Court observers wrote that if the Court did not determine that the case was moot, it could be a major case that would settle the question of the standard of review to be applied in Second Amendment cases (i.e., whether gun laws are reviewed under intermediate scrutiny, as the Second Circuit decided, or the more demanding strict scrutiny).How a new Supreme Court case could transform gun rights in America, Economist (January 30, 2019).
Change in city and state law and subsequent mootness briefing
Gun control groups petitioned New York City to change its gun laws prior to the case's decision as to render the case moot, fearing that with a conservative majority, the Court would create case law that would promote wider gun ownership and weaken gun control legislation. In May 2019, the city initiated a public response period to change the gun control regulation, allowing residents with valid gun licenses to be able to transport the weapons to the shooting ranges in the city limits but not outside the city. By the end of June 2019, the city had revised its gun control ordinances to allow licensed gun holders to transport their weapons in a safe manner to homes or shooting ranges outside of the city.Amy Howe, City returns in gun-rights case, SCOTUSblog (July 22, 2019).
In filings in July 2019, the city wrote that the issue is moot because of its changes to its law. The city also pointed to a new New York State law, signed by Governor Andrew Cuomo, which allows licensed handgun owners to transport handguns to other places in which they are legally permitted to have them. The New York State Rifle & Pistol Association responded that the case had not been rendered moot and argued that even the changed laws represent a live controversy regarding transport of handguns in New York City. For example, the new regulations allegedly require uninterrupted transportation, which forbids a gun owner from stopping to refuel, and still limit transport outside of the city. The Court continued to instruct all parties to continue to submit filings and briefs prior to the start of the 2019 term. In the first week of the new term in September 2019, the Court considered the mootness of the case in closed conference. 
The Supreme Court proceedings in the case took place amid the backdrop of a number of high-profile mass shootings took place in the United States, including the shootings at El Paso, Texas and Dayton, Ohio, in August 2019. Sheldon Whitehouse and four other Democratic senators (Kirsten Gillibrand, Mazie Hirono, Richard Blumenthal, and Dick Durbin) filed an amicus brief that strongly urged the Court to find that the case is moot and criticized the Federalist Society and National Rifle Association of America for promoting what the brief called a "project" to undermine gun-control laws. Referring to the recent mass shootings, the brief said, "In the cloistered confines of this Court, and notwithstanding the public imperatives of these massacres, the NRA and its allies brashly presume, in word and deed, that they have a friendly audience for their 'project.'" The senators' brief argued that "ignoring neutral justiciability principles to reach desired outcomes" would damage the Court's legitimacy as an institutionBrief of Sheldon Whitehouse, Mazie Hirono, Richard Blumenthal, Richard Durbin and Kirsten Gillibrand as Amici Curiae in Support of Respondents, New York State Rifle & Pistol Ass'n, Inc. v. City of New York (No. 18-280). and accelerate a decrease in public faith in the judiciary, and suggested that the Court "heal itself before the public demands it be 'restructured in order to reduce the influence of politics.'"
In its October 7, 2019 orders, the Court denied the request to consider the case moot and stated, "The question of mootness will be subject to further consideration at oral argument."
Oral argument
Oral argument were on December 2, 2019. Observers believed from the questions asked that the Court would likely rule the case moot and so not attempt to arrive at a judgement that would extend Second Amendment rights. The more conservative Justices Neil Gorsuch and Samuel Alito seemed to favor expanding gun rights, but the liberal side of the Court was joined by Chief Justice John Roberts in asking what was left for the Court to rule on because of the change in the law since certiorari had been granted.
Decision
The court issued a per curiam decision on April 27, 2020, holding that the case was moot in light of the changed law. The Court ordered the prior rulings vacated and the case remanded to lower courts to consider "whether petitioners may still add a claim for damages in this lawsuit with respect to New York City's old rule." This is a challenged issue between the parties, and the Supreme Court noted, "Petitioners also argue that, even though they have not previously asked for damages with respect to the City's old rule, they still could do so in this lawsuit. Petitioners did not seek damages in their complaint; indeed, the possibility of a damages claim was not raised until well into the litigation in this Court. The City argues that it is too late for petitioners to now add a claim for damages."
While the decision was issued per curiam and thus meant to represent the collective decision of the court, reporters inferred the decision was based on a 6-3 vote based on the attached opinions. In a concurring opinion, Justice Brett Kavanaugh agreed that the case was moot but wrote that he agreed with Justice Samuel Alito's "concern that some federal and state courts may not be properly applying Heller and McDonald" and suggested that "The Court should address that issue soon, perhaps in one of the several Second Amendment cases with petitions for certiorari now pending before the Court." The day of the decision, the Court added ten Second Amendment-based petitions for consideration.
In a lengthy dissent joined by Justice Neil Gorsuch in full and Justice Clarence Thomas in part, Justice Alito wrote, "This case is not moot. The City violated petitioners' Second Amendment right, and we should so hold." He argued that the Court should have evaluated the city's laws in light of Heller and McDonald, and that by rendering the case moot, they have allowed the docket of the Supreme Court to be "manipulated".
Post-ruling
Referencing this case in New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen, in Justice Alito's concurrence, he states that "after we agreed to review [the Second Circuit's] decision, the city repealed the law and admitted that it did not actually have any beneficial effect on public safety."
References
External links
Supreme Court docket for New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, Inc. v. City of New York'' (No. 18-280)
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Second Amendment case law
Category:History of New York City
"""

From "New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen" ==> """
New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen, 597 U.S. ___ (2022), abbreviated NYSRPA v. Bruen and also known as NYSRPA II or Bruen to distinguish it from the 2020 case, is a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court related to the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution. The case concerned the constitutionality of the 1911 Sullivan Act, a New York State law requiring applicants for a license to carry a concealed pistol on their person to show "proper cause", or a special need distinguishable from that of the general public, in their application.
In a 6–3 decision, the majority ruled that New York's law was unconstitutional, and ruled that the ability to carry a pistol in public was a constitutional right under the Second Amendment. The majority ruled that states are allowed to enforce "shall-issue" permitting, where applicants for concealed carry permits must satisfy certain objective criteria, such as passing a background check, but that "may-issue" systems that use "arbitrary" evaluations of need made by local authorities are unconstitutional.
In wake of Bruen, several lawsuits involving federal and states' gun regulations have been filed, stressing on the judiciary need to evaluate the regulation not in consideration of the public good, but in light of the "historical tradition of firearm regulation", a phrase penned by majority opinion author Justice Clarence Thomas. Several of these cases had successfully overturned long-standing regulations due to the regulations being not of historic tradition.
 Background 
 Prior Second Amendment case law 
The issue around the right to carry guns in public in the United States has been a contested area in politics and constitutional law for most of the 20th and, so far, the 21st century. Prior to the case, the Supreme Court established two major decisions toward gun possession in one's home: District of Columbia v. Heller affirmed that U.S. citizens did have an individual right, unconnected to a "well-regulated militia", to possess guns within their own homes under the Second Amendment, and McDonald v. City of Chicago affirmed this was a right that was incorporated against the states. However, the question of ownership outside of one's home had not yet reached the Supreme Court, and instead was based on an inconsistent framework of state laws and federal court decisions. These decisions were generally rested on long-standing common law that the government does have the ability to regulate firearms in public spaces to uphold state regulations on public gun possession. Across over one thousand cases since Heller, most federal appeals courts have used intermediate scrutiny rather than strict scrutiny to judge the validity of public-carry gun control laws which defer to the states' compelling interest to protect the public by restricting possession of guns in public spaces.
Since Heller and McDonald, the Supreme Court had been pressed by gun-rights advocates like the National Rifle Association to further review Second Amendment rights related to public possession of guns, but the Court had passed on numerous cases that were presented. The case New York State Rifle & Pistol Association Inc. v. City of New York,New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, Inc. v. City of New York, New York , No. 18–280 (April 27, 2020). which dealt with transporting guns out of New York City, had been accepted by the Supreme Court in 2019, but due to changes in the underlying law, the case was rendered moot.
 Case background 
To combat growing criminal violence in certain neighborhoods of New York City, including the assassination attempt on New York City mayor William J. Gaynor and the murder of author David Graham Phillips, Timothy Sullivan led the state legislature to enact the Sullivan Act in 1911. Chapter 195, enacted May 25, 1911, effective September 1, 1911. It made the possession of a handgun without a permit a crime, and instituted issuance of concealed carry permits at the discretion of local law enforcement. The law states that to obtain a permit, the applicant must "demonstrate a special need for self-protection distinguishable from that of the general community or of persons engaged in the same profession". The state had clarified that this must be a non-speculative need for self-defense as to establish a proper cause to grant a permit. The New York State Rifle and Pistol Association, along with Robert Nash and Brandon Koch, who failed to obtain a permit in New York state, challenged that law, seeking to make the issue of permits no longer discretionary. Nash, for example, sought a permit for a handgun after a string of robberies in his neighborhood but was denied as he could not prove a need for self-defense. The plaintiffs argued that the law and judgements against their permits were flawed; "Good, even impeccable, moral character plus a simple desire to exercise a fundamental right is, according to these courts, not sufficient. Nor is living or being employed in a 'high crime area.'" The Sullivan Act is considered the first may-issue public carry law in the United States, since the discretion on allowing a person to carry a gun in public is based on the evaluation of need, which seven other states adopted from New York. This is in contrast to more recent "shall-issue" licensing requirements based on determinant methods such as using background checks and aptitude checks to determine eligibility.
 Lower courts 
The case, filed against then-Superintendent George P. Beach II of the New York State Police and Justice Richard J. McNally of the New York Supreme Court, was initially dismissed at the Northern District of New York in 2018. The plaintiffs appealed to the Second Circuit, which affirmed the dismissal by the District Court in August 2020. Beach was replaced by Keith M. Corlett in 2019; Corlett was replaced by Kevin P. Bruen in 2021, and Bruen was subsequently named as the defendant and respondent in the suit.
 Supreme Court 
The petitioners had asked the Supreme Court to review their case, specifically pressing the question of "whether the Second Amendment allows the government to prohibit ordinary law-abiding citizens from carrying handguns outside the home for self-defense". The Supreme Court granted certiorari on April 26, 2021, though it limited the case to the question of "whether the State’s denial of petitioners’ applications for concealed-carry licenses for self-defense violated the Second Amendment". The case was heard on November 3, 2021. The petitioners were represented by Paul Clement, who served as solicitor general during the administration of George W. Bush and argued as amicus curiae on behalf of the United States in Heller, and on behalf of the National Rifle Association in support of the petitioners in McDonald. The respondents were represented by New York State Solicitor General Barbara Underwood, who served in the Solicitor General's Office during the administration of Bill Clinton and temporarily served as
acting Solicitor General of the United States between the transition from Clinton to Bush.
The case was the first major gun-rights case that the Supreme Court had heard in more than a decade, outside of the moot New York State Rifle & Pistol Association Inc. v. City of New York. It was also the first gun-rights case to be heard by the six-member conservative majority, which included Justices Clarence Thomas, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh, who in prior opinions had emphasized the need for the Supreme Court to review the current stance on Second Amendment cases. Justice Amy Coney Barrett had also expressed support for a Second Amendment review prior to her appointment to the Supreme Court. Because of the shift toward a more-conservative membership, some court analysts believed that the Court might interpret the Second Amendment more liberally in favor of individual rights over states' powers, which could render many existing public-possession regulations unconstitutional. However, as discussed by Vox Ian Millhiser, the limited question that the Court granted may restrict the issue to concealed-carry licenses and not the matter of any and all public possession.
 Amicus briefs 
More than eighty amici curiae for this case were filed.Ellena Erskine. "We read all the amicus briefs in New York State Rifle so you don’t have to ". SCOTUSBlog, November 2, 2021. Accessed June 23, 2022.
 Discrimination and marginalized groups 
Organizations representing American minority groups submitted amicus briefs in support of striking down much of the Sullivan Act as unconstitutional.ARUN VENUGOPAL AND HERB PINDER. "An upcoming U.S. Supreme Court ruling in a NY case could mean more handguns in public places ". Gothamist, June 2, 2022. Accessed June 22, 2022. The Bronx Defenders, Brooklyn Defenders Services, and Black Attorneys of Legal Aid opined that the Second Amendment is a "legal fiction" in New York when it comes to people of color. According to these public defender and legal aid organizations, some 96% of those arrested for illegal gun possession in New York during 2020 were either Black or Latino.  The disparate racial impact of the Sullivan Act and other discretionary New York state gun control regulations is "no accident" according to their brief provided to the Court. Black Guns Matter, A Girl & A Gun Women's Shooting League, and Armed Equality, an LGBT self-defense group, voiced a similar opinion to the Court in their own amicus brief, calling may-issue "deeply discriminatory".
 Weakness of "proper cause" 
Twenty-six state attorneys general argued that the subjective nature of the proper-cause test "fails muster under any level of scrutiny" because it required license applicants to prove they "have already become victims of violent crimes" before they could carry a firearm to protect themselves against that very violence from occurring in the first place.BRIEF OF ARIZONA, MISSOURI, ALABAMA, ALASKA, ARKANSAS, FLORIDA, GEORGIA, IDAHO, INDIANA, KANSAS, KENTUCKY, LOUISIANA, MISSISSIPPI, MONTANA, NEBRASKA, NEW HAMPSHIRE, NORTH DAKOTA, OHIO, OKLAHOMA, SOUTH CAROLINA, SOUTH DAKOTA, TENNESSEE, TEXAS, UTAH, WEST VIRGINIA, AND WYOMING AS AMICI CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS ". Supreme Court of the United States. Accessed June 23, 2022.
Black Guns Matter opined the proper-cause requirement had no objective standards, and therefore lent itself to discriminatory usage in practice.
 History and Precedent 
A group of Republican lawyers including J. Michael Luttig, Peter Keisler, and Stuart M. Gerson argued that text, history, tradition, and precedent make it clear that states may restrict concealed carry and pass legislation to reduce gun violence in public.BRIEF OF J. MICHAEL LUTTIG, PETER KEISLER, CARTER PHILLIPS AND STUART GERSON, ET AL., AS AMICI CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENTS [[Supreme Court of the United States ] ". Supreme Court of the United States. Accessed Aug 19, 2022.
Opinion of the Court
The case's decision was released on June 23, 2022. In a 6–3 opinion authored by Justice Clarence Thomas, the Court held that the state law was unconstitutional as it infringed on the right to keep and bear arms, reversing the Second Circuit's decision and remanding the case for further review. 
Thomas' majority opinion, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett, effectively rendered public carry a constitutional right under the Second Amendment. Thomas wrote, "The constitutional right to bear arms in public for self-defense is not 'a second-class right, subject to an entirely different body of rules than the other Bill of Rights guarantees.' We know of no other constitutional right that an individual may exercise only after demonstrating to government officers some special need." 
Because public carry is a constitutional right, Thomas ruled out use of the two-part test to evaluate state gun laws, which generally involved application of intermediate scrutiny, that many lower courts had used, and instead evaluated New York's law under a more-stringent test of whether the proper-cause requirement is consistent with the nation's historical tradition of firearm regulation. Thomas wrote that gun control laws that identify restricted "sensitive places", such as courthouses and polling places, would still likely pass constitutional muster, though urban areas would not qualify as such sensitive places. 
After striking down the two-step test (formerly used by Courts of Appeals addressing Second Amendment issues), Bruen identified the new test courts must use on Second Amendment cases. The Court held: "When the Second Amendment's plain text covers an individual's conduct [here the right to bear arms], the Constitution presumptively protects that conduct. The government must then justify its regulation by demonstrating that it is consistent with the Nation's historical tradition of firearm regulation. Only then may a court conclude that the individual's conduct falls outside the Second Amendment's "'unqualified command.'"
Concurrence
Justice Kavanaugh penned a concurring opinion, joined by Chief Justice Roberts, affirming states may still implement licensing requirements such as background checks before issuing public carry permits. Kavanaugh wrote that these checks differ from the New York law as that law "grants open-ended discretion to licensing officials and authorizes licenses only for those applicants who can show some special need apart from self-defense." Kavanaugh quoted from Justice Antonin Scalia's majority opinion in Heller, stating that "nothing in our opinion, should be taken to cast doubt on longstanding prohibitions on the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill, or laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive places such as schools and government buildings, or laws imposing conditions and qualifications on the commercial sale of arms."
Dissent
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan. Breyer led his dissent by referring the amount of gun violence in the United States, including listing several major mass shootings from the months prior. He then wrote that "New York's Legislature considered the empirical evidence about gun violence and adopted a reasonable licensing law to regulate the concealed carriage of handguns in order to keep the people of New York safe", and that the majority decision established a new framework for courts to use in Second Amendments cases that would harm states' abilities to regulate guns. He concluded that "when courts interpret the Second Amendment, it is constitutionally proper, indeed often necessary, for them to consider the serious dangers and consequences of gun violence that lead States to regulate firearms".
Criticism of dissent
Justice Alito wrote a separate concurrence to the majority, in which he criticized Breyer's dissent, stating, "It is hard to see what legitimate purpose can possibly be served by most of the dissent's lengthy introductory section ... Much of the dissent seems designed to obscure the specific question that the Court has decided." Dismissing Breyer's concern on a new legal framework for Second Amendment cases, Alito wrote, "Our holding decides nothing about who may lawfully possess a firearm or the requirements that must be met to buy a gun."
Justice Alito also questioned whether a person bent on committing an atrocity such as a mass shooting would be deterred because it would be illegal for him to carry a firearm outside of his home. Alito further pointed out that the recent shooting rampage in Buffalo occurred in New York, and New York's law had done nothing to stop the perpetrator.
 Impact 
While the ruling directly applied only to New York's law, legal analysts and lawmakers expected the ruling to be used to challenge the "may-issue" gun regulations in California, Hawaii, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, and Rhode Island. Lawmakers in New York and these states began evaluating new regulations that would comply with the Supreme Court ruling while maintaining strict ownership laws.
On June 24, 2022, the Acting Attorney General of New Jersey, Matthew J. Platkin, concluded that Bruen disallowed the state from requiring concealed carry permit applicants to demonstrate a justifiable need to carry a handgun and directed law enforcement and prosecutors to process applications on a shall-issue basis. The Attorneys General of California and Hawaii issued similar directives.
Within months of the ruling of Bruen, several existing and new lawsuit challenging federal and states' firearms regulations pressed on the language of "historical tradition of firearm regulation" that was introduced in Thomas' majority opinion, and to ignore the traditional metric of whether the restriction serves the public good. Among federal laws that have been blocked from enforcement as of February 2023 include those that prevented gun ownership from those convicted of misdemeanor domestic violence, individuals subject to final (issued after a hearing of which the respondent had notice and at which the respondent had the opportunity to appear) domestic violence restraining orders, felony defendants, and drug users. These decisions have been praised by Second Amendment activists but criticized by those fighting for stronger gun control in the U.S. The interpretations of Bruen have been considered varied by judges and legal scholars, since interpreting the "historic tradition" requires judges to understand how the framers of the Constitution envisioned gun ownership in the 18th century.
 Reactions 
The Governor of New York, Kathy Hochul (), called the decision by the court "frightening" and said it "strips away the state's right to protect its citizens". She also criticized the decision as "reckless" and "reprehensible". By July 1, 2022, Hochul signed a revised Concealed Carry Improvement Act (CCIA) into law with restrictions on public possession of guns based on the decision from Bruen. The new law removes the old "may-issue" standard that had been challenged, but adds new requirements including classroom training and a background check of the applicant's social media posts for any red flags. In addition, the law prohibits guns from being carried in sensitive locations that include polling places, schools, and churches, and well as New York's tourist attractions like Times Square. The law came into effect on September 1, 2022; an initial lawsuit seeking to block enforcement of the law was thrown out due to lack of standing though federal judge Glenn Suddaby did agree the new law may be unconstitutional under the Bruen decision. A second lawsuit, filed by citizens that belonged to Gun Owners of America, led to Judge Suddaby to grant an injunction on the law on October 6, 2022, stating that the law's full list of locations where public carry was banned was likely indefensible, though the state filed an emergency appeal to the Second Circuit. The Second Circuit lifted the injunction, allowing the law to be enforced, while they reviewed their case.
Separately, New York City passed a bill on October 11, 2022, that designated Times Square as a sensitive location where public possession of a gun would be unlawful.
The Legal Aid Society said the decision "may be an affirmative step toward ending arbitrary licensing standards that have inhibited lawful Black and Brown gun ownership in New York."Justin Rohrlich. "[Supreme Court Paves Way for Even Looser Gun Laws Weeks After Uvalde Massacre]". Yahoo News, June 23, 2022. Accessed June 24, 2022.
House minority Leader Kevin McCarthy () supported the ruling, saying it "rightfully ensures the right of all law-abiding Americans to defend themselves without unnecessary government interference."
Law professor Steve Vladeck said the decision will "have monumental ramifications far beyond carrying firearms in public" and predicts there will be a "slew of litigation challenging any and every gun-control measure".
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
 S.51001 Concealed Carry Improvement Act from the New York State Senate
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Second Amendment case law
Category:New York (state) law
"""

From "New York Times Co. v. Sullivan" ==> """
New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964), was a landmark U.S. Supreme Court decision ruling that the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution's freedom of speech protections limit the ability of American public officials to sue for defamation. The decision held that if a plaintiff in a defamation lawsuit is a public official or candidate for public office, not only must they prove the normal elements of defamationpublication of a false defamatory statement to a third partythey must also prove that the statement was made with "actual malice", meaning the defendant either knew the statement was false or recklessly disregarded whether it might be false. New York Times Co. v. Sullivan is frequently ranked as one of the greatest Supreme Court decisions of the modern era.
The underlying case began in 1960, when The New York Times published a full-page advertisement by supporters of Martin Luther King Jr. that criticized the police in Montgomery, Alabama, for their treatment of civil rights movement protesters. The ad had several inaccuracies regarding facts such as the number of times King had been arrested during the protests, what song the protesters had sung, and whether students had been expelled for participating. Based on the inaccuracies, Montgomery police commissioner L. B. Sullivan sued the Times for defamation in the local Alabama county court. After the judge ruled that the advertisement's inaccuracies were defamatory per se, the jury returned a verdict in favor of Sullivan and awarded him $500,000 in damages. The Times appealed first to the Supreme Court of Alabama, which affirmed the verdict, and then to the U.S. Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the case.
In March 1964, the Court issued a 9–0 decision holding that the Alabama court's verdict violated the First Amendment. The decision defended free reporting of the civil rights movement campaigns in the southern United States. It is one of the key decisions supporting the freedom of the press. Before this decision, there were nearly $300 million in libel actions from the southern states outstanding against news organizations, part of a collective effort by southern officials to use defamation suits to prevent critical coverage of civil-rights issues in out-of-state publications. The Supreme Court's decision, and its adoption of the actual malice standard, reduced the financial exposure from potential defamation claims and frustrated efforts by public officials to use these claims to suppress political criticism.Elena Kagan, "A Libel Story: Sullivan Then and Now" (reviewing Anthony Lewis, Make No Law: The Sullivan Case and the First Amendment (1991)), 18 Law and Social Inquiry 197 (1993).Rick Schmitt, "Window to the Past: New York Times Co. v. Sullivan" , Washington Lawyer, October 2014. In later decisions, beginning with Curtis Publishing Co. v. Butts, the Supreme Court has extended Sullivan higher legal standard for defamation from public officials to all "public figures". These decisions have made it extremely difficult for a public figure to win a defamation lawsuit in the United States.
Background
On March 29, 1960, The New York Times carried a full-page advertisement titled "Heed Their Rising Voices", paid for by the Committee to Defend Martin Luther King and the Struggle for Freedom in the South.Heed Their Rising Voices Advertisement, courtesy of the National Archives In the advertisement, the Committee solicited funds to defend Martin Luther King Jr., against an Alabama perjury indictment. The advertisement described actions against civil rights protesters, some of them inaccurately, some of which involved the police force of Montgomery, Alabama. Referring to Alabama "official authority and police power", the advertisement stated: "They have arrested [King] seven times. ... ", whereas he had been arrested four times; and that "truckloads of police ... ringed the Alabama State College Campus" after the demonstration at the State Capitol, whereas the police had been "deployed near" the campus but had not actually "ringed" it and had not gone there in connection with the State Capitol demonstration. Although the Montgomery Public Safety commissioner, L. B. Sullivan, was not named in the advertisement, Sullivan argued that the inaccurate criticism of actions by the police was defamatory to him as well because it was his duty to supervise the police department.
right|thumb|The advertisement published in The New York Times on March 29, 1960, that led to Sullivan's defamation lawsuit.
Because Alabama law denied public officers recovery of punitive damages in a libel action on their official conduct unless they first made a written demand for a public retraction and the defendant failed or refused to comply, Sullivan sent such a request. The Times did not publish a retraction in response to the demand. Instead, its lawyers wrote a letter stating, among other things, that "we ... are somewhat puzzled as to how you think the statements in any way reflect on you," and "you might, if you desire, let us know in what respect you claim that the statements in the advertisement reflect on you."
Sullivan did not respond but instead filed a libel suit a few days later. He also sued four African-American ministers mentioned in the ad: Ralph Abernathy, S.S. Seay, Sr., Fred Shuttlesworth, and Joseph Lowery.
The Times subsequently published a retraction of the advertisement upon the demand of Governor John Patterson of Alabama, who alleged the publication charged him with "grave misconduct and ... improper actions and omissions as Governor of Alabama and ex officio chairman of the State Board of Education of Alabama." When asked to explain why there had been a retraction for the Governor but not for Sullivan, the Secretary of the Times testified:
We did that because we didn't want anything that was published by the Times to be a reflection on the State of Alabama and the Governor was, as far as we could see, the embodiment of the State of Alabama and the proper representative of the state and we had by that time learned more of the facts which the ad purported to recite and, finally, the ad did refer to the action of the state authorities and the Board of Education presumably of which the Governor is the ex officio chairman ... 
However, the Secretary also testified he did not think that "any of the languages in there referred to Mr. Sullivan."
Sullivan secured a judgment for $500,000 in the Alabama state trial court. The state supreme court affirmed on August 30, 1962, saying "The First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution does not protect libelous publications". The Times appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
Constitutional law scholar Herbert Wechsler successfully argued the case before the United States Supreme Court. Louis M. Loeb, a partner at the firm of Lord Day & Lord who served as chief counsel to the Times from 1948 to 1967,"Who's Who in America" 1978-1979 was among the authors of the brief of the Times.
Decision
On March 9, 1964, the Supreme Court issued a unanimous 9–0 decision in favor of the Times that vacated the Alabama court's judgment and limited newspapers' liability for damages in defamation suits by public officials.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|upright=1.0|Justice William J. Brennan Jr., the author of the Supreme Court's unanimous opinion
Justice William J. Brennan Jr. authored the Court's opinion, and five other justices joined it. The Court began by explaining that criticism of government and public officials was at the core of the American constitutional rights to freedom of speech and freedom of the press. 
The Court said that because of these core American principles, it would "consider this case against the background of a profound national commitment to the principle that debate on public issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide-open, and that it may well include vehement, caustic, and sometimes unpleasantly sharp attacks on government and public officials." (quoting Sullivan, 376 U.S. at 270).
With this background, the Court framed the case around the question of whether this American constitutional commitment to free speech required loosening traditional defamation laws.
In answer, the Court held that the advertisement's inaccuracies did not remove its free-speech constitutional protections. The Court reasoned that "erroneous statement is inevitable in free debate, and ... must be protected if the freedoms of expression are to have the breathing space that they need ... to survive"., quoting Sullivan, 376 U.S. at 271–72 (internal quotation marks omitted). It concluded that the importance of safeguarding the "breathing space" created by the First Amendment's protections required giving constitutional protection to "erroneous statements honestly made". The Court analogized Alabama's libel law to the infamous Alien and Sedition Acts passed in the late 1790s during the presidency of John Adams. It reasoned that a broad interpretation of libel laws that protected government officials from criticism would produce situations similar to those under the Alien and Sedition Acts, which had been historically criticized.
Because of the importance of free debate about public officials, the Court held that it was not enough that Alabama's libel law—like most libel laws in the English common law tradition—allowed defendants to use the truth of their defamatory statements as a defense. Instead, the Court held that under U.S. law, any public official suing for defamation must prove that the defendant made the defamatory statement with "actual malice".
The Court said that besides proving "actual malice", the First Amendment's protections also imposed two other limitations on libel laws. First, a public official seeking damages must prove that the defendant's defamatory statement was about the official individually, not about government policy generally. Second, unlike in traditional common law defamation lawsuits where the defendant had the burden to prove that his or her statement was true, in defamation suits involving American public officials the officials must prove that the defendant's statement was false.
International comparisons
The rule that somebody alleging defamation should have to prove untruth, rather than that the defendant should have to prove the truth of a statement, stood as a departure from the previous common law. In England, the development was specifically rejected in Derbyshire County Council v. Times Newspapers LtdDerbyshire County Council v. Times Newspapers Ltd [1993] AC 534 and it was also rejected in Canada in Hill v. Church of Scientology of TorontoHill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto [1995] 2 SCR 1130 and more recently in Grant v. Torstar Corp.Grant v. Torstar Corp. [2009] 2009 SCC 61  In Australia, the outcome of the case was followed in Theophanous v. The Herald & Weekly Times Ltd,Theophanous v. The Herald & Weekly Times Ltd (1994) 182 CLR 104 but Theophanous was itself overruled by the High Court of Australia in Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation (1997) 189 CLR 520.
50th anniversary
In 2014, on the 50th anniversary of the ruling, The New York Times released an editorial in which it stated the background of the case, laid out the rationale for the Supreme Court decision, critically reflected on the state of freedom of the press 50 years after the ruling and compared the state of freedom of the press in the United States with other nations. The editorial board of The New York Times heralded the Sullivan decision not only as a ruling which "instantly changed libel law in the United States", but also as "the clearest and most forceful defense of press freedom in American history." The board added:
In a 2015 Time magazine survey of over 50 law professors, both Owen Fiss (Yale) and Steven Schiffrin (Cornell) named New York Times v. Sullivan "the best Supreme Court decision since 1960," with Fiss noting that the decision helped cement "the free-speech traditions that have ensured the vibrancy of American democracy" and Schiffrin remarking that the case "overturned the censorial aspects of the law of libel and made it far easier in what’s left of our democracy for citizens—including the Fourth Estate—to criticize the powerful."
Later developments
Curtis Publishing Co. v. Butts, 388 U.S. 130 (1967) held that public figures who are not public officials may still sue news organizations if they disseminate information about them which is recklessly gathered and unchecked.
Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U.S. 323 (1974): Actual malice not necessary for defamation of private person if negligence is present.
 Time, Inc. v. Hill, 385 U.S. 374 (1967). Extension of actual malice standard to false light invasion of privacy tort.
Hustler Magazine v. Falwell, 485 U.S. 46 (1988): Extending standard to intentional infliction of emotional distress.
Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co., 497 U.S. 1 (1990): Existing law is sufficient to protect free speech without recognizing opinion privilege against libel claims.
Further developments
In February 2019, the Supreme Court denied a petition brought by Katherine McKee, one of the women that accused Bill Cosby of sexual assault, which claimed that Cosby had leaked a letter that permanently damaged her reputation, and had sought civil action against Cosby on this matter. Lower courts rejected her case based on New York Times Co., stating that she "thrust herself to the forefront of a public controversy", making her a limited public figure and requiring the higher standard of malice to be demonstrated. The denial by the Supreme Court did not include a vote count, but Justice Clarence Thomas wrote the solitary opinion on the case, agreeing that denial was appropriate per New York Times Co., but stating that he believed that decision of New York Times Co. was made wrongly. Thomas wrote "If the Constitution does not require public figures to satisfy an actual-malice standard in state-law defamation suits, then neither should we".
In March 2021, federal judge Laurence Silberman called on the Supreme Court to overturn New York Times v. Sullivan, stating that the New York Times and The Washington Post are "virtually Democratic Party broadsheets". Silberman's dissent also accused big tech companies of censoring conservatives and warned that "Democratic Party ideological control" of mainstream media may be a prelude to an "authoritarian or dictatorial regime" that constitutes "a threat to a viable democracy".
Judge Silberman's dissent produced significant public discussion of Sullivan and potential reforms. Many conservative-leaning outlets endorsed Silberman's criticisms of Sullivan. Most liberal-leaning outlets and several moderate conservatives condemned Silberman's decision for its tone and the substantive idea of loosening defamation standards. However, some liberal scholars and a Harvard Law student writing in the Wall Street Journal embraced significant reforms to Sullivan.
In the July 2021 denial of certiorari in Berisha v. Lawson, Justice Thomas dissented and reiterated his opposition to New York Times v. Sullivan. Justice Neil Gorsuch also questioned the usefulness of NYT v. Sullivan when applied to today's media and social media.
On March 19, 2023, The New York Times published a story reviewing the original advertisement and the legal case.
See also
 New York Times Co. v. United States (1971)
 New York Times Co. v. Tasini (2001)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 376
References
Footnotes
Citations
Works cited
Further reading
 Edmondson, Aimee. "Rearticulating New York Times v. Sullivan as a Social Duty to Journalists", Journalism Studies 18, no. 1 (Jan 2017): 86-101. response to Donald Trump's campaign promise to " "open up" libel laws to make it easier for officeholders to sue the media.
 Smolla, Rodney A. Suing the Press: Libel, the Media, and Power. NY: Oxford University Press, 1986.
External links
Booknotes interview with Anthony Lewis on Make No Law: The Sullivan Case and the First Amendment, October 20, 1991.
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:United States defamation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:History of mass media in the United States
Category:United States tort case law
Category:The New York Times
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:African-American history of Alabama
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "New York Times Co. v. Tasini" ==> """
New York Times Co. v. Tasini, 533 U.S. 483 (2001), is a leading decision by the United States Supreme Court on the issue of copyright in the contents of a newspaper database. It held that The New York Times, in licensing back issues of the newspaper for inclusion in electronic databases such as LexisNexis, could not license the works of freelance journalists contained in the newspapers.
The lawsuit brought by members of the UAW's National Writers Union against the New York Times Company, Newsday Inc., Time Inc., University Microfilms International, and LexisNexis. The freelance writers, including lead plaintiff Jonathan Tasini, charged copyright infringement due to the use and reuse in electronic media of articles initially licensed to be published in print form. In a 7–2 ruling delivered by Justice Ginsburg, the Court affirmed the copyright privileges of freelance writers whose works were originally published in periodicals and then provided by the publishers to electronic databases without explicit permission of, or compensation to, the writers. As a result of the decision, plaintiffs won a compensation pool of $18 million.
History
The case was initially heard in the district court of Judge Sonia Sotomayor, who held that the publishers were within their rights according to the Copyright Act of 1976. This decision was reversed on appeal, and the Supreme Court affirmed the appellate court's reversal.Sotomayor's resume, record on notable cases, CNN.com, 26 May 2009.  Accessed 26 May 2009.
Aftermath
The decision involved works generated by 27,000 authors, but it did not allocate any bargaining power to them. The New York Times Company responded to the decision by drafting an ultimatum for the authors. The authors could contact the Times and request that it continue to distribute their works online, but only on the conditions that the authors ask for no additional payment and that they release the Tasini decision's legal claim on the Times and the database licensees. Future freelance contracts with the New York Times included similar terms that allowed the Times to exploit the works in whatever ways the future may reveal.
See also
 New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964)
 New York Times Co. v. United States (1971)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 533
 References 
Further reading
External links
N.Y. Times statement about the ruling
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:History of the United Auto Workers
Category:The New York Times
"""

From "New York Times Co. v. United States" ==> """
New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U.S. 713 (1971), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States on the First Amendment right of Freedom of the Press. The ruling made it possible for The New York Times and The Washington Post newspapers to publish the then-classified Pentagon Papers without risk of government censorship or punishment.. 
President Richard Nixon had claimed executive authority to force the Times to suspend publication of classified information in its possession. The question before the court was whether the constitutional freedom of the press, guaranteed by the First Amendment, was subordinate to a claimed need of the executive branch of government to maintain the secrecy of information. The Supreme Court ruled that the First Amendment did protect the right of The New York Times to print the materials.
Background
The New York Times Washington Bureau Chief Max Frankel stated in a 1971 deposition, while the New York Times was fighting to publish the Pentagon Papers, those secrets can be considered the currency on which Washington runs and that "leaks were an unofficial back channel for testing policy ideas and government initiatives." Frankel recounted for example that the Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson used and revealed secrets purposefully. The Pentagon Papers, however, came to light, not by a high-ranking government official. By 1971, the United States had been engaged in an undeclared war with North Vietnam for six years. At this point, about 58,000 American soldiers had died and the government was facing widespread dissent from large portions of the American public. In 1967, Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara commissioned a "massive top-secret history of the United States role in Indochina". Daniel Ellsberg, who had helped to produce the report, leaked 43 volumes of the 47-volume, 7,000-page report to a reporter Neil Sheehan of The New York Times in March 1971 and the paper began publishing articles outlining the findings. 
Restraining order sought
The black article appeared in the Times Sunday edition, on June 13, 1971. By the following Tuesday, the Times received an order to cease further publication from a District Court judge, at the request of the administration. The government claimed it would cause "irreparable injury to the defense interests of the United States" and wanted to "enjoin The New York Times and The Washington Post from publishing the contents of a classified study entitled History of U.S. Decision-Making Process on the  Vietnam Policy."
The government sought a restraining order that prevented the Times from posting any further articles based upon the Pentagon Papers. In addition to The New York Times Company, the Justice Department named the following defendants: Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, president and publisher; Harding Bancroft and Ivan Veit, executive vice presidents; Francis Cox, James Goodale, Sydney Gruson, Walter Mattson, John McCabe, John Mortimer and James Reston, vice presidents; John B. Oakes, editorial page editor; A. M. Rosenthal, managing editor; Daniel Schwarz, Sunday editor; Clifton Daniel and Tom Wicker, associate editors; Gerald Gold and Allan M. Siegal, assistant foreign editors; Neil Sheehan, Hedrick Smith, E. W. Kenworthy and Fox Butterfield, reporters; and Samuel Abt, a foreign desk copy editor.
Section 793 of the Espionage Act
thumb|left|200px|Floyd Abrams, counsel to The New York Times
Section 793 of the Espionage Act was cited by Attorney General John N. Mitchell as cause for the United States to bar further publication of stories based upon the Pentagon Papers.  The statute was spread over three pages of the United States Code Annotated and the only part that appeared to apply to the Times was 793(e), which made it criminal for:
Whoever having unauthorized possession of, access to, or control over any document, writing, code book, signal book, sketch, photograph, photographic negative, blueprint, plan, map, model, instrument, appliance, or note relating to the national defense, or information relating to the national defense which information the possessor has reason to believe could be used to the injury of the United States or to the advantage of any foreign nation, willfully communicates, delivers, transmits or causes to be communicated, delivered, or transmitted, or attempts to communicate, deliver, transmit or cause to be communicated, delivered, or transmitted the same to any person not entitled to receive it, or willfully retains the same and fails to deliver it to the officer or employee of the United States entitled to receive it [shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both].
Based on this language, Alexander Bickel and Floyd Abrams felt there were three preliminary arguments to raise.  First, the wording of the statute was very broad.  Was each article about foreign policy one "relating to the national defense"?  What was the significance of "reason to believe" that the Pentagon Papers "could be used to the injury of the United States or the advantage of any foreign nation"?  If the motivation was to educate the public, was that a defense that served to help, not hinder, the country?  Would the public be "a person not entitled to receive" the information?  Of equal importance was what the statute did not say: No references to "publication" (as Attorney General Mitchell's cease-and-desist order referenced), no reference to classified information, and no support for Mitchell's reliance on the top secret classification to justify restraint on publication.  Additionally, there was no statutory language providing authority for prior restraint on publication at all.
Second, was the relevance of Mitchell's reliance on a criminal statute in a civil proceeding seeking prior restraint. There was a Supreme Court precedent that lent support to the idea that bans on the publication of information by the press were unconstitutional.  In 1907 Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote the "main purpose" of the First Amendment was "to prevent all such previous restraints upon publications as had been practiced by other governments." In 1931 the Court wrote that only the narrowest circumstances—such as publication of the dates of departure of ships during wartime—were permissibly restrained.  In 1969 John Marshall Harlan II wrote that the Supreme Court "rejected all manner of prior restraint on publication."  This second line of reasoning made it seem the statute should only be dealt with in passing, making the case a First Amendment one and the relief the government wanted—a bar on publication—unavailable. 
The third possible approach was a very broad view of the First Amendment, one not focused on the impact of a government victory on the life of a democratic society if prior restraint were granted; but that the publication of just these sorts of materials—governmental misjudgments and misconducts of high import—is exactly why the First Amendment exists. 
Federal judge Murray Gurfein heard arguments in the District Court for the Southern District of New York.  Michael Hess, chief of the Civil Division of the United States Attorneys Office, argued "serious injuries are being inflicted on our foreign relations, to the benefit of other nations opposed to our foreign relations, to the benefit of other nations opposed to our form of government."Fred Graham, "Court Here Refuses to Order Return of Documents Now", The New York Times, June 16, 2010.  Hess relied on Secretary of State William P. Rogers's statement reported earlier that day that a number of nations were concerned about the Papers publication and an affidavit from the general counsel of the Navy that alleged irreparable injury if publication did not cease.  Hess asked for a temporary restraining order.
Bickel argued that the separation of powers barred the court from issuing the restraining order since there was no statute authorizing such relief.  He further argued that there was no exception to the general unavailability of prior restraint that applied in this case.  Gurfein called all counsel to his chambers and asked Bickel and Abrams to have the Times cease publication of the Papers until he could review them.  Bickel responded that Gurfein would be the first judge in American history to enter a prior restraint enjoining the publication of news if he granted the government's request.  The Times refused to cease publication.  Gurfein granted the request and set a hearing for June 18.
The New York Times agreed to abide by the restraining order and on June 19, Judge Gurfein rejected the administration's request for an injunction, writing that "[t]he security of the Nation is not at the ramparts alone.  Security also lies in the value of our free institutions.  A cantankerous press, an obstinate press, a ubiquitous press must be suffered by those in authority in order to preserve the even greater values of freedom of expression and the right of the people to know." However, the Court of Appeals, after an en banc hearing, granted an injunction until June 25.
 United States v. Washington Post Co.
On June 18, 1971, The Washington Post began publishing its own series of articles based upon the Pentagon Papers. That day, Assistant U.S. Attorney General William Rehnquist asked the Post to cease publication. After the paper was refused, Rehnquist sought an injunction in the District Court for the District of Columbia, but Judge Gerhard Gesell rejected the government's request, as did the Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit.United States v. Washington Post Co., 446 F.2d 1322, 1327 (D.C. Cir. 1971). This inconsistency between the courts of appeal led the Supreme Court to hear the case.
Opinion
The Supreme Court heard arguments from the Executive Branch, the Times, the Post, and the Justice Department on June 25 and 26, 1971. Along with the issue of how the Times obtained the documents (which was being investigated by a federal grand jury elsewhere) the real issue for the Court was whether there was a sufficient justification for prior restraint, which would be a suspension of the newspaper's First Amendment rights to freedom of the press. The First Amendment states that no federal law can be made abridging the freedom of the press, but a few landmark cases in the 20th century had established precedents creating exceptions to that rule, among them the "clear and present danger" test first articulated by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. in Schenck v. United States.
The most recent incarnation of the exception was the grave and probable danger rule, established in Dennis v. United States, . During this case, the wording was changed to the grave and irreparable danger standard. The idea behind the numerous versions of the rule is that if a certain message will likely cause a "grave and irreparable" danger to the American public when expressed, then the message's prior restraint could be considered an acceptable infringement of civil liberties. The Supreme Court was therefore charged with determining if the Government had sufficiently met the "burden of showing justification for the imposition of such a restraint".
On June 30, with six Justices concurring and three dissenting, the Supreme Court upheld the right of the newspapers to publish the material. The Court issued a terse per curiam opinion, stating only that the Court concurred with the decisions of the two lower courts to reject the Government's request for an injunction.New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U.S. at 714. In its decision, the court first established the legal question with the use of precedents. It first stated that "Any system of prior restraints of expression comes to this Court bearing a heavy presumption against its constitutional validity". The purpose of this statement was to make the presence of the inherent conflict between the Government's efforts and the First Amendment clear. The decision then stated that the government "thus carries a heavy burden of showing justification for the imposition of such a restraint". This reinforced the idea that it was the Nixon Administration's responsibility to show sufficient evidence that the newspapers' actions would cause a "grave and irreparable" danger.
New York Times v. United States is generally considered a victory for an extensive reading of the First Amendment, but as the Supreme Court ruled on whether the government had made a successful case for prior restraint, its decision did not void the Espionage Act or give the press unlimited freedom to publish classified documents.
Concurring opinions
Justice Hugo Black wrote an opinion that elaborated on his view of the absolute superiority of the First Amendment:
Justice William O. Douglas concurred with Black, arguing that the need for a free press as a check on government prevents any governmental restraint on the press.New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U.S. at 720–24.
Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., wrote separately to explain that the publication of the documents did not qualify as one of the three exceptions to the freedom of expression established in Near v. Minnesota (1931).New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U.S. at 724–27.
Justices Potter Stewart and Byron R. White agreed that it is the responsibility of the Executive to ensure national security through the protection of its information. However, in areas of national defense and international affairs, the President possesses great constitutional independence that is virtually unchecked by the Legislative and Judicial branches. "In absence of governmental checks and balances", wrote Justice Stewart, "the only effective restraint upon executive policy and power in [these two areas] may lie in an enlightened citizenry – in an informed and critical public opinion which alone can here protect the values of democratic government".New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U.S. at 727–30.
Justice Thurgood Marshall argued that the term "national security" was too broad to legitimize prior restraint, and also argued that it is not the Court's job to create laws where the Congress had not spoken.New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U.S. at 740–48.
Dissenting opinions 
Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, dissenting, argued that when "the imperative of a free and unfettered press comes into collision with another imperative, the effective functioning of a complex modern government," there should be a detailed study on the effects of these actions. He argued that in the haste of the proceedings, and given the size of the documents, the Court was unable to gather enough information to make a decision. He also argued that the Times should have discussed the possible societal repercussions with the Government prior to publication of the material. The Chief Justice did not argue that the Government had met the aforementioned standard, but rather that the decision should not have been made so hastily.New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U.S. at 748–52.
Justice John M. Harlan and Justice Harry A. Blackmun joined Burger in arguing the faults in the proceedings, and the lack of attention towards national security and the rights of the Executive.New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U.S. at 752–63.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 403
 Spiegel affair, a similar case in West Germany
  The Post, a 2017 historical drama film directed by Steven Spielberg about the Pentagon Papers
References
Further reading
  → Abrams is quoted as saying the book is the "most complete, incisive, and persuasive study of those documents yet published".
External links
 "Top Secret: Battle for the Pentagon Papers"   a resource site that supports a currently playing docu-drama about the Pentagon Papers. The site provides historical context, timelines, bibliographical resources, information on discussions with current journalists, and helpful links.
 First Amendment Library entry for New York Times Co. v. United States
 General case background.  Includes audio of the oral arguments
New York Times v. United States from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:History of mass media in the United States
Category:The New York Times
Category:Vietnam War and the media
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Pentagon Papers
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "New York v. Belton" ==> """
New York v. Belton, 453 U.S. 454 (1981), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that when a police officer has made a lawful custodial arrest of the occupant of an automobile, the officer may, as a contemporaneous incident of that arrest, search the passenger compartment of that automobile. Therefore, Belton extended the so-called "Chimel rule" of searches incident to a lawful arrest, established in Chimel v. California (1969), to vehicles. The Supreme Court sought to establish bright line rules to govern vehicle search incident to eliminate some confusion in the cases.
Background
A New York State Police trooper stopped a speeding car. No one in the car knew the owner. The officer could smell marijuana, and he saw an envelope on the floor marked "Supergold" which he could see probably contained marijuana. He ordered the occupants out of the car and arrested them. He patted them down and then directed them to stand apart. He searched the passenger compartment and found cocaine in a pocket of Belton's jacket. The New York Court of Appeals suppressed the search because there no longer was any danger of destruction of evidence.
Opinion of the court
The Supreme Court noted that "no straightforward rule has emerged from the litigated cases respecting the question ... of the proper scope of a search of the interior of an automobile incident to a custodial arrest of its occupants." The Court thus resolved to establish a definitive rule and held:
Our reading of the cases suggests the generalization that articles inside the relatively narrow compass of the passenger compartment of an automobile are in fact generally, even if not inevitably, within "the area into which an arrestee might reach in order to grab a weapon or evidentiary ite[m]. Chimel, supra, at 763. In order to establish the workable rule this category of cases requires, we read Chimels definition of the limits of the area that may be searched in light of that generalization. Accordingly, we hold that when a [police officer] has made a lawful custodial arrest of the occupant of an automobile, [the officer] may, as a contemporaneous incident of that arrest, search the passenger compartment of that automobile.
It follows from this conclusion that the police may also examine the contents of any containers found within the passenger compartment, for if the passenger compartment is within reach of the arrestee, so also will containers in it be within his reach. United States v. Robinson, supra; Draper v. United States, 358 U.S. 307. Such a container may, of course, be searched whether it is open or closed, since the justification for the search is not that the arrestee has no privacy interest in the container, but that the lawful custodial arrest justifies the infringement of any privacy interest the arrestee may have. Thus, while the Court in Chimel held that the police could not search all the drawers in an arrestee's house simply because the police had arrested him at home, the Court noted that drawers within an arrestee's reach could be searched because of the danger their contents might pose to the police. Chimel v. California, supra, at 763.
The Court distinguished Chadwick and Sanders as not involving "an arguably valid search incident to a lawful custodial arrest."
Thus, under Belton, the entire passenger compartment of an automobile is subject to search under the search incident doctrine even if the arrestee is out of the car.
A nexus is required between the vehicle and the person arrested with or in the vehicle prior to the arrest.
Response to Belton
Belton has been criticized by legal scholars for failing to meet the constitutional standard of probable cause.
Belton has been distinguished by Arizona v. Gant (2009), which restricted searches incident to arrest to circumstances where it is reasonable to believe that: 1) the arrested individual might access the vehicle at the time of the search; or 2) the arrested individual's vehicle contains evidence of the offense that led to the arrest.* Argued October 7, 2008—Decided April 21, 2009.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 453
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1981 in United States case law
"""

From "New York v. Connecticut" ==> """
New York v. Connecticut, 4 U.S. (4 Dall.) 1 (1799), was a lawsuit heard by the Supreme Court of the United States between the State of New York against the State of Connecticut in 1799 that arose from a land dispute between private parties. The case was the first case in which the Supreme Court exercised its original jurisdiction under Article III of the United States Constitution to hear controversies between two states.
Background
The Connecticut Gore region was a strip of land on New York's western border with Pennsylvania.  Connecticut claimed jurisdiction over the land and granted it to Jeremiah Halsey and Andrew Ward in exchange for their construction of the state house in Hartford. (The building is now known as the Old State House.)
After New York granted certain parcels within the Connecticut Gore to other individuals, the successors in title to Halsey and Ward filed an action for ejectment in the United States Circuit Court for the District of Connecticut.  The defendants argued that they were residents of New York and that the land was actually in Steuben County, New York and so only state or federal courts in New York could exercise jurisdiction over the action. The plaintiffs claimed that the lands were actually in Connecticut.
The Supreme Court denied a motion to remove the cases from the Circuit Court,See Fowler v. Lindsey, 3 U.S. (Dall.) 411 (1799). and New York subsequently filed a bill in equity against Connecticut and the Connecticut plaintiffs for an injunction to stay the ejectment proceedings.The bill was filed by Josiah Ogden Hoffman, the Attorney General of New York.  As part of the bill, New York submitted an agreement between the states, dated November 28, 1683, that purported to recognize New York's rights to the land.
Because the bill in equity was filed while the Connecticut General Assembly was out of session,According to the defendants' counsel, the General Assembly had not met since the Supreme Court denied the motion to remove in Fowler. the state never actually participated in the case.  However, attorneys for the private land claimants argued that reasonable notice was not given for the injunction to be granted and that New York also lacked an interest in the proceedings to merit a stay.
Decision
The Court found that notice was sufficient since a shorter period of time may be reasonable when the application for injunction is made to a court, rather than a single judge. However, the Court denied the injunction and found that New York lacked standing. It had not been a party to the suits in the lower court and had no concrete interest in the decisions. Also, it was claiming jurisdiction over the land, not title to it. The Circuit Court lacked the power to determine either its boundaries or its consequent rights.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 4
Notes
References
Full text of the Court's decision at Wikisource
Further reading
The Connecticut Gore Title, Stated and Considered, Showing The Right of the Proprietors, to the Lands Lately Purchased by Them, from the State of Connecticut: Lying West of the Delaware River.  Hudson & Goodwin (Hartford, 1799).  An advocacy for Connecticut's right to the land, which contains the text of eighteen original documents pertaining to the land dispute dating back to 1631.
The Rise, programs, and effect of the claim of the proprietors of the Connecticut Gore, stated and considered.  Hudson & Goodwin (Hartford, 1802).
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Internal territorial disputes of the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
Category:Legal history of Connecticut
Category:1799 in United States case law
Category:1799 in Connecticut
Category:1799 in New York (state)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
"""

From "New York v. Ferber" ==> """
New York v. Ferber, 458 U.S. 747 (1982), was a landmark decision of the U.S Supreme Court, unanimously ruling that the First Amendment to the United States Constitution did not forbid states from banning the sale of material depicting children engaged in sexual activity, even if the material was not obscene.
Procedural background
New York had an obscenity law that made it illegal for an individual to "promote any performance which includes sexual conduct by a child less than sixteen years of age." Paul Ferber, an owner of an adult bookstore in Manhattan, was charged under the law after he sold an undercover police officer two films depicting young boys masturbating. He was charged with promoting both obscene sexual performances and indecent sexual performances. At trial, he was acquitted of the obscene sexual performance count but he was convicted of the indecent sexual performance count, and the conviction was affirmed by the intermediate appellate court. The New York Court of Appeals overturned the conviction, finding the obscenity law unconstitutional under the First Amendment because the law was both underinclusive as to other films of dangerous activity, and overbroad as to its application to materials produced out-of-state and non-obscene materials.
Supreme Court's decision
The Court upheld the constitutionality of New York's obscenity law, ruling that it did not violate the First Amendment, and reversed and remanded the case.
For a long time before the decision, the Court had ruled that the First Amendment allowed the regulation of obscenity. Under the Court's previous decision in Miller v. California, , material is "obscene" if, taken as a whole and applying contemporary community standards, it lacks serious scientific, literary, artistic, or political value, is "patently offensive" and aimed at "prurient interests". The court in Ferber found that child pornography, however, may be banned without first being deemed obscene under Miller for five reasons:
 The government has a very compelling interest in preventing the sexual exploitation of children.
 Distribution of visual depictions of children engaged in sexual activity is intrinsically related to the sexual abuse of children.  The images serve as a permanent reminder of the abuse, and it is necessary for government to regulate the channels of distributing such images if it is to be able to eliminate the production of child pornography.
 Advertising and selling child pornography provides an economic motive for producing child pornography.
 Visual depictions of children engaged in sexual activity have negligible artistic value.
 Thus, holding that child pornography is outside the protection of the First Amendment is consistent with the Court's prior decisions limiting the banning of materials deemed "obscene" as the Court had previously defined it.  For this reason, child pornography need not be legally obscene before being outlawed.
See also
Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, , which established that simulated child pornography is protected free speech
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 458
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Child pornography law
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
"""

From "New York v. United States" ==> """
New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144 (1992), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, writing for the majority, found that the federal government may not require states to “take title” to radioactive waste through the "Take Title" provision of the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amendments Act, which the Court found to exceeded Congress's power under the Commerce Clause.. The Court permitted the federal government to induce shifts in state waste policy through other means. .
Background
The Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amendments Act was an attempt to imbue a negotiated agreement of states with federal incentives for compliance. The problem of what to do with radioactive waste was a national issue complicated by the political reluctance of the states to deal with the problem individually. New York was a willing participant in the compromise, and after the Act was passed, it announced locations in the counties of Allegany and Cortland, as potential places for waste storage. Public opposition in both counties was immediate and very determined and eventually helped motivate New York to challenge the law.
Decision
The Act provided three "incentives" for states to comply with the agreement. 
The first two incentives were held constitutional. The first incentive allowed states to collect gradually increasing surcharges for waste that was received from other states. The Secretary of Energy would then collect a portion of the income and redistribute it to reward states that achieved a series of milestones in waste disposal. That was held to be within Congress's power under the Taxing and Spending Clause, an "unexceptionable" exercise of that power.
The second incentive, the "access" incentive, allowed states to reprimand other states that missed certain deadlines by raising surcharges or eventually denying access to disposal at their facilities completely. That was held to be a permitted exercise of Congress's power, under the Commerce Clause.
The third incentive, requiring states to "take title" and assume liability for waste generated within their borders if they failed to comply, was held to be impermissibly coercive and a threat to state sovereignty, thereby violating the Tenth Amendment.
After noting the constitutionality of the first two incentives, Justice O'Connor characterized the "take title" incentive as an attempt to "commandeer" the state governments by directly compelling them to participate in the federal regulatory program. The federal government "crossed the line distinguishing encouragement from coercion." The distinction was that with respect to the "take title" provision, states had to choose between conforming to federal regulations or taking title to the waste. Since Congress cannot directly force states to legislate according to their scheme, and since Congress likewise cannot force them to take title to radioactive waste, O'Connor reasoned that Congress cannot force States to choose between the two. Such coercion would be counter to the federalist structure of government in which a "core of state sovereignty" is enshrined in the Tenth Amendment.
The Court found the "take title" provision to be severable and, noting the seriousness of the "pressing national problem" being addressed, allowed the remainder of the Act to survive.
Dissenting opinion
Justice White wrote a dissenting opinion that was joined by Justices Blackmun and Stevens. White stressed that the Act was a product of "cooperative federalism," as the states "bargained among themselves to achieve compromises for Congress to sanction." Noting that Congress can directly regulate radioactive waste, as opposed to "compelling state legislatures" to regulate according to their scheme, he said that the "ultimate irony of the decision today is that in its formalistically rigid obeisance to 'federalism,' the Court gives Congress fewer incentives to defer to the wishes of state officials in achieving local solutions to local problems."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 505
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Tenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:1992 in the environment
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:Radioactive waste
Category:Energy in New York (state)
"""

From "Newberry v. United States" ==> """
Newberry v. United States, 256 U.S. 232 (1921), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court which held that the United States Constitution did not grant the United States Congress the authority to regulate political party primaries or nomination processes.. The court struck down 1911 amendments to the Federal Corrupt Practices Act which placed spending limits on candidate and political election committee spending in primaries or other nomination processes for federal office.
Background
With a shift in public opinion for pro-campaign finance reform legislation during the Progressive era, Congress enacted the Tillman Act in 1907, which banned direct corporate financing of political campaigns. This was followed with the enactment of the Federal Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) of 1910, which was amended in 1911; providing two limitations on expenditures in federal elections.  The first was that no candidate for Congress shall, in procuring his nomination and election, spend any sum in excess of the amount provided for by state law. The second was that no candidate for the United States House of Representatives shall spend more than $5,000 in any campaign for nomination and election, and that no candidate for United States Senate shall spend more than $10,000 in any campaign for his nomination and election.
Michigan law (Act No. 109, § 1, 1913) prohibited candidates for federal office from expending more than 25 percent of his anticipated federal salary for the purposes of securing his nomination, and another 25 percent of his anticipated federal salary on the general election. At the time, this amounted to about $3,750 in each phase of the electoral process.
Truman Handy Newberry was a Michigan businessman and former Secretary of the Navy who decided to run for the U.S. Senate as a Republican in 1918. His primary opponent was Henry Ford, the legendary automobile manufacturer. The primary was hotly contested, and Newberry was alleged to have spent upwards of $100,000 on his nomination race.  Newberry defeated Ford, and went on to win the general election. Ford challenged Newberry and used his federal connections to win an investigation by Congress and the United States Department of Justice.  Newberry was tried in 1921 and convicted.
Newberry appealed his conviction to the U.S. Supreme Court, arguing that the FCPA was unconstitutional.
Decision
Writing for the majority, Justice James Clark McReynolds held that the U.S. Constitution did not grant Congress the power to regulate primary elections or political party nomination processes.  The power of Congress over federal elections, McReynolds said, has its source solely in Article I, Section 4, of the Constitution. The Seventeenth Amendment, promulgated in May 1913, neither instituted nor required a new meaning of the term "election" and so did not modify Article I, Section 4. Primaries, McReynolds argued, are definitely not elections for office.
Neither a plain reading of the Constitution nor the meaning ascribed to them by the framers of the Constitution permits any other conclusion, he said. Moreover, Congress does not need to regulate primaries and nomination procedures in order to effectively perform its duties under Article I, Section 4. To infer such a power, McReynolds found, would infringe on the rights of the states and the people.
Justice Joseph McKenna concurred in part. He agreed with the majority that the FCPA was unconstitutional prior to adoption of the Seventeenth Amdendment. However, he reserved judgment as to whether the Act was constitutional after adoption of the amendment.
Justice Mahlon Pitney concurred in part. He was joined in part by Justices Louis D. Brandeis and John Hessin Clarke. Pitney argued that there was no constitutional infirmity in congressional regulation of primary elections. However, he concluded that the district court's instructions to the jury were in error. He would have reversed, with directions for a new trial.
Chief Justice White, dissenting but concurring with a modification in the judgment of reversal, found no constitutional infirmity. He called the idea that "the nominating primary is one thing and the election another and different thing... a suicidal one." He also argued that the record of the passage of the Seventeenth Amendment by Congress indicated that Congress intended for the amendment to permit the regulation of primaries and political party nominations. White, too, found an error in the district court's jury instruction, and would have reversed and remanded on that basis.
In an investigation after the court's ruling, the U.S. Senate found that Newberry had not violated the FCPA.  The Senate seated him but expressed disapproval of the sum spent in his primary campaign. In the face of a new movement to unseat him, Newberry resigned from the Senate on November 18, 1922.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 256
 United States v. Classic
References
Ervin, Spencer. Henry Ford vs. Truman H. Newberry: The Famous Senate Election Contest. New York, R.R. Smith, 1935. Reprint. New York: Arno Press, 1974. 
External links
Category:1921 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States elections case law
Category:Primary elections in the United States
Category:Michigan elections
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:1918 elections in the United States
Category:Henry Ford
Category:1918 United States Senate elections
Category:Campaign finance reform in the United States
"""

From "Newman v. Piggie Park Enterprises, Inc." ==> """
Newman v. Piggie Park Enterprises, Inc., 390 U.S. 400 (1968), is a 1968 United States Supreme Court case in which the court held per curiam that after a successful effort to obtain an injunction under Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, attorney's fees under Section 204(b) are generally recoverable..
 Background 
Piggie Park Enterprises was, in 1964, a drive-in BBQ chain with four restaurants, created and operated by Maurice Bessinger, the Baptist head of the National Association for the Preservation of White People. He did not allow African-Americans to eat in his restaurants. After Bessinger's refusal to allow Anne Newman, an African-American minister's wife into his restaurant, a lawyer, Matthew J. Perry, filed a class action lawsuit against the chain.
 Procedural history 
Perry's lawsuit was first heard in the United States District Court for the District of South Carolina with Charles Earl Simons, Jr. presiding.
The plaintiffs argued that Piggie Park's exclusion of African-Americans constituted a violation of Title II. The defendant, Bessinger, denied the discrimination, denied that the restaurants were public accommodations in the meaning of the Act (as it did not involve interstate commerce), and argued that the Civil Rights Act violated his freedom of religion as "his religious beliefs compel him to oppose any integration of the races whatever." Simons held the Act did not apply to drive-in restaurants but applied to Bessinger's sandwich shop. On appeal, the Fourth Circuit reversed the lower court decision, finding that discrimination was prohibited at both drive-in and eat-in establishments, The Fourth Circuit remanded the case back to the district court, instructing that court to "award counsel fees only to the extent that the respondents' defenses had been advanced for purposes of delay, and not in good faith." The Supreme Court granted certiorari to the question of whether the exclusion for good-faith defense was correct.
 Decision 
The Court held 8-0 (Marshall not participating) that full attorney's fees should generally be recoverable, based on the intent and practical effect of the law. The Court wrote:
 When a plaintiff brings an action under that Title, he cannot recover damages. If he obtains an injunction, he does so not for himself alone, but also as a "private attorney general," vindicating a policy that Congress considered of the highest priority. If successful plaintiffs were routinely forced to bear their own attorneys' fees, few aggrieved parties would be in a position to advance the public interest by invoking the injunctive powers of the federal courts. Congress therefore enacted the provision for counsel fees -- not simply to penalize litigants who deliberately advance arguments they know to be untenable but, more broadly, to encourage individuals injured by racial discrimination to seek judicial relief under Title II.
 It follows that one who succeeds in obtaining an injunction under that Title should ordinarily recover an attorney's fee unless special circumstances would render such an award unjust.
 Subsequent developments  
This language has been said to form of a "cornerstone" for the text of the 1967 Attorney's Fees Act. Newman is seen as an early step in toward the Civil Rights Attorney's Fees Award Act of 1976 and more generally the American rule.
 See also 
 Bouie v. City of Columbia: Supreme Court case involving a sit-in at a lunch counter in Columbia
 Katzenbach v. McClung: Supreme Court case desegregating Ollie's Barbecue Restaurant in Alabama
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 390
References
 External links
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Legal costs
Piggie Park
Piggie Park
Category:History of Columbia, South Carolina
Category:African-American history of South Carolina
"""

From "Ng Fung Ho v. White" ==> """
Ng Fung Ho v. White, 259 U.S. 276 (1922), is a United States Supreme Court decision holding that habeas corpus petitioners are entitled to a de novo judicial hearing to adjudicate claims that they are citizens of the United States.Ng Fung Ho v. White, 259 U.S. 276, 282 (1922).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 259
References
External links
Category:1922 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
"""

From "Nguyen v. INS" ==> """
Nguyen v. INS, 533 U.S. 53 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the validity of laws relating to U.S. citizenship at birth for children born outside the United States, out of wedlock, to an American parent. The Court declined to overturn a more restrictive citizenship requirement applying to a foreign-born child of an American father and a non-American mother who was not married to the father, as opposed to a child born to an American mother under similar circumstances.Nguyen v. INS, .
Background
Section 309 of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 as amended (codified as section 1409 of Title 8 of the United States Code) deals with U.S. citizenship for children born outside the U.S., out of wedlock, to an American parent. If a child is born abroad, out of wedlock, to an American mother, the child automatically acquires U.S. citizenship at birth, provided the mother had "previously been physically present in the United States or one of its outlying possessions for a continuous period of one year". An illegitimate foreign-born child of an American father and an alien mother, on the other hand, is recognized as a U.S. citizen only if a much more complex and stringent set of conditions are met: the father's paternity must be convincingly established prior to the child's 18th birthday, and the father must also agree in writing to provide financial support to the child until he or she reaches age 18.Nguyen, 533 U.S. at 59.
Tuan Anh Nguyen was born in Vietnam to an American father and a Vietnamese mother who were not married. He moved to the United States with his father and became a legal permanent resident of the U.S. at age six, but his father did not attempt to establish any claim of U.S. citizenship for the boy. At age 22, Nguyen pleaded guilty to sexual assault; this made him subject to deportation based on his criminal record.Nguyen, 533 U.S. at 57.
Nguyen's father obtained evidence of parentage in an attempt to have his son recognized as a U.S. citizen, but his efforts were rejected by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) because  required any such evidence to have been presented before the child's 18th birthday. Nguyen—together with his father—mounted a court challenge to the law, claiming that 8 U.S.C. § 1409 was unconstitutionally discriminatory because it imposed stricter requirements for a foreign-born illegitimate child of an American father than would have applied if his American parent had been his mother.Nguyen, 533 U.S. at 57–58.
Holding
The Supreme Court rejected Nguyen's arguments and upheld the law denying him citizenship, holding by a 5–4 majority that 8 U.S.C. § 1409 was consistent with the equal protection principle, applied through the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution. In the opinion of the Court (written by Associate Justice Anthony Kennedy), the Court ruled that although the statute was discriminatory, "it serve[d] important governmental objectives and that the discriminatory means employed [were] substantially related to the achievement of those objectives". The Court found that Congress' decision to impose different requirements on unmarried fathers and unmarried mothers was "based on the significant difference between their respective relationships to the potential citizen at the time of birth".Nguyen, 533 U.S. at 62.Washington Post (June 12, 2001).
"By a vote of 5 to 4, the court held that, in adopting different rules depending on whether the mother or father was a U.S. citizen, Congress was attempting to ensure that such children have a clear biological and social attachment to their U.S. citizen parent, and therefore was engaging in a constitutionally acceptable form of gender discrimination." First, the Court noted that whereas a mother's biological relationship to her child is easily verified and documented, the same cannot be said of the father.Nguyen, 533 U.S. at 64. Second, the Court concluded that the law was designed "to ensure that the child and citizen parent have some demonstrated opportunity to develop... a relationship... that consists of the real, everyday ties that provide a connection between child and citizen parent and, in turn, the United States"—something that was inherent in the case of an American mother and her child, but not inevitable in the case of a single father.Nguyen, 533 U.S. at 64–65.
Even though Nguyen's father had submitted DNA evidence proving the father-son relationship, the Court noted that "scientific proof of biological paternity does nothing, by itself, to ensure contact between father and child during the child's minority".Nguyen, 533 U.S. at 67. In the end, the Court held that Congress was "well within its authority in refusing, absent proof of at least the opportunity for the development of a relationship between citizen parent and child, to commit this country to embracing a child as a citizen".
A concurring opinion by Associate Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas proposed that the Supreme Court simply did not have the power of "conferral of citizenship on a basis other than that prescribed by Congress".Nguyen, 533 U.S. at 73. The dissent (written by Associate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor) concluded that the INS "[had] not shown an exceedingly persuasive justification for the sex-based classification... because it [had] failed to establish at least that the classification substantially relate[d] to the achievement of important government objectives", and on that basis the minority would have ruled in Nguyen's favor.Nguyen, 533 U.S. at 74ff.
An earlier case, Miller v. Albright, , suggested a similar conclusion to that given in Nguyen v. INS, but had failed to support it by a clear majority.Nguyen, 533 U.S. at 58.
Aftermath
After the Supreme Court decision, the INS attempted to deport Nguyen, but was unsuccessful because of a Vietnamese government policy barring the repatriation of convicts from the United States.
Nguyen and his father sought to reopen the deportation proceedings, and when this effort was unsuccessful, appealed to the courts again, claiming that the refusal by the Board of Immigration Appeals to reopen Nguyen's case deprived him of due process of law and denied the father's right to enjoy his son's companionship. This appeal was rejected by the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals in 2005.Nguyen v. Bureau of Immigration & Customs Enforcement, 400 F.3d 255 (5th Cir. 2005).
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
"""

From "Nichols v. United States" ==> """
Nichols v. United States, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (SORNA) does not require an individual to update his registration after departing a state.SCOTUSblog coverage
 Background 
In 2003, Lester Ray Nichols was convicted of "traveling with intent to engage in illicit sexual conduct with a minor" under .Nichols v. United States, No. 15–5238, 578 U.S. ____ (2016). Congress passed the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (SORNA) in 2006 and the United States Attorney General determined in 2007 that the law applied retroactively. When Nichols was released in December 2011, he complied with SORNA's registration requirements, registering as a sex offender in Kansas. In November 2012, Nichols abruptly decided to leave Kansas and move to Manila in the Philippines.
Nichols was arrested and charged with violating SORNA reporting requirements. He filed a motion to "dismiss the indictment on the ground that SORNA did not require him to update his registration in Kansas"; however his motion was denied and "Nichols conditionally pleaded guilty, reserving his right to appeal the denial of his motion."
On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit affirmed his conviction.United States v. Nichols, 775 F.3d 1225 (10th Cir. 2014); rehearing en banc denied, 784 F.3d 666 (10th Cir. 2015). In a 2013 case involving a man from the Kansas City area who had also moved to the Philippines, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit held in United States v. Lunsford that the defendant had no obligation to update his registration. The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the circuit split.
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Samuel Alito authored a unanimous decision holding that a plain text reading of SORNA applies to a place in which a resident resides, not resided. Because the Philippines is a foreign jurisdiction where SORNA is inapplicable and because the law uses the present tense, Nichols had no obligation under this federal law to update his registration. Under Kansas state law and under the subsequently enacted federal legislation, Nichols does have an obligation to update his registration information.
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Philippines–United States relations
Category:Sex offender registries in the United States
"""

From "Nielsen v. Preap" ==> """
Nielsen v. Preap, No. 16-1363, 586 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case related to the detention of legal immigrants with criminal histories. In a 5–4 vote, the Court ruled that the government has the power to detain immigrants at any time that have committed certain crimes that could lead to their deportation, even if those crimes occurred long in the past.
Background
The case centers on the language of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996, codified at , which states that an immigrant "shall be taken into custody" if they have committed a deportable offense, when that alien is "released".
In the specific case, the respondents were legal immigrants in California that had been convicted of criminal charges, each which fell into the class that could lead to deportation, and served their time. They were not detained at their release from serving this criminal sentence, but instead were detained by immigration officials five to eleven years later after being released for serving time on non-criminal charges. With help from the American Civil Liberties Union, the three sued the Department of Homeland Security, arguing that because they were not immediately detained on release from the criminal sentence, Sect. 1226 did not apply to them. The District Court certified their case as a class-action case, represented all immigrants in similar situations, and found for the immigrants, ruling that they could not be held under Section 1226 due to lack of immediate detention. The Ninth Circuit upheld the ruling on appeal. A similar separate class-action case was made in Washington state, under Khoury v. Asher, where both the District and Ninth Circuit reached the same conclusion, that the immigrants could not be detained since they were not detained immediately after release from the criminal offense.Khoury v. Asher, 3 F. Supp. 3d 877 (W.D. Wash. 2014); affirmed, 
Supreme Court
The Department of Homeland Security petitioned their case to the Supreme Court, who granted certiorari to hear the challenge on both cases, citing that the Ninth Circuit's decision had created a split on the matter among the circuit courts. Oral arguments were heard on October 10, 2018.
The decision was released on March 19, 2019. In the 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit's two rulings and stated that the language of Section 1226 allowed detention at any time after the deportable offense. Justice Samuel Alito, writing for the majority, stated that Congress enacted mandatory detention out of concern that individualized hearings could not be trusted to reveal which deportable criminal aliens who are not detained might continue to engage in crime or fail to appear for their removal hearings, and that allowing for detention long after release reflected the fact that immigration officials are not always notified or available in a timely manner to be at the point of release. Those delays may be caused by unintentional delays, or in some cases, purposely not notified as in the case of some sanctuary cities. However, Alito did acknowledge that this interpretation would end up targeting a wider range of immigrants, including those that have only had minor infractions such as drug offenders and tax cheats, but was necessary to serve the purpose of the law as written by Congress. The other four justices on the conservative wing joined on the majority, though Justice Brett Kavanaugh wrote his own opinion that concurred in part to Alito's, while Justice Clarence Thomas also wrote a concurrence in part, joined by Justice Neil Gorsuch.
The dissenting opinion was delivered by Justice Stephen Breyer, joined by the other three liberal Justices. Breyer cautioned that the majority opinion gave the government a new wide-ranging power; "It is a power to detain persons who committed a minor crime many years before, and it is a power to hold those persons, perhaps for many months, without any opportunity to obtain bail." 
The decision of the Supreme Court was noted to be the second within the last few years to support a strong government stance on immigration, following Trump v. Hawaii (Docket 17-965).
References
External links
 Nielsen v. Preap at SCOTUSBlog.com
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "Niemotko v. Maryland" ==> """
Niemotko v. Maryland, 340 U.S. 268 (1951), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the city of Havre de Grace, Maryland had violated the free exercise of Niemotko's religion by not issuing a permit for him and his religious group (the Jehovah's Witnesses) to meet in a public park when other religious and civic groups had been given permits for holding their meetings there..
References
External links
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:Christianity in Maryland
Category:Havre de Grace, Maryland
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:1951 in Maryland
Category:1951 in religion
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Nieves v. Bartlett" ==> """
Nieves v. Bartlett, 587 U.S. ___ (2019), was a civil rights case in which the Supreme Court of the United States decided that probable cause should generally defeat a retaliatory arrest claim brought under the First Amendment, unless officers under the circumstances would typically exercise their discretion not to make an arrest., 139 S. Ct. 1715 (2019).
 Background 
Arctic Man is a snow-themed race occurring annually in the March–April period (as the spring breaks and before the snow and ice thaws) in Interior Alaska that draws around 10,000 spectators and creates a festival atmosphere similar to Burning Man. Because of the potential for drunken misbehavior, the event is patrolled by Alaska State Troopers. At the 2014 event, Robert Bartlett was one of the spectators and brought his recreational vehicle along with a keg of beer. State trooper Sergeant Luis Nieves approached Bartlett, who was visibly intoxicated, and requested him to stow the keg in his RV. Bartlett refused to acknowledge Nieves. As there was no legal issue with having the keg outside the RV or any cause to suspect criminal activity, Nieves continued his route. Later, a younger man was approached by Trooper Bryce Weight, who believed that the man was underage and should not be drinking. Bartlett overheard that, approached the two, told the younger man that he did not have to answer the trooper's question, and as loudly instructed Weight to leave the younger man alone. After additional confrontation, Weight pushed Bartlett away, which led to Bartlett becoming physically aggressive. Nieves came by quickly to help Weight subdue Bartlett and arrested him on charges of disorderly conduct and resisting arrest, but they were never followed through out of budgetary concerns. Bartlett spent some hours in a drunk tank before he was released.
Later, Bartlett filed a lawsuit against Nieves and Weight in the Alaska District Court. Among Bartlett's charges were that he was falsely arrested and imprisoned. He claimed that after Nieves had apprehended him, he told him, "Bet you wish you would have talked to me now." However, evidence from partial body cameras worn by the troopers did not include that statement. The District Court made summary judgement against all of Bartlett's claims and closed the case with prejudice. It concluded that Nieves had probable cause to make the arrest that disallowed Bartlett to make a retaliatory arrest claim, as established in 42 U.S.C. §1983 related to civil action for deprivation of rights. Bartlett took the case to the Ninth Circuit Appeals Court. There, the three-judge panel agreed with the District Court's ruling except on the false arrest charge. The judges argued that Bartlett's claimed quote from Nieves could be read that Nieves had arrested him for not willingly speaking to him earlier, which put into question the probable cause. The Ninth Circuit thus ruled that even if Nieves had probable cause, Bartlett could seek a retaliatory arrest claim based on his First Amendment rights.
That created a split decision in the Circuit Courts. The Supreme Court had heard the case of Lozman v. City of Riviera Beach, which had been brought up through the Eleventh Circuit. It found that the existence of probable cause in one's arrest voided any retaliatory arrest claims that could be made. The Supreme Court reversed that decision but primarily because of Riveria Beach's specific laws in question that appeared to be designed harass the civilian, not on the broader question of how probable cause and retaliatory arrest claims interacted.
The Supreme Court had ruled in Hartman v. Moore that to be able to claim on retaliatory prosecution, the onus was on the petitioner to prove that there was no probable causes that could be assigned by the prosecutors, judges, and juries.. The Nieves case is recognized as a different situation from Hartman since instead of having to question the results from prolonged legal evaluation, Nieves questions the on-the-spot judgement call made by an officer.
 Supreme Court 
Nieves and Weight petitioned for writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court in February 2018, and the Court accepted the case, with oral hearings given on November 26, 2018. Observers to the oral hearing found the Justices concerned on how to develop a proper standard to determine when an arrest can be considered retaliatory; Justice Samuel Alito considered that it would be difficult to set a metric between two extreme cases: that of a man yelling at an officer in a heated setting, and that of a person critical of their local government being arrested on a minor traffic violation.
Opinion of the Court
The Court issued its decision on May 28, 2019, reversing and remanding the Ninth Circuit's decision. The 6–3 decision, with only Justice Sotomayor fully dissenting, determined that in general, the presence of a probable cause for an arrest defeats a First Amendment retaliatory arrest claim. The court additionally held by a more narrow margin that there are some narrow exceptions to this. Because officers can exercise their discretion in making arrests for warrantless misdemeanor crimes, a plaintiff can succeed on a Section 1983 claim if they can present objective evidence that other similarly situated individuals who were not engaged in protected speech had not been arrested. This finding was supported by Chief Justice Roberts, and Justices Breyer, Alito, Kagan, and Kavanaugh with Justice Thomas dissenting from this section of the opinion. In his partial concurrence, Justice Gorsuch agreed with the majority that "the absence of probable cause is not an absolute requirement of such a claim and its presence is not an absolute defense. Ginsburg opined that she would have reversed the lower decision and would have avoided using this case to establish a rigid rule that may chill free speech, but agreed that probable cause alone is not sufficient to defeat a retaliatory arrest claim.
Sotomayor's dissent
In her dissent, Justice Sotomayor, like Ginsburg, agreed with the majority judgement that probable cause alone cannot defeat a retaliatory arrest claim, but argues that the majority opinion threatens to produce arbitrary results and allow even clear cut cases of abuse. Her main point of dissent was that the majority opinion "fetishizes one specific type of motive evidence—treatment of comparators—at the expense of other modes of proof." The majority opinion she contends would allow for officers to openly state their unconstitutional motives but be immune from litigation in the absence of comparative evidence, providing a number of hypothetical and historic examples of such conduct that would be permissible under the majority opinion. She points to literature on unconstitutional race-based selective prosecution and notes how difficult it is for plaintiffs in that case to provide comparative evidence of the type the majority decision now requires. The danger in this, she argues, is that it threatens to produce the same effects as the absolute threshold the court rejected.
She agrees with Ginsburg that existing precedent is the right course to take. The standard Sotomayor presents is that the plaintiff bears responsibility to show that "unconstitutional animus" was a motivating factor in the arrest and that the burden then shifts to the defendant who must show that they would have taken the action regardless of any reason to retaliate. Gorsuch suggested an evidential standard for clear and convincing of a prohibited purpose which she critiques but refrains from rejecting outright.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 587
 References 
External links
Category:2014 in Alaska
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:Alaska Department of Public Safety
Category:Copper River Census Area, Alaska
Category:Law enforcement controversies in the United States
Category:United States constitutional torts case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Retaliatory arrest and prosecution
"""

From "Nishikawa v. Dulles" ==> """
Nishikawa v. Dulles, 356 U.S. 129 (1958), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that a dual US/Japanese citizen who had served in the Japanese military during World War II could not be denaturalized unless the United States could prove that he had acted voluntarily.. 
Mitsugi Nishikawa, born in California to Japanese parents, went to Japan to study, and he was conscripted into the Japanese military in early 1941. After the end of the war, Nishikawa was informed by US officials that he had lost his citizenship because he had served in a foreign army. His case was eventually reviewed by the Supreme Court, which decided that the burden of proof must be on the government to prove that Nishikawa's Japanese military service was undertaken voluntarily before he could be stripped of his citizenship.
 Background 
Mitsugi Nishikawa was born in Artesia, California in 1916, making him a US citizen by birth. Because his parents were Japanese citizens, he also had Japanese citizenship. He resided in the United States until August 1939, before the outbreak of World War II, when he went to Japan to study. On March 1, 1941, he was conscripted into the Japanese Army, nine months before the attack on Pearl Harbor, and he served as a mechanic. Japanese law provided a maximum sentence of three years for evading conscription. After the war, he applied to the US consulate in Japan for a US passport. Instead he was deprived of his US citizenship under section 401(c) of the Nationality Act 1940, which reads:
He petitioned a US district court for a declaration that he was still an American citizen because he had not enlisted voluntarily. He testified that in addition to the legal penalties for draft evasion, he was afraid of the violent reputation of the Japanese secret police and had been told that the US consulate would not have assisted him if he had sought help to avoid conscription. After Pearl Harbor, when he said to other Japanese soldiers that Japan could not win the war, he was regularly beaten every day for a month. The government called no evidence of its own. Nevertheless the district judge disbelieved him and confirmed his loss of citizenship. The decision was upheld by the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. Nishikawa appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court overturned the decisions of the courts below, holding that the Government bears the burden of proving not only that a citizen has enlisted in a foreign state but also that his enlistment was voluntary.
 Precedents and argument 
The court followed the decision of Mandoli v. Acheson, 344 U.S. 133 in which it had held that "it is settled that no conduct results in expatriation unless the conduct is engaged in voluntarily," a position not challenged by the State Department in argument. The court also followed Gonzales v. Landon, 350 U.S. 920, where the court had held that the burden of proof in cases of denaturalization under section 401(j) was on the Government "by clear, convincing and unequivocal evidence." The court extended this rule to cases under all subsections of section 401. In Schneiderman v. United States, 320 U.S. 118, the court had held that in a case concerning "the precious right of citizenship ... we believe the facts and the law should be construed as far as is reasonably possible in favor of the citizen."
The State Department argued that the normal burden of proving duress is on the party relying on it. Nishikawa argued that voluntariness was an intrinsic element of the conduct required by section 401.
 Majority opinion 
Chief Justice Warren delivered the opinion of the court:
The court then examined the evidence on the district court record and found that there was insufficient evidence for the district judge's finding against Nishikawa: "Nor can the district judge's disbelief of petitioner's story of his motives and fears fill the evidentiary gap in the Government's case. The Government's only affirmative evidence was that petitioner went to Japan at a time when he was subject to conscription." The Court therefore remanded the case to the district court for issuance of a declaration that Nishikawa remained a US citizen.
 Dissenting opinion 
Justice Harlan (joined by Justice Clark) dissented, arguing that "To permit conscription without more to establish duress unjustifiably limits, if it does not largely nullify, the mandate of § 401(c)," since by 1940 conscription had become the main way of raising armies around the world. He also believed that the burden of proving duress should remain on Nishikawa: "One of the prime reasons for imposing the burden of proof on the party claiming involuntariness is that the evidence normally lies in his possession." He therefore thought that the Supreme Court should defer to the district judge's findings on Nishikawa's credibility.
 See also 
 Kennedy v. Mendoza-Martinez
 Perez v. Brownell
 Afroyim v. Rusk
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
 Interview with lawyer Fred Okrand about the historical context: "Forty years defending the Constitution oral history transcript." Fred Okrand. (1982 University of California, LA.)
Category:1958 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Denaturalization case law
"""

From "Nishimura Ekiu v. United States" ==> """
Nishimura Ekiu v. United States, 142 U.S. 651 (1892), was a United States Supreme Court case challenging the constitutionality of some provisions of the Immigration Act of 1891.. The case was decided against the litigant and in favor of the government, upholding the law. The case is one of two major cases that involved challenges to the Immigration Act of 1891 by Japanese immigrants, the other (and more famous) case being Yamataya v. Fisher.
 Background 
 Backdrop of laws 
The United States had essentially unrestricted immigration until 1875. The Page Act of 1875 forbade the immigration of prostitutes and forced laborers from Asia, requiring Asian women to obtain certificates of character from Hong Kong prior to migrating.Eithne Luibheid, Entry Denied: Controlling Sexuality at the Border (University of Minnesota Press, 2002) 31.Abrams, Kerry, “Polygamy, Prostitution, and the Federalization of Immigration Law,” Colombia Law Review 105.3 (Apr. 2005): 641-716.An Act Supplementary to the Acts in Relation to Immigration (Page Law) sect. 141, 18 Stat. 477 (1873-March 1875).
Starting in the 1880s, a number of laws were passed that deprived the Chinese of the right to migrate and deprived Chinese migrants of rights. The Angell Treaty of 1880 temporarily banned migration from China, and the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 extended the ban on migration of skilled and unskilled laborers for ten years. Around the same time as the Chinese Exclusion Act, the Immigration Act of 1882 was passed. This law set the basic framework for immigration enforcement at sea ports.
The Scott Act (1888) forbade Chinese migrants from re-entering the United States.  This Act was effectively challenged in Chae Chan Ping v. United States, but the United States Supreme Court ruled against the litigant and upheld the law..
 Immigration Act of 1891 
The Immigration Act of 1891 focused on the situation of migrants from countries other than China. The Act's key pieces included:
 Additional classes of excludable aliens
 New border procedures and extended authority to land borders: The Act specified that the officers in charge of any vessel arriving by sea had to submit a list of passengers with their biographical information to the immigration inspectors at the port. Requirements of this sort had been part of United States federal law since the requirement for a manifest of immigrants in Section 4 of the Steerage Act of 1819. However, in this case the list needed to be submitted immediately upon arrival and was used to inspect aliens prior to admitting them. The inspectors at ports of entry had the authority to conduct a medical examination of aliens suspected of being unfit or having dangerous diseases, marking the beginning of medical exclusion of immigrants in the United States. Aliens who were detained for a medical examination were still considered to not have formally entered the United States.
 New bureaucratic office to coordinate immigration enforcement
 Authority to deport
 Penalties and restrictions on abetting migration
Of these provisions, it was the new border procedures that would be effectively challenged by the case.
 The case 
 Initial detention by California immigration commissioner and habeas corpus petition 
The case involved Nishimura Ekiu, a 25-year-old female citizen of Japan who arrived on the steamship Belgic from Yokohama, Japan on May 7, 1891. William H. Thornley, commissioner of immigration of the state of California, refused to allow her and five other passengers to land. In a report on May 13, 1891, he elaborated on the reason for denying her entry: "Passport states that she comes to San Francisco in company with her husband, which is not a fact. She states that she has been married two years, and that her husband has been in the United States one year, but she does not know his address. She has $22, and is to stop at some hotel until her husband calls for her." Rather than detaining her on the ship, he decided to detain her at the Methodist Episcopal Japanese and Chinese Mission, a location he deemed more suitable for her to stay, until the date the ship would sail back. His report cited the Immigration Act of 1882. The collector approved Thornley's decision. On the same day (May 13), a writ of habeas corpus was issued to Thornley to produce Ekiu. Thornley replied explaining where he had detained her and said he would continue to detain her there until final disposition of the writ.
 Re-examination and rejection of habeas corpus by an immigration inspector 
On May 14, 1891, the secretary of the treasury appointed John L. Hatch, an immigration inspector at the port of San Francisco, to re-examine the case. On May 16, Hatch submitted a report almost identical to that submitted originally by Thornley, except that he also cited the Immigration Act of 1891 in support of the decision. On May 18, Hatch intervened in opposition of the writ of habeas corpus, noting that based on his investigation, Ekiu was 'an alien immigrant from Yokohama, empire of Japan,' and 'a person without means of support, without relatives or friends in the United States,' and "a person unable to care for herself, and liable to become a public charge, and therefore inhibited from landing under the provisions of said act of 1891, and previous acts of which said act is amendatory."
 Challenge and loss in the circuit court 
At the hearing before the commissioner of the circuit court, the petitioner offered to introduce evidence as to her right to land; and contended that if the Immigration Act of 1891 allowed immigration bureaucrats to make final decisions on such matters without the possibility of judicial review, it was unconstitutional.
The commissioner excluded the evidence offered as to the petitioner's right to land, noting that the question of that right had been tried and determined by a duly-constituted and competent tribunal having jurisdiction in the premises. Therefore, the court rejected the habeas corpus petition on July 24, 1891.
 Supreme Court case 
The appellant, Nishimura Ekiu, then appealed to the United States Supreme Court. The case was heard before the Supreme Court, with Lyman I. Mowry representing the appellant and Assistant Attorney General Packet representing the United States.
The court ruled against the appellant. The court agreed with the appellant that an appellant had the right to challenge, with a writ of habeas corpus, any unlawful detention. For this, it cited Chew Heong v. United States, United States v. Jung Ah Lung, and Wan Shing v. United States as precedents.
However, the court sided with the United States government on the position that the final determination of facts of the case (specifically, whether the appellant had relatives in the United States, and whether she would be able to support herself financially) was to be made by the immigration authorities. A number of precedents, including in domains unrelated to immigration, were cited, such as Martin v. Mott (deference to the President ordering militias into service),. Railroad Co. v. Stimpson (a patent dispute where the Supreme Court held that its goal was simply to determine whether the patent office properly handled the case, rather than re-evaluate the case fully on merits), Benson v. McMahon (deference to authorities regarding extradition procedure for crimes),. In re Luis Oteiza y Cortes (the Court refused to discharge an officer for complying with an extradition request), and others.
The court also reiterated the position that the management of immigration was under the purview of the executive branch, within parameters set by legislative acts of Congress. The Head Money cases, that had established the legitimacy of a head tax introduced in the Immigration Act of 1882, were cited as precedent for this purpose.
The court also noted that it was not necessary for it to express an opinion on Thornley's actions. Rather, the review by Hatch sufficed for that purpose. It also noted that habeas corpus was simply a means to determine whether somebody could be held in custody, rather that a way to recover damages for unlawful arrest. The court argued that Hatch's appointment and his testimony were valid, and therefore ruled against the appellant.
 Dissent 
Justice Brewer dissented from the majority opinion.
 Relation with other court cases 
 Relation with the second Japanese immigrant case 
A later case, Yamataya v. Fisher (1903), bears many similarities with Nishimura Ekiu v. United States. Both cases involved a female Japanese citizen who challenged immigration authorities' decision to let her into the United States, and both sought to challenge the Immigration Act of 1891 that the denial was based on. In both cases, the court ruled against the appellant and declined to consider the specific facts surrounding the appellant's admissibility into the United States. In both cases, the appellant was ultimately deported.Howard L. Bens, “The Deportation of Aliens,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review and American Law Register 68, no. 2 (1920), 111.Alexander Aleinikoff, “Federal Regulation of Aliens and the Constitution,” The American Journal of International Law 83, no. 4, 864.
However, the two cases differ in terms of the precedent they set. Whereas Nishimura Ekiu is seen as a complete refusal by the court to consider the appellant's claim, the court did acknowledge the appellant's rights to due process in Yamataya v. Fisher. The court in Yamataya v. Fisher argued that the appeals process within the immigration bureaucracy was sufficient to meet the due process requirements, and the appellant's rights were not violated. However, the very fact that the court opined on the issue set a precedent for future challenges based on procedural due process violations.Hiroshi Motomura, ‘The Curious Evolution of Immigration Law: Procedural Surrogates for Substantive Constitutional Rights,” Columbia Law Review 92, no. 7 (1992), 1637.
 Value as a precedent for later doctrines in immigration law 
The case, along with Chae Chan Ping v. United States and Fong Yue Ting v. United States, has been cited as one of the precedents for Supreme Court deference to the plenary power doctrine for immigration law, and the related doctrine of consular nonreviewability. However, the court's more cautious response in Nishimura Ekiu v. United States than in Chae Chan Ping v. United States set a precedent in practice of a greater burden of proof for deportation than for exclusion cases.
In the case and most of the Chinese Exclusion Cases, the Supreme Court repeatedly sided with the United States government and against aliens, offering the rationale that immigration policy and its enforcement were a matter for the legislative and executive branches. Some commentators argue that these cases were key precedents for establishing the plenary power doctrine, whereas others have disagreed about the significance of these cases for plenary power. 
The defining case for the plenary power doctrine, Knauff v. Shaughnessy (1950) did not explicitly cite the case.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:1892 in United States case law
Category:Japanese-American culture in San Francisco
Category:Japan–United States relations
"""

From "Nix v. Hedden" ==> """
Nix v. Hedden, 149 U.S. 304 (1893), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held, 9–0, that the tomato should be classified as a vegetable rather than a fruit for purposes of tariffs, imports, and customs.. Justice Horace Gray delivered the opinion of the Court in holding that the Tariff Act of 1883 used the ordinary meaning of the words "fruit" and "vegetable", instead of the technical botanical meaning.
Background of the case
John Nix founded the John Nix & Co. fruit commission in New York City in 1839. The company became one of the largest sellers of produce in New York City at the time, and was one of the first companies to ship produce from Virginia, Florida, and Bermuda to New York.
In 1883, President Chester A. Arthur signed the Tariff Act of March 3, 1883, requiring a tax to be paid on imported vegetables, but not fruit. The John Nix & Co. company filed a suit against Edward L. Hedden, Collector of the Port of New York, to recover back duties paid under protest. They argued against the tariff by pointing out that, botanically, a tomato is a fruit due to its seed-bearing structure growing from the flowering part of a plant.
At the trial, the plaintiffs' counsel entered into evidence definitions of the words "fruit" and "vegetables" from Webster's Dictionary, Worcester's Dictionary, and the Imperial Dictionary. They called two witnesses, who had been in the business of selling fruit and vegetables for 30 years, and asked them, after hearing these definitions, to say whether these words had "any special meaning in trade or commerce, different from those read".
During testimony, one witness testified that in regard to the dictionary definition:
Another witness testified that "I don't think the term 'fruit' or the term 'vegetables' had, in March 1883, and prior thereto, any special meaning in trade and commerce in this country different from that which I have read here from the dictionaries."149 U.S. at 305.
Both the plaintiffs' counsel and the defendant's counsel made use of the dictionaries. The plaintiffs' counsel read in evidence from the same dictionaries the definitions of the word tomato, while the defendant's counsel then read in evidence from Webster's Dictionary the definitions of the words pea, eggplant, cucumber, squash, and pepper. Countering this, the plaintiff then read in evidence from Webster's and Worcester's dictionaries the definitions of potato, turnip, parsnip, cauliflower, cabbage, carrot and bean.
The Court's decision
thumb|right|Botanically, a tomato is a fruit. However, in common parlance it is a vegetable; hence the United States Supreme Court ruled that a tomato is a vegetable for the purposes of the customs regulations.
The court unanimously decided in favor of the respondent and found that the tomato should be classified under the customs regulations as a vegetable, based on the ways in which it is used, and the popular perception to this end. Justice Horace Gray, writing the opinion for the Court, stated that:
Justice Gray, citing several Supreme Court cases (Brown v. Piper, 91 U.S. 37, 42, and Jones v. U.S., 137 U.S. 202, 216) stated that when words have acquired no special meaning in trade or commerce, the ordinary meaning must be used by the court. In this case dictionaries cannot be admitted as evidence, but only as aids to the memory and understanding of the court. Gray acknowledged that botanically, tomatoes are classified as a "fruit of the vine"; nevertheless, they are seen as vegetables because they were usually eaten as a main course instead of being eaten as a dessert. In making his decision, Justice Gray mentioned another case where it had been claimed that beans were seeds — Justice Bradley, in Robertson v. Salomon, 130 U.S. 412, 414, similarly found that though a bean is botanically a seed, in common parlance a bean is seen as a vegetable. While on the subject, Gray clarified the status of the cucumber, squash, pea, and bean.
Subsequent jurisprudence
Nix has been cited in three Supreme Court decisions as a precedent for court interpretation of common meanings, especially dictionary definitions. (Sonn v. Maggone, ; Saltonstall v. Wiebusch & Hilger, ; and Cadwalader v. Zeh, ). Additionally, in JSG Trading Corp. v. Tray-Wrap, Inc., 917 F.2d 75 (2d Cir. 1990), a case unrelated to Nix aside from the shared focus on tomatoes, a judge wrote the following paragraph citing the case:
In 2005, supporters in the New Jersey legislature cited Nix as a basis for a bill designating the tomato as the official state vegetable.State of New Jersey, 212th Legislature, No. A1210
See also
Carrot – defined to be a fruit in European Union law, for the purpose of jam classification; Annex III(A)(1), Council Directive 2001/113/EC of 20 December 2001 relating to fruit jams, jellies and marmalades and sweetened chestnut purée intended for human consumption 
 Ketchup as a vegetable
 Jaffa Cakes, the subject of a 1991 UK tribunal which decided that they were cakes, rather than biscuits (cookies), which would attract value-added tax.
Toy Biz v. United States – decided that action figures of certain superheroes are legally toys, not dolls
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 149
Notes
References
External links
Rocknel Fastener, Inc. v. United States – 34 page PDF covering a similar case hinging on the difference between screws and bolts. The difference is outlined in a 21-page PDF Distinguishing Bolts From Screws.
2
Category:Tomatoes
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1893 in United States case law
"""

From "Nix v. Whiteside" ==> """
Nix v. Whiteside, 475 U.S. 157 (1986), was a United States Supreme Court decision that dealt with the effective assistance of counsel during a criminal trial.
Background
Before his trial for murder, the defendant, Whiteside, discussed his planned testimony with his attorney, and said that he had seen "something metallic in [the victim's] hand", in contradiction to earlier statements that he had not seen a gun in the victim's hand. Whiteside's attorney, Robinson, had warned that he (Robinson) would have an ethical obligation to report perjured testimony to the court. Whiteside, on the stand, admitted that while he believed the victim had a gun, he did not actually see a gun in the victim's hand. Whiteside was convicted, and subsequently applied for a federal writ of habeas corpus, on the grounds that his conviction was tainted under the Sixth Amendment in that his attorney's threat to disclose the perjury had deprived Whiteside of effective assistance of counsel.
Supreme Court decision
The Court ruled unanimously that Whiteside had not been deprived of his Sixth Amendment rights. The majority opinion, written by Chief Justice Burger, stated that an attorney's duty to his client's cause is "limited to legitimate, lawful conduct compatible with the very nature of a trial as a search for truth", and that "the right to counsel includes no right to have a lawyer who will cooperate with planned perjury".
Concurrences by Justices Blackmun, Brennan and Stevens stated that Whiteside had failed to show that the attorney's actions had caused prejudice to the defendant's trial required to sustain a claim of "ineffective representation", as required by the case of Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668 (1984).
In a separate concurrence, Justice Brennan said that the Court is deciding only the narrow issue "conduct acceptable under the Sixth Amendment" (quoting the lower court). "Unfortunately, the Court seems unable to resist the temptation of sharing with the legal community its vision of ethical conduct." But it is up to "the States... how [lawyers] behave in their courts, unless and until federal rights are violated."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 475
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment ineffective assistance of counsel case law
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Perjurers
"""

From "Nix v. Williams" ==> """
Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. 431 (1984), was a U.S. Supreme Court case that created an "inevitable discovery" exception to the exclusionary rule. The exclusionary rule makes most evidence gathered through violations of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which protects against unreasonable search and seizure, inadmissible in criminal trials as "fruit of the poisonous tree". In Nix, the Court ruled that evidence that would inevitably have been discovered by law enforcement through legal means remained admissible.
 Background 
Robert Williams, an escaped mental patient,  murdered ten-year-old Pamela Powers  after kidnapping her from a YMCA in Des Moines, Iowa, on December 24, 1968. He surrendered to police two days later in another county on the condition that he not be interrogated while being transported back to Urbandale. One of the detectives began a conversation and proposed that Williams reveal where he had left the body before an impending snowfall; Williams agreed and led the detectives to Powers' body. 
Williams was subsequently convicted of the murder, but in Brewer v. Williams (1977),. the US Supreme Court ruled that his right to counsel had been violated based on the precedent of Massiah v. United States (1964). Williams' conviction was thereby reversed. Justice Potter Stewart's majority opinion, however, contained a footnote suggesting that the evidence provided by Williams could still be used in a trial:
While neither Williams’ incriminating statements themselves nor any testimony describing his having led the police to the victim’s body can constitutionally be admitted into evidence, evidence of where the body was found and of its condition might well be admissible on the theory that the body would have been discovered in any event, even had incriminating statements not been elicited from Williams. ... In the event that a retrial is instituted, it will be for the state courts in the first instance to determine whether particular items of evidence may be admitted.
Williams then received a second trial, in which his attorneys again moved to suppress all evidence stemming from the interrogation of Williams by the detectives. The judge ruled that Williams' statements to the detectives were inadmissible, but citing Stewart's footnote, ruled that the body was admissible as evidence, as it would have inevitably been discovered by law enforcement. On July 15, 1977, Williams was again convicted of first degree murder.
 Decision of the Court 
The appeal of the second trial reached the Supreme Court in 1984. The majority opinion was written by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, who was joined by Justices Byron White, Harry Blackmun, Lewis F. Powell, Jr., William Rehnquist, and Sandra Day O'Connor. Justices White and Stevens wrote concurring opinions, while Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. wrote a dissent in which he was joined by Thurgood Marshall..
The majority opinion found that an "inevitable discovery exception" to the exclusionary rule was constitutional, noting that such a rule was already standard practice in most state and federal courts. The Court stated that law enforcement was not required to demonstrate that it had violated a defendant's rights in good faith, only that the evidence would have inevitably been found despite the violation. Williams' conviction was thereby upheld. 
Brennan's dissent agreed that an inevitable discovery exception existed, but argued that the burden of proof should be strengthened from the "preponderance of the evidence" required by the majority opinion to "clear and convincing evidence".
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
 References 
External links
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Nixon v. Condon" ==> """
Nixon v. Condon, 286 U.S. 73 (1932), was a voting rights case decided by the United States Supreme Court, which found the all-white Democratic Party primary in Texas unconstitutional.  This was one of four cases brought to challenge the Texas all-white Democratic Party primary.  All challenges were supported by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). Jim Crow Supreme Court Cases: Texas, accessed 21 March 2008 With Smith v. Allwright (1944) the Supreme Court decisively prohibited the white primary.
Background
In Nixon v. Herndon (1927), the Court had struck down a Texas statute that prohibited blacks from participating in the Texas Democratic primary election. Very shortly after that decision, the Texas Legislature repealed the invalidated statute, declared that the effect of the Nixon decision was to create an emergency requiring immediate action, and replaced the old statute with a new one. The new law provided that every political party would henceforth "in its own way determine who shall be qualified to vote or otherwise participate in such political party".
Under the authority of this law, the executive committee of the Texas Democratic Party adopted a resolution stating that "all white democrats who are qualified under the constitution and laws of Texas" would be allowed to vote. In the 1928 Democratic primary, Dr. L. A. Nixon of El Paso again tried to vote. He was again denied, on the ground that the resolution allowed only whites to vote (Nixon was black). Nixon sued the judges of elections in federal court.
Issue
The defendants argued that there was no state action and therefore no equal protection violation, because the Democratic Party was "merely a voluntary association" that had the power to choose its own membership.
Decision
The Court, however, in a five to four ruling, reasoned that because the Texas statute gave the party's executive committee the authority to exclude would-be members of the party – an authority, the Court said, that the executive committee hitherto had not possessed – the executive committee was acting under a state grant of power. Because there was state action, the case was controlled by Nixon v. Herndon (1927), which prohibited state officials from "discharg[ing] their official functions in such a way as to discriminate invidiously between white citizens and black".
Aftermath
The Court's decision affected all-white primaries in other Southern states.
The Democratic Party in Texas responded by barring blacks from participation in the party nominating conventions, and thus effectively continuing the white primary.
Grovey v. Townsend (1935) and Smith v. Allwright (1944) were additional cases brought by African Americans to challenge Texas white primaries. With the latter, the Supreme Court decisively prohibited white primaries.
Citations
External links
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1932 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:African-American segregation in the United States
Category:Texas elections
Category:Texas Democratic Party
Category:Primary elections in the United States
Category:History of El Paso, Texas
Category:United States elections case law
Category:Democratic Party (United States) litigation
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Nixon v. Fitzgerald" ==> """
Nixon v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 731 (1982), was a US Supreme Court case that dealt with immunity from prosecution of government officials performing discretionary functions when their actions did not violate clearly-established law..
Background
Arthur Ernest Fitzgerald filed a lawsuit against government officials that he had lost his position as a contractor for the US Air Force because of testimony made before Congress in 1968. Among the people listed in the lawsuit was ex-President Richard Nixon, who argued that a president cannot be sued for actions taken while he is in office.
The trial court and the appellate court rejected Nixon's claim of immunity. The case was then appealed to the Supreme Court.
Opinion
In a 5–4 decision, the Court ruled that the President is entitled to absolute immunity from legal liability for civil damages based on his official acts. The Court, however, emphasized that the President is not immune from criminal charges stemming from his official or unofficial acts while he is in office.
The Court noted that a grant of absolute immunity to the President would not leave him with unfettered power. It stated that there were formal and informal checks on presidential action that did not apply with equal force to other executive officials.
The Court observed that the President was subjected to constant scrutiny by the press and noted that vigilant oversight by Congress would also serve to deter presidential abuses of office and to make the threat of impeachment credible. It determined that other incentives to avoid presidential misconduct existed, including the desire to earn re-election, the need to maintain prestige as an element of presidential influence, and the traditional concern for his historical stature.
The decision was clarified by Clinton v. Jones, in which the Court held that a President is subject to civil suits for actions committed before he assumes the presidency..
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 457
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:Richard Nixon
Category:United States Constitution Article Two case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Nixon v. General Services Administration" ==> """
Nixon v. General Services Administration, 433 U.S 425 (1977), is a landmark court case concerning the principle of presidential privilege and whether the public is allowed to view a President's “confidential documents”.. The Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act, signed into law by President Gerald Ford in 1974, ordered that the Administrator of the General Services Administration obtain President Richard Nixon’s presidential papers and tape recordings. In addition, the Act further ordered that government archivists seize these materials. These archivists would preserve the material deemed historic and return to former President Nixon the materials deemed private. Furthermore, this Act stated that material that was preserved could be used in judicial hearings and proceedings.  Immediately after this Act was enacted, Richard Nixon filed a lawsuit in a federal district court claiming that the Act violated the principle of separation of powers, the principle of presidential privilege, Nixon's personal privacy, his First Amendment right of association, and further asserted that it amounted to a constitutionally prohibited Bill of Attainder.
Background
Historically, all presidential papers were considered the personal property of the president. Some took them at the end of their terms while others destroyed them. Franklin D. Roosevelt was the first to make them available to the public when he donated them to the National Archives in 1939, as the Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum, but did so voluntarily.
This case was argued a few years after the Watergate scandal had broken out and the President was compelled to resign in the face of the impeachment process against Richard Nixon. The former President objected to the seizure of documents from the Nixon Administration, as he did not want to further tarnish the public's already negative perception of him as a corrupt and scheming politician. Given that he was not liable to criminal prosecution, as he had been pardoned, Nixon's concern for his reputation appears to be the primary reason that he did not want his private documents to be inspected by historical archivists and made available to the public. The forty two million pages of documents and eight hundred and eighty tape recordings produced during his presidency would reveal critical information about Nixon's involvement in the Watergate scandal, his real opinions on a wide range of issues, and further perpetuate his image as a paranoid and secretive President. These are some of the underlying personal motives as to why Richard Nixon chose to file a lawsuit against the Administrator of General Services the day after President Ford signed the Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act into law.
President Nixon also felt that this Act broke the confidentiality promise that the Administrator of General Services gave to Nixon after he resigned from the presidency. This confidentiality agreement stated that both Richard Nixon and the General Service Administration could not access the former President's tapes and documents located near his California home without each party's respective consent. The agreement specifically provided that Richard Nixon could not withdraw any copies over a three-year period unless he made or withdrew new copies of tapes and documents, that he could only withdraw any of the original tapes after five years, and that all of the tapes would be destroyed ten years after Nixon's death. Congress was upset as to how President Nixon's official business records were to be kept concealed from public review, and wanted to make President publicly accountable for his actions. Therefore, shortly after this confidentiality agreement was announced, Congress decided to introduce a bill that would provide for greater public access to Richard Nixon's records.
The conflict
The main conflict in this case was whether a federal statute authorizing that the President would have his records inspected by government archivists violated the principles of separation of powers and executive privilege. In addition, there was a conflict in this case whether a President's personal materials were deemed private even though the public had a high level of interest in them. Furthermore, it was debatable whether the government's seizure of President Nixon's materials was actually "limited intrusion".  The main conflict in this case was whether it was constitutional for government archivists to seize President Nixon's materials.
Decision
The Supreme Court decided that the Presidential Recordings and Material Preservation Act was constitutional, ruling in favor of the Administrator of General Services in a 7-2 vote and rejecting all claims that Nixon made in his lawsuit against the Administrator of General Services. The Court rejected Nixon's claim that the Act violates the presidential privilege of confidentiality, finding that the government archivists that would review Nixon's documents and tape recordings had done so with other presidents' papers without violating the confidentiality of communications between presidents and their advisers. The past work by government archivists had not harmed the institution of the presidency. Furthermore, the Court stated that the review of documents by government archivists would be no more of an intrusion than an in camera inspection of documents permitted under the Court's majority decision in United States v. Nixon. The Court rejected the argument that the Act invaded Richard Nixon's right of privacy, as there would be limited intrusion through the screening of his documents, the public has a legitimate reason to want to know more about the President's historical documents (as he is a public figure), and the impossibility of separating the small amount of private materials without first thoroughly screening all of his documents. The Court determined that Richard Nixon's privacy rights were still protected under the Act, and that his complaints about his lack of privacy were overstated.
Beyond the questions of confidentiality, privilege and privacy, the Court found that the Act does not interfere with President Nixon's First Amendment rights of association. Further, the Court determined that the federal government had compelling reasons to preserve Nixon's Presidential materials, and archival screening was the least restrictive way to review presidential materials and to return private papers to the president. Finally, the Act did not violate the Bill of Attainder clause of the Constitution because this Act does not convict former President Nixon of a crime and does not expose him to prosecution. The Court commented that Congress was justified in approving the Act because Congress believed Nixon was a President who could serve as an example for future presidents. The Court determined that the purpose of this Act was not to punish President Nixon, but simply to legislate a policy that had a purpose of preserving important historical artifacts and presidential records.
Chief Justice Warren Burger and Justice William Rehnquist wrote dissenting opinions. Rehnquist vigorously argued that under the provisions of the Act, all presidential papers could be seized by Congress at any time, and the Act was thus excessive. Burger asserted that the Administrator was not justified in engaging in such an invasion of privacy with respect to a President's documents. In addition, Burger contended that the Administrator was also encroaching on President Nixon's Executive Privilege and that this Act amounted to an unconstitutional Bill of Attainder.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:Richard Nixon
Category:General Services Administration
"""

From "Nixon v. Herndon" ==> """
Nixon v. Herndon, 273 U.S. 536 (1927), was a United States Supreme Court decision which struck down a 1923 Texas law forbidding blacks from voting in the Texas Democratic Party primary.. Due to the limited amount of Republican Party activity in Texas at the time following the suppression of black voting through poll taxes, the Democratic Party primary was essentially the only competitive process and chance to choose candidates for the Senate, House of Representatives and state offices.
This case was one of four supported by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) that challenged the Texas Democratic Party's all-white primary, which was finally prohibited in the Supreme Court ruling Smith v. Allwright in 1944.
Facts
In 1902 the Texas legislature passed a requirement for a poll tax which suppressed voting by black and Mexican Americans. As voter participation by these groups declined, the Democratic Party became more dominant."Historical Barriers to Voting", in Texas Politics, University of Texas, accessed 4 November 2012. Quote:
Dr. Lawrence A. Nixon, a black physician in El Paso, Texas and member of the Democratic Party, sought to vote in the Democratic Party primary of 1924 in El Paso."Jim Crow Supreme Court Cases: Texas", accessed 21 March 2008  The defendants were magistrates in charge of elections who prevented him from doing so on the basis of the 1923 Statute of Texas which provided that "in no event shall a negro be eligible to participate in a Democratic party primary election held in the State of Texas". Nixon sought an injunction against the statute in the federal district court. The district court dismissed the suit, and Nixon appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
Issue
Nixon argued that the statute violated the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution. The defendants argued that the Court lacked jurisdiction over the issue, as it was a political question.
Ruling
The Court, speaking through Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, unanimously rejected the argument that the political question doctrine barred the Court from deciding the case. The argument, said the Court, was "little more than a play upon words". While the injury which the plaintiff alleged "involved political action", his suit "allege[d] and s[ought] to recover for private damage".
The Court then turned to the merits of the suit. It said that it was unnecessary to discuss whether the statute violated the Fifteenth Amendment, "because it seems to us hard to imagine a more direct and obvious infringement of the Fourteenth". The Court continued:
The Court reversed the district court's dismissal of the suit.
Aftermath
Texas promptly enacted a new provision to continue restrictions on black voter participation, granting authority to political parties to determine who should vote in their primaries. Within four months the Executive Committee of the Democratic Party passed a resolution that "all white Democrats ... and none other" be allowed to participate in the approaching primary of 1927."Nixon v. Condon. Disfranchisement of the Negro in Texas", The Yale Law Journal, Vol. 41, No. 8, June 1932, p. 1212, accessed 21 March 2008
Five years later, in 1932, Dr. Nixon reappeared before the Supreme Court in another suit, Nixon v. Condon, against the all-white primary. The Court again ruled against the State, which passed another variation in a continuing endeavor to maintain the white primary system. It was not until Smith v. Allwright (1944) that the Supreme Court "finally and decisively prohibited the white primary".
See also
White Municipal Party
Citizens' Councils
References
Further reading
External links
 L.A. Nixon fought Texas voting law
Category:1927 in United States case law
Category:African-American segregation in the United States
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Democratic Party (United States) litigation
Category:History of El Paso, Texas
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:Primary elections in the United States
Category:Texas Democratic Party
Category:Texas elections
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
Category:African-American history of Texas
"""

From "Nixon v. Missouri Municipal League" ==> """
Nixon v. Missouri Municipal League, 541 U.S. 125 (2004), is a U.S. Supreme Court case decided on March 24, 2004.  The case concerned the Federal Communications Commission’s ability to preempt state law under § 253(a) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
Facts
In 1997, the Missouri state legislature enacted § 392.410(7) of the State's Revised Statutes, which prohibited the sale of  telecommunications service by any political subdivisions of the state. The Missouri Municipal League, which consisted of municipalities, municipal organizations, and municipally-owned utilities, petitioned the Federal Communications Commission for an order declaring the state statute unlawful and requesting the Commission to preempt under § 253(a) of the Telecommunications Act (47 U.S.C, § 253(a)), which provides that “No State or local statute or regulation, or other State or local legal requirement, may prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the ability of any entity to provide any interstate or intrastate telecommunications service.” After notice and comment, the FCC refused to declare the Missouri statute preempted. The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reversed this decision, finding that the term “entity” in the statute, especially when modified by “any,” manifested sufficiently clear congressional intent to include governmental entities within its scope. This decision created a circuit split between the Eighth Circuit and the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit's City of Abilene, Texas v. FCC, 164 F. 3d 49 (1999) opinion, which held that a state statute prohibiting municipalities from directly or indirectly selling telecommunications services to the public was not preempted by the same provision, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the conflict.
Judgment
In an 8-1 opinion authored by Justice David Souter, the Supreme Court reversed the Eighth Circuit’s order and upheld the Missouri statute.  In their analysis of the Telecommunications Act’s grant of authority to the FCC to preempt state laws, the Court concluded that “the class of entities contemplated by § 253 does not include the State's own subdivisions, so as to affect the power of States and localities to restrict their own (or their political inferiors') delivery of telecommunications services.”  
This holding followed the reasoning from the 1999 D.C. Circuit decision in City of Abilene, Tex. v. F.C.C. The Court reasoned that the term "any entity" in § 253(a) does not plainly include municipalities. The majority opinion interpreted the Supremacy Clause to mean that Congress may legislate in areas traditionally regulated by the States, but that Congress would not exercise this power lightly, and not without a clear grant of authority. The standard for determining whether Congress truly intended to alter the balance between federal and state powers is a directive that is "unmistakably clear in the language of the statute." The Court found no such explicit language in the provision. The Court based their reasoning in part on the inseparable nature of states and their political subdivisions, which rely on states for their existence and any authority. The Court reasoned that in the absence of some authorizing legislation by a state, municipalities would still be powerless to enter the telecommunications business, thus “any entity” could not mean municipalities because they did not have “the ability” without state authorization. Justice Stevens dissented, arguing that Congress was aware of the existence of publicly-owned utilities when the Telecommunications Act was enacted and intended to include them as entities, and that the FCC's interference into state-local affairs was limited because the agency could pre-empt only those state laws that constitute nonneutral restraints on telecommunications providers.
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States communications regulation case law
Category:United States federal preemption law
"""

From "Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government PAC" ==> """
Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government PAC, 528 U.S. 377 (2000), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that their earlier decision in Buckley v. Valeo (1976),. upholding federal limits on campaign contributions also applied to state limits on campaign contributions to state offices..
Background
Buckley v. Valeo established a "$1000 cap on individuals' contributions to candidates for federal office" in 1976. A 1998 statute increased the contribution limit to $1075 for statewide office candidates. In that year, Zev David Fredman filed suit alleging that "the Missouri statute imposing limits on contributions to candidates for state office violated" a candidates First and Fourteenth Amendment rights. Fredman further argued that he could only campaign effectively with contributions exceeding $1075. The Federal District Court upheld the statute on limitations to campaign donations. The Court of Appeals then reversed the decision finding that "Missouri's interest in avoiding the corruption or the perception of corruption caused by candidates' acceptance of large campaign contributions was insufficient to satisfy Buckly's strict scrutiny standard of review."
Decision of the Supreme Court
Justice John Paul Stevens' concurrence questioned more than two decades of campaign finance jurisprudence, stating:  "Money is property; it is not speech."
Professor D. Bruce La Pierre argued in front of the Court for the respondents. Patric Lester appeared on the brief. Missouri Attorney General Jay Nixon argued for the petitioners.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 528
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Missouri
"""

From "Nixon v. United States" ==> """
Nixon v. United States, 506 U.S. 224 (1993), was a United States Supreme Court decision that determined that a question of whether the Senate had properly tried an impeachment was political in nature and could not be resolved in the courts if there was no applicable judicial standard..
Background
The Chief Judge for the United States District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi, Walter Nixon, was convicted of committing perjury before a grand jury but refused to resign from office even after he had been incarcerated. Nixon was subsequently impeached by the US House of Representatives, and the matter was referred to the Senate for a vote on Nixon's removal. The Senate appointed a committee to hear the evidence against Nixon and later report to the body as a whole. The Senate then heard the report of the committee and voted to remove Nixon from office. Nixon contended that this did not meet the constitutional requirement of Article I for the case to be "tried by the Senate."
Decision
The court's decision was unanimous, but four separate opinions were published. The majority opinion, by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, held that the courts may not review the impeachment and trial of a federal officer because the Constitution reserves that function to a coordinate political branch.  Article I, Section 3 of the Constitution gives the Senate the "sole power to try all impeachments." Because of the word sole it is clear that the judicial branch was not to be included. Furthermore, because the word try was originally understood to include factfinding committees, there was a textually demonstrable commitment to give broad discretion to the Senate in impeachments.
Furthermore, the Framers believed that representatives of the people should try impeachments, and the Court was too small to justly try impeachments. Also, the judicial branch is "checked" by impeachments, so judicial involvement in impeachments might violate the doctrine of the separation of powers.
The Court further ruled that involving the judiciary would prevent finality without clear remedy and bias post-impeachment criminal or civil prosecutions, which the Constitution explicitly allows.
Justices Byron White, Harry Blackmun, and David Souter concurred, but voiced concern that the Court was foreclosing the area for review. While they found that the Senate had done all that was constitutionally required, they were concerned that the Court should have the power to review cases in which the Senate removed an impeached officer summarily without a hearing, or through some arbitrary process such as "a coin toss."
An important feature of this case is how it diverges from Powell v. McCormack (1969). In Powell, a grant of discretionary power to Congress was deemed to be justiciable because it required a mere "interpretation" of the Constitution.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 506
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:United States political question doctrine case law
Category:United States federal impeachment
"""

From "Niz-Chavez v. Garland" ==> """
Niz-Chavez v. Garland, 593 U.S. ___ (2021), was an immigration decision by the United States Supreme Court. In a 6–3 decision authored by Neil Gorsuch, the Court ruled against the federal government, holding that deportation hearing notices need to be in a single document. Although a highly technical case, the decision received attention for being predicated on the single-letter word a.
Background
Non-citizens are eligible to apply to the attorney general for cancellation of deportation if they meet certain criteria: for permanent residents, they must have had seven years' "continuous residence" and for non-permanent residents, ten years' "continuous presence". However, per the "stop-time rule", this timer can be stopped by being issued a "notice to appear" at a deportation hearing. This clause was intended to prevent immigrants from accumulating time because of a slow-moving deportation process.
Agusto Niz-Chavez, an unauthorized immigrant from Guatemala, entered the United States in 2005, fleeing after he had been threatened with his land being seized and family killed. He had been reported to the government following various driving infractions. In 2013, he received documents to appear at a deportation hearing in two separate installments. While the first document did not state where or when he needed to attend the hearing, the second, received two months later, did.
Following unsuccessful requests to have his deportation canceled, an appeal to the Board of Immigration Appeals was made; among the arguments, Niz-Chavez asserted that he had been inadequately notified and hence the stop-time rule had not been invoked. The appeal was rejected by the Board as well as by the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit.
Supreme Court
Following the Sixth Circuit's rejection of the appeal in October 2019, a petition for a writ of certiorari was filed in January 2020 and granted in June 2020, there having been a circuit split on the issue. The Supreme Court had previously ruled on the stop-time rule in Pereira v. Sessions and Barton v. Barr, ruling that notices to appear without times and dates could not cause the stop-time rule to be invoked in Pereira. However, it did not rule on whether a collection of notices could constitute a single notice to appear, especially where one of the notices did not contain the required information.
The highly technical case was previously titled Niz-Chavez v. Barr, having had its oral arguments during the Trump administration. William Barr left office as Attorney General of the United States in December 2020, with Merrick Garland being confirmed by the Senate in March 2021 after the Biden administration took office.
Oral arguments
In oral arguments, the plaintiff's lawyer, David Zimmer, argued that the use of a prior to "notice to appear" signified that Congress had intended for the process to be underpinned by one document; he also stated that it had intentionally moved away from a two-step process. The Justice Department's lawyer, Anthony Yang, argued that a "written notice" could come in more than one document, highlighting that in Oregon law, notices to arbitrate could be served over several documents.
Under further questioning, Chief Justice Roberts elicited a stance from the defendant's legal team that while two documents in different envelopes received on the same day would be inadmissible, two documents in a single envelope would not. Zimmer further argued that Congress had attempted to simplify the process for immigrants when it required the notice to appear to be in a single document. Justice Gorsuch referred back to the Court's prior decision in Pereira, criticizing the government for not having "taken the hint from the eight-justice majority" in that case and calling the case "Pereira Groundhog Day".
Gorsuch pressed Zimmer on why the Court should not treat the immigration authorities' stance on whether multiple documents could invoke the stop-time rule with Chevron deference, with Zimmer replying that the stance had not been based on the text of the law. Following oral arguments, SCOTUSblog Jayesh Rathod predicted that there was a good chance of "another lopsided decision in favor of noncitizens", referring to Pereira.
Majority opinion
thumb|Retired justice Anthony Kennedy flanked by Neil Gorsuch (left) and Brett Kavanaugh (right). Both opinion writers had attended the same school and clerked for Kennedy together.
The majority opinion attracted attention for being based on the single-letter word a and for its "odd bedfellows", with three "conservative" justices (Justice Gorsuch as author, joined by Justices Thomas and Barrett) and three "liberal" justices (Justices Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan) signing on to the opinion.
Focusing on that shortest word and criticizing the government's stance, Gorsuch wrote:
Distinguishing between the use of notice as either a "countable object" or a "noncountable abstraction", he stated the use of a meant that lawmakers had intended for it to be the former. He wrote in summation:
Dissenting opinion
Written by Justice Kavanaugh joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Alito, the opinion scorched the majority for an interpretation that was "rather perplexing as a matter of statutory interpretation and common sense" and one that "spawns a litany of absurdities", referring back to the petitioner's argument that documents received on the same day but in different envelopes would be inadequate.
Criticizing the majority's overly literalist reading and invoking Justice Antonin Scalia's words that a "good textualist is not a literalist", he wrote: "Ordinary meaning and literal meaning are two different things. And judges interpreting statutes should follow ordinary meaning, not literal meaning." He went further, elaborating:
In response to Gorsuch's analogy of a car being sent in installments, Kavanaugh raised examples of job applications and a manuscript being submitted by an author chapter-by-chapter as acceptable instances of installments.
Effects and analysis
The American Immigration Lawyers' Association called the decision a "bombshell", with campaigners critical that the previous state of affairs had meant that many immigrants failed to attend their hearings and were not aware that they had one in the first place. Numerous requests to stop deportations where immigrants were not told a venue or date were granted by judges as a result of the case; experts warned that the courts would be "flooded" with these motions. Stephen Yale-Loehr, a professor at Cornell Law School, predicted that there would be greater delays in people being placed into the deportation process. , Niz-Chavez's wife has been deported, and he is waiting for a new hearing at immigration court, living in Michigan .
Legal analysts drew parallels between Niz-Chavez and Bostock v. Clayton County, highlighting that Gorsuch and Kavanaugh were again at odds despite having both been Trump appointees, former law clerks to Anthony Kennedy, and attendees of Georgetown Preparatory School. Observers also noted Gorsuch's textualism and libertarianism driving his opinion, with CNN noting that his textualism had underpinned both this case and Bostock.
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:History of immigration to the United States
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "NLRB v. Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co." ==> """
NLRB v. Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co., 306 U.S. 292 (1939), is a US labor law case where the US Supreme Court held 5-to-2 that the National Labor Relations Act required decisions of the National Labor Relations Board (Board) to be based on substantial evidence.. The Supreme Court overturned a ruling of the Board (requiring an employer to rehire striking workers) for not being based on substantial evidence. The Court also held that only the representative of the workers (the union) could issue collective bargaining proposals under the law, and that proposals transmitted by a third party did not trigger the Act's protections or duties.
Facts
Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co. manufactured metal utensils in Terre Haute, Indiana. It recognized a labor union of its employees and signed a one-year collective bargaining agreement on July 14, 1934, which provided for arbitration of disputes and barred work stoppages (pending arbitration). Over the next seven months, the company and union met repeatedly to discuss and negotiate over the union's demands, which included a closed shop and the dismissal of all workers the union had suspended for non-payment of dues. The union struck on March 23, 1935, and the strike turned into a lockout on March 30. The plant reopened with strikebreakers on July 23, 1935. During the strike, the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) became law. The Board attempted to mediate an end to the strike in July and August, but to no avail. The union submitted proposals to the employer in September and October, but received no reply.
On February 14, 1936, the NLRB held Columbian Enameling & Stamping in violation of the NLRA for refusing to bargain in good faith with its workers, and ordered all strikebreakers fired and all former employees rehired.  The company sued in federal court to have the order overturned.
Judgment
Associate Justice Harlan F. Stone wrote the decision for the majority, joined by Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes and Associate Justices James Clark McReynolds, Pierce Butler, and Owen Roberts.
Stone concluded that the NLRB's decision was not supported by the evidence.NLRB v. Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co., 306 U.S. at 296. The NLRB agents' proposals to the employer did not constitute a request for bargaining under the NLRA, and so the employer's refusal to respond to them was not a violation of the law.NLRB v. Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co., 306 U.S. at 297. The NLRB's conclusions, Stone said, were not based on "substantial" evidence.NLRB v. Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co., 306 U.S. at 299. The majority defined substantial evidence as evidence which "must do more than create a suspicion of the existence of the fact to be established. It is such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion, and it must be enough to justify, if the trial were to a jury, a refusal to direct a verdict when the conclusion sought to be drawn from it is one of fact for the jury.NLRB v. Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co., 306 U.S. at 300.
Associate Justice Hugo Black dissented, joined by Associate Justice Stanley Forman Reed. Black concluded that the majority had substituted its own appraisal of the evidence for that of the Board's, which was inappropriate.NLRB v. Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co., 306 U.S. at 301 (Black, J., dissenting). He also concluded that the majority disregarded the evidence that the mediators were negotiating with the employer on behalf of the union.NLRB v. Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co., 306 U.S. at 301-302.
{Cquote|To conclude that the company—through its president—was unaware the conciliators were acting at the instance of the Union, and therefore is not to be held responsible for its flat refusal to meet with its employees, is both to ignore the record and to shut our eyes to the realities of the conditions of modern industry and industrial strife."NLRB v. Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co., 306 U.S. at 303. Black also noted that no arbitration was pending, and so the union was not in violation of its contract.NLRB v. Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co., 306 U.S. at 306.
Significance
Initially, the Supreme Court had adopted the "mere scintilla" rule.  As defined in Interstate Commerce Commission v. Union Pacific Railroad, 222 U.S. 541 (1912), the Court originally required administrative agencies to provide "more than a scintilla" of evidence.Matthews, p. 44. But by the late 1930s, the Court had shifted to the "substantial evidence rule."Matthews, p. 45. NLRB v. Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co. is the first significant, lengthy statement of this rule. But the "substantial evidence" test has been criticized as being "largely an exercise in semantics, i.e., an analysis of the words used in writing opinions and not of the extent in which reviewing courts inquired into the facts."Davis, p. 915.
The case was one of the first clear-cut defeats for the Board before the Supreme Court, after an unprecedented string of 15 successes.Gross, p. 83. Along with NLRB v. Fansteel Metallurgical Corp., 306 U.S. 240 (1939) and NLRB v. Sands Manufacturing Co., 306 U.S. 332 (1939), the decision has been called one of the three most significant NLRB cases since NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation, 301 U.S. 1 (1938) upheld the NLRA's constitutionality. The three cases also expanded the way the Court interpreted the NLRA. Although the justices had previously interpreted the Act solely through the lens of the Commerce Clause (showing strong deference to the Board), now the Court evinced a willingness to apply evidentiary standards to the Board's actions and to impose a less radical interpretation on the law.Ross, p. 150.
See also
US labor law
Notes
References
Davis, Kenneth Culp. Administrative Law. St. Paul, Minn.: West Publishing Co., 1951.
Gross, James A. The Reshaping of the National Labor Relations Board: National Labor Policy in Transition, 1937-1947. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1981.
Matthews, Daniel E. "Administrative Law: The Status of 'Substantial Evidence'." American University Law Review. 3:2 (May 1954).
Ross, William G. The Chief Justiceship of Charles Evans Hughes: 1930-1941. Columbia, S.C.: University of South Carolina Press, 2007.
External links
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
"""

From "NLRB v. Fansteel Metallurgical Corp." ==> """
National Labor Relations Board v. Fansteel Metallurgical Corporation, 306 U.S. 240 (1939), is a United States Supreme Court case on labor laws in which the Court held that the National Labor Relations Board had no authority to order an employer to reinstate workers fired after a sit-down strike, even if the employer's illegal actions triggered that strike..
Facts
In the summer of 1936, workers at Fansteel Metallurgical Corporation's plant near Chicago, Illinois, attempted to form a union. Fansteel infiltrated a labor spy into the union, who committed espionage against the union. Although the union attempted to meet several times with the plant superintendent to negotiate a contract, each time the employer refused. The employer established a company union in an attempt to weaken support for the independent union, but this failed. On February 17, 1937, the frustrated union announced a sit-down strike and seized a portion of the plant.Gross, p. 24. The employer won an injunction ordering the union men to vacate the premises, which they ignored. An attempt by sheriff's deputies to eject the men on February 19 failed, but a second attempt on February 26 was successful."Six Hurt in Battle as Sheriff Tries to Oust 'Sit-Downs'," New York Times, February 20, 1937; "Fansteel Rejects Terms, Bars Gov. Horner's Proposal of Tacit Recognition of C.I.O. Union," New York Times, February 26, 1937; "Gas Barrage Ousts Fansteel Strikers in a Short Battle," New York Times, February 27, 1937. The National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) held on March 14, 1938, that Fansteel had to reinstate 90 of the workers because the company had violated the Act first (precipitating the sit-down strike).Brisbin, p. 57.
Judgment
Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes wrote the decision for the majority, joined by Associate Justices James Clark McReynolds, Pierce Butler, and Owen Roberts. Hughes held that a sit-down strike was "good cause" for discharging the workers, and that the National Labor Relations Act did not give the NLRB the authority to force an employer to rehire workers who had violated the law.NLRB v. Fansteel Metallurgical Corp., 306 U.S. at 252, 255, 257. The majority also held that the NLRB could not order an employer to bargain with the union in the absence of evidence that the union has the support of a majority of the workers, even though the employer has engaged in illegal activity which may have undermined that pro-union support.NLRB v. Fansteel Metallurgical Corp., 306 U.S. at 261.
Associate Justice Harlan F. Stone concurred in part. Stone agreed that the sit-down strikers had been lawfully fired and lost the protection of the NLRA.NLRB v. Fansteel Metallurgical Corp., 306 U.S. at 263. He disagreed, however, that the workers who abetted the sit-down strikers had lost the protection of the Act (as the majority had concluded), and felt the Board had the power to order their reinstatement.NLRB v. Fansteel Metallurgical Corp., 306 U.S. at 265.
Associated Justice Stanley Forman Reed dissented, joined by Justice Hugo Black. Reed argued that the majority had recognized that the sit-down strikers could be punished for their lawless acts, but that the majority refused to punish the employer for engaging in lawless acts which led to an unfair labor practice strike.NLRB v. Fansteel Metallurgical Corp., 306 U.S. at 266. Congress, Reed said, had given the Board the power to return to the status quo ante, and all workers should be reinstated.NLRB v. Fansteel Metallurgical Corp., 306 U.S. at 267-269.
Significance
Many commentators believe Fansteel outlawed the sit-down strike. It did not; rather, the court held that the NLRB had no authority to force an employer to reinstate workers who engaged in a sit-down strike.Gross, pp. 83-84.
The Fansteel Court initially limited discharge to those employees who had violated the law during a strike, but the Supreme Court held in Southern Steamship Co. v. National Labor Relations Board, 316 U.S. 31 (1942), that an employer could discharge an employee for any violation of federal law, whether it occurred during a strike or not. And in NLRB v. Sands Manufacturing Co., 306 U.S. 332 (1939), the Court held that an employer could discipline a striking employee for acts committed away from the job site.Brisbin, p. 57-58. The Supreme Court would eventually hold collective work slow-downs, collective refusal to work overtime, and "quickie" strikes equally unlawful.Craver, p. 20.
Along with NLRB v. Columbian Enameling & Stamping Co., 306 U.S. 292 (1939) and NLRB v. Sands Manufacturing Co., the decision has been called one of the three most significant NLRB cases since National Labor Relations Board v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation, 301 U.S. 1 (1938) upheld the NLRA's constitutionality.Gross, p. 83. The three cases also expanded the way the Court interpreted the NLRA. Although the justices had previously interpreted the Act solely through the lens of the Commerce Clause (showing strong deference to the Board), now the Court evinced a willingness to apply evidentiary standards to the Board's actions and to impose a less radical interpretation on the law.Ross, p. 150.
Notes
References
 Brisbin, Richard A. A Strike Like No Other Strike: Law and Resistance During the Pittston Coal Strike of 1989-1990. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002.
 Craver, Charles B. Can Unions Survive?: The Rejuvenation of the American Labor Movement. New York: New York University Press, 1995.
 "Fansteel Rejects Terms, Bars Gov. Horner's Proposal of Tacit Recognition of C.I.O. Union." New York Times. February 26, 1937.
 "Gas Barrage Ousts Fansteel Strikers in a Short Battle." New York Times. February 27, 1937.
 Gross, James A. The Reshaping of the National Labor Relations Board: National Labor Policy in Transition, 1937-1947. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1981.
 Ross, William G. The Chief Justiceship of Charles Evans Hughes: 1930-1941. Columbia, S.C.: University of South Carolina Press, 2007.
 "Six Hurt in Battle as Sheriff Tries to Oust 'Sit-Downs'." New York Times. February 20, 1937.
External links
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co., Inc." ==> """
NLRB v. Gissel Packing Co., Inc., 395 U.S. 575 (1969) was a unanimous United States Supreme Court case clarifying the application of the National Labor Relations Act after the Taft-Hartley Amendments, particularly the application of union authorization cards.
The Taft-Hartley Amendments repealed the provision of the National Labor Relations Act that allowed the NLRB to certify unions without an election. In the Joy Silk decision, the NLRB announced that it would order employers to recognize and bargain with unions if the general counsel established that the union represented a majority of workers in the appropriate bargaining unit, the union request recognition, the employer denied the request for recognition and lacked good faith doubt of the union's majority status, and the employer tried to disrupt the union's majority status by committing unfair labor practices. This doctrine provided a strong incentive for employers to avoid committing unfair labor practices during organizing campaigns.
After the Court abandoned Joy Silk, it announced its new doctrine in Gissel, which hinges on whether employer unfair labor practices make a fair election unlikely or impossible, a more speculative test than the Joy Silk doctrine. First, the Court upheld the board's authority to remedy an employer's unfair labor practices by ordering the employer to recognize and bargain with a union based solely on authorization cards from a majority of employees. So-called "Gissel" orders are issued when the atmosphere has been so tainted by an employer's unfair labor practices that a fair rerun election is unlikely. Second, the Court held that the NLRB retains the authority to force an employer to bargain with the union even when the union no longer possesses a majority of employees at the time of the bargaining order.
Since the decision in Gissel, Federal Circuit Courts have added additional burdens on the NLRB's authority to issue Gissel orders.
 References 
Category:United States labor case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "NLRB v. Hearst Publications" ==> """
NLRB v. Hearst Publications, 322 U.S. 111 (1944), was an administrative law case heard before the United States Supreme Court. The case concerned the meaning of the term "employees" in the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA).
Background
Hearst Publications (Hearst), the publishers of four daily Los Angeles newspapers, refused to bargain collectively with their newsboys. The newsboys filed petitions with the  National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) for certification as a local union. The NLRB found that the newsboys were full-time employees within the meaning of the NLRA and ordered Hearst bargain with the newsboys. The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit refused to enforce the order, reasoning that the newsboys were independent contractors, rather than employees.NLRB v. Hearst Publications, 322 U.S. 111, 113-15 (1944)
Decision of the Court
Justice Rutledge, delivering the opinion of the court, ruled that the NLRB's interpretation of the Act was not erroneous. The court held that when an administrative agency engages in "specific application of a broad statutory term in a proceeding in which the agency administering the statute must determine it initially, the reviewing court's function is limited."Id. at 131. The newsboys were employees within the meaning of the Act, with whom Hearst was required to collectively bargain.
Dissent
Justice Roberts, dissenting, wrote that "the question of who is an employee, so as to make the statute applicable to him, is a question of the meaning of the Act and, therefore, is a judicial and not an administrative question."Id. at 136.
Facts
Newsboys, who distributed papers on the streets of the city of Los Angeles, formed a union to collectively bargain over wages. They claimed they were 'employees' under the National Labor Relations Act 1935. They alleged their employers were Hearst Publications Inc, which owned the Los Angeles Examiner and the Los Angeles Evening Herald and Express, as well as the Los Angeles Times. The National Labor Relations Board determined that the newsboys were employees, as they worked continuously, regularly and relied on their earnings to support themselves and their families. The publishers dictated the buying and selling prices, fixed their markets, controlled their supply of papers, supervised their work hours and effort, and gave them sales equipment for the publishers' benefit. The NLRB then designated the full-time newsboys and 'checkmen' to be a bargaining unit within the city, excluding temporary, casual and part-time newsboys and bootjackers. The newspapers argued that under common law standards, their control over the newsboys made them no more than independent contractors, so that they were not 'employees' and had no duty to bargain in good faith under the National Labor Relations Act 1935.
Judgment
The Supreme Court held that the Act's history, context and purposes should be taken into account when determining whether someone is an employee, not just common law standards, local law or legal classifications made for other purposes. The NLRB's determination that someone is an employee may not be set aside if it has a reasonable legal basis. Its identification of bargaining units was within its discretion, including its exclusion of suburban newsboys on the ground that they were not in the union.
Rutledge J gave the court's judgment.322 US 120-134
Reed J concurred, and said the NLRB had the definition of 'employee' correct.
Roberts J dissented, stating his view that the newsboys were not employees.
 See also 
 Newsboys Strike of 1899
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 322
 US labor law
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:1944 in United States case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:Hearst Communications
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Newspaper labor disputes in the United States
"""

From "NLRB v. J. Weingarten, Inc." ==> """
NLRB v. J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. 251 (1975), is a United States labor law case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States. It held that employees in unionized workplaces have the right under the National Labor Relations Act to the presence of a union steward during any management inquiry that the employee reasonably believes may result in discipline.
Facts
In 1972, J. Weingarten, Inc. (Weingarten) operated a chain of food outlets.. Weingarten operated two types of food establishments: stores with lunch counters and lobby food operations.  Weingarten's purported policy was to allow employees at stores with lunch counters a free lunch, but employees at lobby food operations were not allowed a free lunch; this distinction (and what the actual policy was) would figure in the controversy to follow.
Beginning in 1961, Leura Collins was employed as a sales person at Store No. 2, which was a store with a lunch counter.  Then in 1970, she was transferred to Store No. 98, which was a lobby food operation, where she again worked as a sales person. As a Weingarten sales person, Collins was represented under a collective bargaining agreement by Local Union No 455 of the Retail Clerks Union, which later became part of United Food and Commercial Workers. After a report that Collins was taking money from the cash register, an internal Weingarten investigator spent two days in June 1972 observing the store without the knowledge of Store No. 98's manager. After completing the surveillance, the investigator informed the store manager of his presence and reported that he could find nothing wrong. The store manager then told the investigator that one coworker had reported that Collins failed to pay full price for a box of chicken she had purchased.
The manager and investigator summoned Collins for an interview and questioned her. Collins asked for the presence of a union representative several times but was refused by the manager each time. Upon questioning, Collins explained that she had put four pieces of chicken (which cost $1 total) into a larger box (one which could hold $2.98 of chicken) because the store had run out of the four-piece sized boxes.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 254-55. To check Collins's story, the investigator left to ask the coworker who had reported her.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 255. The coworker confirmed that the store had run out of $1 size boxes and admitted she did not know how much chicken Collins had placed in the larger box. The investigator returned to the interview, apologized to Collins, and prepared to let her go.
Collins then burst into tears and exclaimed that the only thing she had ever gotten from the store without paying was her free lunch.  This prompted renewed questioning from the investigator and manager because of the differing policies regarding free lunches at lobby food operations (not allowed) versus stores with lunch counters (allowed). Collins again requested and was refused the presence of a union representative. Based on the questioning, the investigator prepared a statement that Collins owed $160 for lunches but she refused to sign the statement. It was later found that most (if not all) of the employees at Store No. 98 (including the manager) took free lunches because they had never been informed of the policy prohibiting it. When the investigator contacted company headquarters during the interview, the company itself was uncertain whether the policy against free lunches was even in effect at that store.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 255-56.
As a result, the investigator terminated the questioning and the store manager asked Collins to keep the inquiry private.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 256.  However, Collins reported the interview to her shop steward and other union representatives. As a result, an unfair labor practice proceeding was brought before the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB).
Judgment
National Labor Relations Board
The NLRB applied a right it had recently announced in Quality Mfg. Co. and then clarified in Mobil Oil Corp. that employees in unionized workplaces had a right under Section 7 of the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) to the presence of a union representative during any inquiry where the employee's job might be in jeopardy.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 256-57. The NLRB had explained in those decisions that having a union representative present was an exercise of the right to the 'mutual aid and protection' protected by Section 7. Therefore, an employer's refusal of such presence was an unfair labor practice and actionable under the NLRA. As a result, the NLRB found that Weingarten had engaged in an unfair labor practice by refusing Collins a representative and Weingarten appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 252-53.
Fifth Circuit
The Fifth Circuit held that this interpretation of Section 7 was impermissible and refused to enforce the NLRB order. The Fifth Circuit followed the lead of the Seventh and Fourth circuits which had refused to enforce the NLRB's previous decisions in Mobil Oil Corp. and Quality Mfg. Co. respectively.J. Weingarten, Inc., 85 F.2d at 1137. The Fifth Circuit argued that no union presence was necessary in Collins' questioning because the company was not attempting to bargain with her in any way. Additionally, the court argued that requiring a union representative any time the threat of discipline was present would extend the scope of the NLRA far too broadly.J. Weingarten, Inc., 85 F.2d at 1137-38. The NLRB appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States, which granted certiorari to hear the case.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 253.
US Supreme Court
The Supreme Court, reversing the Fifth Circuit,J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 258. held that the NLRB decision was appropriate because its interpretation of the NLRA was permissible.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 260. The Court explained that the NLRB is entrusted with the responsibility to adapt the NLRA to changing times and that as a result courts reviewing its decisions only have the authority to reject its interpretations of the NLRA if those decisions are impermissible under it.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 266-67. This also led to the Court's observation that the NLRB can change its interpretation of the NLRA over time and is not required to comply with its earlier decisions.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 265.
The Court held that in this case the NLRB's interpretation of Section 7 was permissible because union representation at employer inquiries constitutes "concerted activity for mutual aid or protection" under the statute. While a particular inquiry might only have implications for one worker, each employee has an interest in the outcome as it establishes rules they will have to follow in the future. The Court further pointed out that having a representative present will help the employee who may be too "fearful or inarticulate" to accurately participate in the investigation as well as the employer by eliciting facts and helping find other sources for the investigation.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 262-63. The Court also pointed out that requiring a union representative at inquiries was consistent with actual labor practice as something already found in many workplaces.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 267. As a result, the Court reversed and remanded directing the Fifth Circuit to enter a judgment enforcing the NLRB order. Justice Brennan said the following.
Chief Justice Burger dissented arguing that the NLRB had not adequately explained and justified its decision to impose the union representative presence requirement.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 268-69 (Burger, C.J., dissenting). He argued that the Court was not required to accept the NLRB decision because it was not adequately explained.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 269. Justice Burger stated that he would remand the case to the NLRB for a fuller explanation of its decision.
Justice Powell argued that the NLRB's interpretation of Section 7 was impermissible because having a union representative present during an investigation is a matter left by the NLRA to the bargaining process.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 270 (Powell, J., dissenting). He argued that the NLRA only creates the framework in which employers and unions bargain for employment benefits and does not cover specific benefits like the right to have a union representative present.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 273. He further explained that Section 7 only "protects those rights that are essential to employee self-organization" which did not include the right at issue in the case. As a result, he would have affirmed the Fifth Circuit because the right to the presence of a union representative was not covered by Section 7.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 275.
Justice Powell also prophetically noted that the rationales relied upon by the majority and the NLRB were applicable not only to unionized workplaces, but also to situations where there is no union.J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. at 270 n.1.
Significance
Since Weingarten was decided, the NLRB has extended and retracted its protections several times. While the right announced in the case has never been removed, the NLRB has changed its mind several times as to whether or not the right to have a representative present during investigations applies to non-union workplaces. In 1982 in the case of Materials Research Corp., the NLRB extended the right to workplaces that did not have unions. The NLRB reasoned that the right was derived from Section 7 of the NLRA rather than Section 9. While Section 9 covers the exclusive rights of unions to act in the collective bargaining process and are thus only available in unionized workplaces, Section 7 rights are available to employees without a union and thus do not vary based on whether the workplace is unionized. The NLRB further explained that the right to have another employee present during interviews that might lead to discipline helped to reduce the inequality between employees and management as intended by the NLRA. This would also be true regardless of whether a workplace was unionized.
However, the NLRB removed this right from non-unionized workplaces only three years later in the 1985 of Sears, Roebuck & Co. In that case, the NLRB explained that the right to a union representative during inquiries that could lead to discipline was appropriate because a union protects the rights of all workers by safeguarding the terms and conditions for each individual worker. However, when there is no union present the right is inappropriate because employers have the authority to deal with employees on an individual basis and the right to the presence of another employee interferes with that. The NLRB further explained that a representative protects the interests not just of the individual employee, but of the entire collective bargaining unit. As a result, giving employees in non-unionized workplaces is like requiring the employer to deal with the equivalent of a union representative which is not intended by the NLRA. As a result, employees who are not represented by unions do not have the right to a representative during inquiries.
In the 2001 case of Epilepsy Found. of Ne. Ohio, the NLRB again extended the right to non-unionized workplaces, and this decision was affirmed by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. Then, the NLRB again withdrew the right in the 2004 case of IBM Corp. The NLRB noted that either interpretation of the NLRA, extending the right to representation during investigations that may lead to discipline or not doing so, was permissible. Therefore, whether or not to extend the right is purely a policy decision for the NLRB to make. After considering the policy issues on both sides, the NLRB decided that the "employer's right to conduct prompt, efficient, thorough, and confidential workplace investigations" outweighed the employee's right to representation during those investigations and withdrew the right from workplaces without unions.
As of 2007, workers who are not union members do not have the right to the presence of a representative during management inquiries. However, since the NLRB has changed its decision on this issue over time, it is unclear whether that will be true in the future.
See also
US labor law
Weingarten Rights
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 420
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States labor case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:United Food and Commercial Workers
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
