"""

From "Commissioner v. Wodehouse" ==> """
Commissioner v. Wodehouse, 337 U.S. 369 (1949), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that lump sums paid in advance by publications to non-resident aliens are taxable income under the Revenue Act and are indistinguishable from "royalties" paid over time within the meaning of that Act..
 References 
External links
Category:1949 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States copyright case law
"""

From "Commodity Futures Trading Commission v. Schor" ==> """
Commodity Futures Trading Commission v. Schor, 478 U.S. 833 (1986), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held an administrative agency may, in some cases, exert jurisdiction over state-law counterclaims.Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n v. Schor, .
Background
The Commodity Exchange Act (CEA),  et seq., prohibits fraudulent conduct in the trading of futures contracts. In 1974, Congress amended the Act to create a more comprehensive regulatory framework for the trading of future contracts. To that end, Congress created an administrative agency called the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC). One of the duties assigned to the CFTC was the administration of a quasi-judicial reparations procedure by which customers of commodities brokers could seek legal redress for brokers’ alleged violations of the Act or other CFTC regulations. One of the CFTC's regulations also provided the agency to adjudicate counterclaims “arising out of the same transaction or occurrence or series of transactions or occurrences set forth in the complaint”. The section of the statute and the CFTC regulation at issue in this case, both of which were intended to provide an inexpensive and expeditious method for the settlement of futures contract-related claims, were challenged by the customers of a broker as being violative of Article III of the United States Constitution.
Facts & procedural history
In February 1980, respondents Schor and Mortgage Services of America, Inc. filed complaints with the CFTC against brokerage firm ContiCommodity Services, Inc. (Conti) and Richard L. Sandor, one of the firm's employees, alleging violations of the CEA. Meanwhile, Conti filed an action under diversity jurisdiction in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois to recover the debit balance in Schor's account. Schor filed a counterclaim in the federal suit, asserting the same charges against Conti it had made in its complaint to the CFTC. Schor moved to dismiss the district court action, but the judge declined. Conti then voluntarily dismissed the suit, in order to present its counterclaim against Schor for the debit balance as a defense in the CFTC action.
The Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) in the CFTC reparations proceeding ruled in Conti's favor on both claims, and it was at that point Schor challenged the CFTC's jurisdiction to hear Conti's counterclaim against him. The ALJ rejected this contention, and the CFTC declined to review the decision. Schor then petitioned the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit for review. The Court of Appeals held that the CFTC had jurisdiction over Schor's claim against Conti, but not over Conti's state-law based counterclaim against Schor for the debit balance, seeking to avoid the constitutional problems faced in Northern Pipeline Construction Co. v. Marathon Pipe Line Co..  The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari, vacated the judgment, and remanded the case back to the Court of Appeals for further consideration under Thomas v. Union Carbide Agricultural Products Co.. The Court of Appeals reinstated its previous judgment, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari again.
Majority opinion
Justice O’Connor, joined by Chief Justice Burger and Justices White, Blackmun, Powell, Rehnquist and Stevens, authored the opinion of the Court, addressing the statutory interpretation issue first. She held that the D.C. Circuit created a false distinction between the CFTC's jurisdiction over state law counterclaims and counterclaims arising under the CEA, simply to avoid a constitutional problem, and ignored the legislative intent of Congress in doing so. The situation faced by the litigants here was common: a claim and counterclaim arising out of the same transaction and occurrence, and it was well within the statutory jurisdiction of the CFTC to adjudicate such both actions. This is in keeping with Congress’ intent to create a more efficient means of adjudicating such disputes, as well as the administration's interpretation of the statute.
She then turned to the Article III issue. Justice O’Connor chose to interpret Article III liberally, examining the underlying purposes of adjudication of cases by an independent judiciary. The right to be heard by an Article III tribunal is not absolute, and is subject to waiver by the parties. In this case, Schor waived his right to a trial with respect to Conti's counterclaim, and elected to have the entire dispute resolved before the CFTC. It was only after the CFTC ruled against him that he challenged the agency's jurisdiction. To Justice O’Connor, Schor's actions constituted an express waiver of his right to a civil trial.
Additionally, Justice O’Connor held that Congress’ grant of judicial power to the CFTC for the adjudication of state-law counterclaims did not intrude on the powers of the judiciary. She concluded that while Congress could not vest administrative agencies with ancillary or pendent jurisdiction of all claims, it was not outright forbidden for Congress to vest an agency with such jurisdiction over some claims. Unlike the situation in Northern Pipeline, not only were the CFTC's orders reviewable in the U.S. district courts, the CFTC was not granted the full powers of an Article III court, and the parties were given the option of invoking the agency's jurisdiction, rather than being compelled to use it. Furthermore, any issue of intrusion upon the powers of state courts was irrelevant, Justice O’Connor reasoned, because federal courts may exercise ancillary jurisdiction over state law claims anyway.
Dissent
Justice Brennan, joined by Justice Marshall, dissented on the grounds that allowing Congress to grant such jurisdictional powers to administrative agencies eroded the powers of Article III courts, and deprived litigants of the impartial decision-making authority of an independent judiciary. He accused the majority of putting concerns of convenience and judicial economy ahead of separation of powers. Also, because the individual and structural/separation of powers issues served by Article III were “coextensive”, Brennan reasoned that the consent of the litigants to appear before a non-Article III tribunal should have no bearing on the legal analysis in this case.Schor, 478 U.S. at 867 (Brennan, J., dissenting).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 478
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Good Behavior Clause case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States commodity and futures case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana" ==> """
Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. 609 (1981), is a 6-to-3 ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that a severance tax in  Montana does not violate the Commerce Clause or the Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution..Elison, Larry M. and Snyder, Fritz. The Montana State Constitution: A Reference Guide. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Greenwood Publishing Group, 2001. 
Background
In 1975, concerned that Montana was a "stereotypical colonial state"Elison and Snyder, The Montana State Constitution: A Reference Guide, 2001, p. 174. with little economic development whose natural resources would be extracted and the state left with severe environmental degradation, the Montana State Legislature enacted a severance tax on each ton of coal mined in the state.Mathew, Hal. "Montana Looks to Days When Coal Is Gone." Los Angeles Times. May 6, 1979; "Plundered Butte Stands As A Warning to the West." The Spokesman-Review. June 24, 1979. Then-Governor Tom Judge called the statute "the most significant piece of legislation enacted in Montana in this century."Malone, Michael P.; Roeder, Richard B.; and Lang, William L. Montana: A History of Two Centuries. 2d rev. ed. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2003.  It was attacked in a RAND Corporation study (partly financed by the National Academies of Science) as excessive."Coal Tax Found Excessive In Great Plains States." Associated Press. November 28, 1976. An amendment was proposed and adopted in 1976 requiring that at least one-fourth of the coal severance tax be deposited into a Permanent Coal Tax Trust Fund and that, after 1979, at least half the tax revenues be deposited into the fund. The fund could not be tapped unless three-fourths of each chamber of the state legislature voted to do so.Merrill-Maker, Andrea. Montana Almanac. 2d ed. Guilford, Conn.: Globe Pequot, 2005.  The tax, levied on the cost "at the mine mouth," varied depending on the market value of the coal, the coal's energy content, and the method of extraction.Coal Tax Oversight Subcommittee. Montana Legislature. Reappraising Montana's Coal Severance Tax: Report and Recommendations of Coal Tax Oversight Subcommittee. Helena, Mont.: Montana Legislative Council, November 1984. Generally speaking, most sub-bituminous coal was taxed at a rate of 30% and lignite coal at 20%.
Coal producers in Montana and 11 out-of-state utilities (including Commonwealth Edison) challenged the constitutionality of the severance tax, arguing it was invalid under the Commerce and Supremacy Clauses of the U.S. Constitution."Coal Tax Legal Aid Sought." Associated Press. April 19, 1978; "Coal Tax Fight Looms." Associated Press. May 1, 1978; "Utilities File Suit Over Tax On Coal." Associated Press. June 21, 1978; "State Initiates Coal Tax Defense." Associated Press. September 9, 1978. The Montana state district court for Lewis and Clark County dismissed the complaint in July 1979."State in 'Strong Position' to Meet Appeals." Associated Press. July 28, 1979. Montana State Attorney General Mike Greely hailed the decision, declaring "Montana will never again roll over and play dead when big outside interests decide to take our resources." The plaintiffs appealed to the Montana Supreme Court. Additional Midwestern utilities joined the suit, claiming that the state of Montana was acting like OPEC and accusing Montanans of being "blue-eyed Arabs"."Montana Unfairly Profits, Coal Users Say of Tax." Chicago Tribune. April 20, 1980"U.S. Coal States Study OPEC's Ways of Raising Revenues." Los Angeles Times. September 15, 1980Light, Alfred R. "Drawing the Wagons into a Circle: Sectionalism and Energy Politics." Publius. 1978 The Montana Supreme Court upheld the tax's constitutionality on July 17, 1980.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. State, 189 Mont. 191, 615 P.2d 847 (Mont. 1980)."Coal, Utility Interests Appeal Severance Tax.  Associated Press. October 17, 1980. The utilities appealed, and the U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari in December 1980."Supreme Court Will Rule on Right of Access to Federal Contractor Records." Los Angeles Times. December 9, 1980; "Court to Study State Tax on Exported Coal." New York Times. December 9, 1980..
Ruling
Majority
Justice Marshall wrote the decision for the majority. He was joined by Chief Justice Burger and Justices Brennan, Stewart, White and Rehnquist.
Justice Marshall addressed the Commerce Clause issue first. The majority agreed with Commonwealth Edison's claim that, even though a tax is imposed before the goods become interstate commerce, this does not mean the tax evades constitutional analysis.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 615. Rejecting the reasoning in Heisler v. Thomas Colliery Co.,. the majority "disapproved" of any distinction between intrastate and interstate commerce based on the idea that the Commerce Clause denies states the right to burden interstate commerce, and concluded that state severance taxes came under the jurisdiction of the Constitution's Commerce Clause.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 614–617.Although Justice Marshall said in Footnote 7 that Heisler and its "progeny" had not been overruled, legal scholars argue that it is effectively overturned. See: Brenner, Saul and Spaeth, Harold J. Stare Indecisis: The Alteration of Precedent on the Supreme Court, 1946–1992. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995.  The respondents argued that the appropriate test for evaluating a tax under the Commerce Clause should be the four-prong test set forth in Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. Brady,. and that the Montana tax violated the third prong of the Complete Auto Transit test by discriminating against out-of-state consumers of Montana's coal.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 617–618. But the majority concluded no discrimination existed, because the tax burden was borne equally by all out-of-state consumers.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 618–619. The appellants also argued the tax violated the fourth prong of the test because it was not "fairly related to the services provided by the State" (e.g., the amount of the tax collected exceeds the cost of services provided).Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 620. But the majority disagreed: Commonwealth Edison had fundamentally misconstrued the Court's test in Complete Auto. The Montana Supreme Court had characterized the severance tax as intended for general government purposes, a finding the U.S. Supreme Court refused to dispute.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 621. Thus, there could be no "excessiveness" test.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 621–622, 627–628. Nor was there any question that the state of Montana had the right to levy the tax for the purposes it did.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 622–25. Justice Marshall next identified how the fourth prong of the Complete Auto test should be interpreted:
The relevant inquiry under the fourth prong of the Complete Auto Transit test is not, as appellants suggest, the amount of the tax or the value of the benefits allegedly bestowed as measured by the costs the State incurs on account of the taxpayer's activities. Rather, the test is closely connected to the first prong of the Complete Auto Transit test. Under this threshold test, the interstate business must have a substantial nexus with the State before any tax may be levied on it. See National Bellas Hess, Inc. v. Illinois Revenue Dept., 386 U.S. 753 (1967). Beyond that threshold requirement, the fourth prong of the Complete Auto Transit test imposes the additional limitation that the measure of the tax must be reasonably related to the extent of the contact, since it is the activities or presence of the taxpayer in the State that may properly be made to bear a "just share of state tax burden," Western Live Stock v. Bureau of Revenue, 303 U.S., at 254. See National Geographic Society v. California Board of Equalization, 430 U.S. 551 (1977); Standard Pressed Steel Co. v. Washington Revenue Dept., 419 U.S. 560 (1975).Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 625–626 (footnotes omitted).
The Court held that the Montana severance tax easily met this test.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 626–627. The Court refused to decide whether a tax could ever be "too high" under the Constitution, leaving this judgment expressly to the legislative branch.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 627–629.
Justice Marshall next addressed whether the tax violated the Supremacy Clause. The first contention was that the tax interfered with the purposes of the Mineral Lands Leasing Act of 1920, 30 U.S.C. § 181 et seq., et seq. as amended by the Federal Coal Leasing Amendments Act of 1975, P.L. 94-377.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 629. But the Court observed that the Mineral Lands Leasing Act of 1920 expressly authorizes states to impose severance and excise taxes on coal mined from federal land, and that the Supreme Court had agreed with this interpretation of the law in Mid-Northern Oil Co. v. Walker..Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 631–633. There was nothing in the legislative history of either the 1920 Act or the 1975 Amendments to indicate otherwise; indeed, if a state severance tax were found to interfere with federal leases, all such taxes (of any amount) would have to be enjoined—an outcome Congress clearly did not intend.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 632–633. Appellants had also argued that the Montana tax "frustrated" the broad goals of national energy policy, but the Court refused to agree on two grounds.  First, the Court would not overturn a state act unless "the nature of the regulated subject matter permits no other conclusion, or that the Congress has unmistakably so ordained."
Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 634, quoting . Second, the Supreme Court found that during debates over recent national energy legislation Congress had been fully cognizant of the Montana tax and had refused to take action to pre-empt it or ameliorate its impact on other states.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 633–637.
In a brief concurrence, Justice White called the issues involved "troubling". Nonetheless, "Congress has the power to protect interstate commerce from intolerable or even undesirable burdens," he wrote, and "The constitutional authority and the machinery to thwart efforts such as those of Montana, if thought unacceptable, are available to Congress... . As I presently see it, therefore, the better part of both wisdom and valor is to respect the judgment of the other branches of the Government."Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 637–638 (White, J., concurring).
Dissent
Justice Blackmun dissented, joined by Justices Powell and Stevens.
For Justice Blackmun, the issue was whether the Montana severance tax constituted a "tailored tax" in violation of the test in Complete Auto Transit.Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. Brady, 430 U.S. 274, 288–289. He was deeply troubled by the fact that Montana had control over one-quarter of the nation's coal reserves and nearly total control of the nation's low-sulfur coal reserves, and that most of these reserves lay under land controlled by the federal government.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 638–644 (Blackmun, J., dissenting). In addition, Blackmun argued there was a "tension" in the Court's ruling as to whether interstate commerce should be relatively unhindered from interference by state taxation and whether states should be allowed to recoup costs associated with interstate commerce.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 644. Blackmun agreed with the majority that the tax was not discriminatory.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 644–45. But he disagreed that the tax did not burden interstate commerce, characterizing the majority's ruling as making Montana free "to tax this coal at 100% or even 1,000% of value, should it choose to do so."Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 644–645. Blackmun characterized the majority's decision as "mechanical," and claimed it was not in step with prior Court rulings on burdensome taxation.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 646–648. Blackmun further argued that the Montana severance tax was a "tailored tax" because it only taxed coal destined for interstate commerce, and thus deserved stricter scrutiny under the Complete Auto test.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 649–651. Accordingly, given the economic conditions and importance of national energy policy, Blackmun would have remanded the case for trial for further determination of these issues.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 651–653. Blackmun agreed with the majority, however, that there was no Supremacy Clause issue.Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. at 653.
Further developments and rulings
Beginning in 1987, Montana reduced its tax on bituminous coal to 15% and on lignite coal to 10%, and exempting the first 20,000 tons (later, 50,000 tons) of coal mined from any tax whatsoever. In 1992, the state legislature created a "Treasure State Endowment Trust Fund" under the Permanent Coal Tax Trust Fund, and diverted money from the Permanent Fund into the Endowment Fund for the purposes of supporting local government. A 1999 state law subsequently enacted a "licensing fee" equal to 50% of the severance tax, and allowed each coal mining company to apply up to 101% of the license against the severance tax (effectively halving the tax on coal mined in the state). A coalitions of citizens sued, arguing this illegally diverted funds from the Permanent Trust. In Montanans for the Coal Trust v. State,  the Montana Supreme Court agreed and enjoined the licensing law.Montanans for the Coal Trust v. State, 298 Mont. 69, 996 P.2d 856 (2000).
The U.S. Supreme Court had a second occasion to address issues with the Montana coal severance tax in 1998. In 1904, the Crow Nation ceded part of its tribal reservation back to the government of the United States. The federal government continued to hold the mineral rights under these lands in trust for the tribe. Montana's coal severance tax applied to coal mined on both the ceded federal land as well as land beneath the Crow Nation. The Crow Nation sued, claiming that the Montana tax impinged on their tribal sovereignty and was pre-empted by federal law.  In the landmark Indian law case, Montana v. Crow Tribe of Indians, the U.S. Supreme Court disagreed on both counts, reversing the previous judgments of the Ninth Circuit.National Indian Law Library. Landmark Indian Law Cases. Rev. ed. Buffalo, N.Y.: Wm. S. Hein Publishing, 2002. 
Assessment
Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana has been criticized by legal scholars for overturning Heisler v. Thomas Colliery Co. and subsequent rulings.May, Christopher N. and Ides, Allen. Constitutional Law, National Power and Federalism: Examples and Explanations. 4th ed. New York: Aspen Publishers Online, 2007. ; Tribe, Laurence. American Constitutional Law. 2d ed. Mineola, N.Y.: Foundation Press, 1988. 
Other legal scholars criticize the ruling for, in their view, undermining the importance of the fourth prong of the Complete Auto Transit test.Levy, Leonard Williams; Karst, Kenneth L.; and Winkler, Adam. Encyclopedia of the American Constitution, Volume 4. 2d ed. New York: Macmillan Reference USA, 2000. 
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:Montana state case law
Category:Environmental tax
Category:Taxation in Montana
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:1981 in Montana
Category:Exelon
Category:Mining in Montana
Category:Coal mining in the United States
Category:Severance taxes
"""

From "Communications Workers of America v. Beck" ==> """
Communications Workers of America v. Beck, 487 U.S. 735 (1988), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court which held that, in a union security agreement, unions are authorized by statute to collect from non-members only those fees and dues necessary to perform its duties as a collective bargaining representative..  The rights identified by the Court in Communications Workers of America v. Beck have since come to be known as "Beck rights," and defining what Beck rights are and how a union must fulfill its duties regarding them is an active area of modern United States labor law.Ford, Karen E.; Notestine, Kerry E.; and Hill, Richard N. Fundamentals of Employment Law. 2d ed. Washington, D.C.: American Bar Association, 2000. 
Background
The union security agreement is a contractual agreement, usually part of a union collective bargaining agreement, in which an employer and a trade or labor union agree on the extent to which the union may compel employees to join the union, and/or whether the employer will collect dues, fees, and assessments on behalf of the union. Broadly speaking, there are three types of union security agreements:
 The closed shop, where only union members may be hired, and an employee must remain a union member in order to remain employed;
 The union shop, where the employer may hire union or non-union workers, but employees must join the union in order to remain employed; and
 The agency shop, where the employer may hire union or non-union workers, and employees need not join the union in order to remain employed.  However, the non-union worker must pay a fee to cover collective bargaining costs.
In the United States, the fee paid by non-union members under the agency shop is known as the "agency fee." Where the agency shop is illegal, as is common in labor law governing American public sector unions, a "fair share provision" may be agreed to by the union and the employer. The provision requires non-union employees a pay "fair share fee" to cover the costs of the union's collective bargaining activities. The "fair share" is similar to the agency shop, but usually more restrictive as to what may be charged to the non-member.
In the United States, unions established the closed shop, union shop, and agency shop since at least the 1880s.Foner, Philip S. History of the Labor Movement in the United States. Vol. 5: The AFL in the Progressive Era, 1910–1915. New York: International Publishers, 1980.  The National Labor Relations Act (NLRA), the primary federal law governing labor relations in the United States, was enacted in 1935 and formally legalized the closed shop, union shop, or agency shop. In 1947, however, Congress enacted the Taft-Hartley Act, which amended the NLRA.  Title I, Section 101 of the Taft-Hartley Act added a new Section 14 to the NLRA, part (b) of which banned the closed shop:
Nothing in this Act shall be construed as authorizing the execution or application of agreements requiring membership in a labor organization as a condition of employment in any State or Territory in which such execution or application is prohibited by State or Territorial law.Title I, Sec. 101. An Act to Amend the National Labor Relations Act, to Provide Additional Facilities for the Mediation of Labor Disputes Affecting Commerce, to Equalize Legal Responsibilities of Labor Organizations and Employers, and for Other Purposes. (80 Pub.L. 101.) June 23, 1947.
The Taft-Haftley Act did not, however, outlaw the union shop or agency shop (although it did place some procedural restrictions on their establishment and use).
During World War II, Congress also banned union political contributions to federal campaigns. The Smith-Connally Act, enacted in 1943, banned the use of union members' dues to make direct contributions to candidates for federal office but did not ban indirect expenditures which educated union members or the public about a candidate's voting record.La Raja, Raymond J. Small Change: Money, Political Parties, and Campaign Finance Reform. Ann Arbor, Mich.: University of Michigan Press, 2008.  The Taft-Hartley Act made the ban permanent.Goidel, Robert K.; Gross, Donald August; and Shields, Todd G. Money Matters: Consequences of Campaign Finance Reform in U.S. House Elections. New York: Rowman & Littlefield, 1999. Smith, Bradley A. Unfree Speech: The Folly of Campaign Finance Reform. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2001.  In 1948, the U.S. Supreme Court held that the Taft-Hartley Act's ban on use of union dues for political purposes did not extend to internal communications directed at a union's own members.. Eleven years later, the Court refused to consider a federal district court's ruling that Taft-Hartley Act did not ban expenditure of union dues on communications with the public..
Disputes over the constitutional and statutory status of union shop and agency shop agreements began almost immediately after the passage of the Taft-Hartley Act. In the Supreme Court's first major ruling on the issue in Railway Employees' Dept. v. Hanson, 351 U.S. 225 (1956),. the Court held that the union security provisions of the Railway Labor Act were constitutional, but withheld judgment as to "the validity or enforceability of a union or closed shop agreement if other conditions of union membership are imposed or if the exaction of dues, initiation fees or assessments is used as a cover for forcing ideological conformity or other action in contravention of the First or the Fifth Amendment."Hanson, 351 U.S. at 238. The ruling in Hanson appeared to call into serious question the viability of union shop agreements. Five years later, in Machinists v. Street, 367 U.S. 740 (1961), the Court held that the Railway Labor Act "denies the authority to a union, over the employee's objection, to spend his money for political causes which he opposes.". The high court also confronted the issue of remedy in Machinists v. Street, and outlined several options which unions and employers might adopt as well as rejecting remedies which the district court in the case had chosen.Street, 367 U.S. at 771–775.  The Supreme Court returned to the union security issue three more times in 1963.  In NLRB v. General Motors Corp., 373 U.S. 734 (1963), the Court held that agency fees equal to dues are not prohibited by the National Labor Relations Act.. Nonetheless, in Retail Clerks v. Schermerhorn, 373 U.S. 746 (1963), the Court questioned whether an agency fee set at a level equal to member dues was unfair because it set collective bargaining fees higher for non-members than for members."...if nonmember payments, equal to those of a member, go entirely for collective bargaining costs, the nonmember will pay more of these expenses than his pro rata share. The member will pay less and to that extent a portion of his fees and dues is available to pay institutional expenses. The union's budget is balanced. By paying a larger share of collective bargaining costs the nonmember subsidizes the union's institutional activities. . After reargument, however, the Court in Retail Clerks v. Schermerhorn, 375 U.S. 96 (1963), did not reach the issue again and instead decided the case on narrow procedural grounds (concluding that Florida's right-to-work law outlawed the union shop provision at issue)..Twomey, David. Labor and Employment Law: Text & Cases. 14th ed. Florence, Ky.: Cengage Learning, 2009.  The Court further elaborated on the issue of remedies in Railway Clerks v. Allen, 373 U.S. 113 (1963), allowing agency fee payers to opt out of all political expenditures rather than enunciate specific examples but refusing to allow them to act as a class.. The Supreme Court extended its constitutional and equity analysis to public employees in Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, 431 U.S. 209 (1977), holding that, where public employee collective bargaining exists and agency fee clauses are clearly authorized by law, public employee agency fee mechanisms are also constitutional.Carelli, Richard. "Ruling Eases Non-Union Dues Payments." Associated Press. June 29, 1988..
Similarly, the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) had had occasion since 1945 to address the union shop and agency fee issues. Among its key cases was In re Union Starch & Refining Co., 87 NLRB 779, (1949).In re Union Starch & Refining Co.,  87 NLRB 779, (1949), enf'd, 186 F.2d 1008 (7th Cir. 1951), cert. denied, 342 U.S. 815 (1951).Beck, 487 U.S. at 767.  The Board held in Union Starch that unions were permitted to charge nonmembers agency fees that were nearly equal to full union dues so long as these agency fees were uniform in nature and no additional requirements were made in violation of NLRA Section 8(a)(3)(B) or §8(b)(2).In re Union Starch & Refining Co., 87 NLRB 779. A second important case,Beck, 487 U.S. at 754. Teamsters Local No. 959, 167 NLRB 1042 (1967), the Board concluded that special assessments or fees could not be part of the agency fee.Teamsters Local No. 959,  167 NLRB 1042 (1967). Reacting to the Supreme Court's ruling in Retail Clerks v. Schermerhorn,Detroit Mailers Union No. 40,  192 NLRB 951, 952 (1971). the Board held in Detroit Mailers Union No. 40, 192 NLRB 951 (1971) that certain fraternal activities may be included in the agency fee so long as they are not special assessments.Detroit Mailers Union No. 40, 192 NLRB 951 (1971). The Board also ruled repeatedly on a number of issues associated with agency fees. It held in several cases that the NLRA does not permit the collection of assessments through the agency fee.H. Muehlstein & Co., 118 NLRB 268 (1957); Convair (Pomona), 122 NLRB 1531 (1959), rev. (other grounds) NLRB v. Guided Missile Lodge 1254, 241 F.2d 695 (9th Cir. 1957); Tom's Monarch Laundry & Cleaning Co., 161 NLRB 740 (1966); International Longshoremen's Ass'n. Local 1180, 266 NLRB 954 (1982). The RLA, in contrast, does.Electric Auto-Lite Co., 92 NLRB 1073 (1950), aff'd,  The Board also held that when determining what an assessment is, facts (not labels) matter most.International Harvester Co., 95 NLRB 730 (951).Tool and Die Makers Lodge No. 113, IAM, 207 NLRB 795 (1973), en'fcd. NLRB v. Die & Tool Makers Lodge 113, 231 F.2d 298 (7th Cir. 1956); Anaconda Copper Mining Co., 110 NLRB 1925 (1954).
In the years just before the Supreme Court took up the Beck case, however, it elaborated on its previous agency fee rulings.  In Ellis v. Railway Clerks, 466 U.S. 435 (1984), the Supreme Court concluded that the agency fee may only cover those activities directly related to the union's role as a collective bargaining representative.  These included national conventions (where dues levels were set and union programs debated and established), social activities (which enhanced union solidarity, especially during negotiations), grievance handling, contract negotiation costs, and union communications, but excluded union organizing activities.Belman, Dale; Gunderson, Morley; and Hyatt, Douglas. Public Sector Employment in a Time of Transition. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1996. . The Court in Ellis also wrestled with the issue of rebates, and concluded that a union could not simply rebate agency fees to workers for that would essentially constitute a forced, interest-free loan from the worker to the union. In 1985, the Court held in Pattern Makers v. NLRB, 473 U.S. 95 (1985), that a union member may resign at any time without notice.. Thus, Pattern Makers further undermined the union shop by giving workers the right to resign from the union at any time and incur no penalty (such as termination of employment).  The Court also crafted additional rules regarding agency fees in Teachers v. Hudson, 475 U.S. 292 (1986). In Teachers, the union had failed to minimize the risk that agency fees might be used for impermissible purposes and had failed to provide agency fee payers with adequate information about how the agency fee was calculated.. Now the Supreme Court imposed a third requirement, that agency fee payers must be offered a timely, fair, and objective mechanism for challenging the computation of agency fees. The Court did uphold, however, the use of interest-bearing escrow accounts for holding disputed dues.Teachers, 475 U.S. at 309–310.
Despite these many rulings, the Supreme Court had never extended its agency fee rulings to unions covered by the National Labor Relations Act and many lower courts were confused as to the state of the law. In 1986, the 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals ruled against non-union workers in a case very similar to Beck involving the United Auto Workers.Price v. Auto Workers, 795 F.2d 1128 (1986).
Beck's complaint and lawsuit
In 1968, the Communications Workers of America (CWA) used union members' dues, in part, to support Vice President Hubert Humphrey's campaign for President of the United StatesSawyer, Kathy. "Union Ordered to Refund Dues to 18 C&P Workers." Washington Post. March 8, 1983. and Senator Joseph Tydings' re-election campaign.
Harry Beck was a maintenance worker with the Chesapeake & Potomac Telephone Co. (C&PT) in Maryland and a CWA organizer.Federman, Stan. "Man, Union Spar On Political use of 'Agency Fee'." The Oregonian. January 25, 1988. Beck protested the use of his union dues for a political cause in which he did not believe and asked for a refund. The CWA refused, arguing that using union dues for political expenditures was appropriate and legal. In the early 1970s, after disagreeing with national CWA officials over a union organizing drive in suburban Baltimore, Maryland, Beck resigned from the union and began to pay the $10-a-month agency fee. Beck continued to protest the use of his agency fee for political purposes, and asked the CWA to provide a more accurate accounting of how much money it spent on politics. The union refused. In June 1976, Beck and 19 other non-union members of the CWA's bargaining unit at C&PT sued the union for a refund.Beck, 487 U.S. at 739–740. The National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation provided legal counsel and support to Beck and the other 18 workers. Beck quit C&PT in 1979 and moved to Oregon, where he worked at CWA-organized job at American Telephone & Telegraph and continued to pay his agency fee.
The issue of agency fee payments was a national and serious one.  By 1984, about 5 percent of employees at work sites covered by a union contract had opted not to join the union and instead pay an agency fee.Perl, Peter. "The Case of the Reluctant Union Contributor." Washington Post. November 2, 1984. In 1987, the same number of workers covered by CWA contracts were agency fee payers. At the time of the Beck case in 1987, a majority of unions had set the agency fee about equal to full union dues."Court to Rule on Union Dues." United Press International. June 1, 1987. More than 90 percent of all collective bargaining agreements (covering six million workers) made under the authority of the NLRA contained an agency fee provision.
Prior disposition
U.S. District Court Judge James R. Miller, Jr. ruled in favor of Beck and the 19 other co-plaintiffs in March 1983.Beck, 487 U.S. at 740. Beck et al. claimed that CWA had not only breached its duty of fair representation but had also violated the agency fee payers' First Amendment rights as enunciated by the Supreme Court in Railway Employes' Dept. v. Hanson. Applying the clear and convincing evidence standard, the district court found that CWA could not show that 21 percent of the agency fee was spent on collective bargaining purposes alone, ordered an immediate refund of all dues collected since January 1976, and directed CWA to establish a record-keeping system which segregated collective bargaining and non-collective bargaining accounts. The refund was about $5,000 for all 20 workers.
CWA (and many other unions) quickly implemented a time-and-expenditures accounting system to meet the court's order. CWA also appealed the ruling.
United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit agreed to hear CWA's appeal in November 1984, and handed down its ruling in October 1985. In a 2-to-1 ruling, the appellate court upheld the district court's ruling.Beck, 487 U.S. at 740–741. The 4th Circuit Court found that the district court had erred in applying the clear and convincing standard, but on the basis of a statutory interpretation of the NLRA and the duty of fair representation claim found that the district court had correctly concluded that the agency fee was being illegally spent on items not related to collective bargaining. CWA petitioned for a rehearing en banc, which was granted in April 1986. In a per curiam decision issued in September 1986, the 10 judges ruled 6-to-4 that the court had jurisdiction over the case on one or more grounds.Five of the six judges held that the appellate court had jurisdiction on the duty of fair representation issue but not constitutional grounds.  A sixth judge held that the appeallate court had jurisdiction on constitutional grounds and duty of fair representation, but did not concur with the other five judges on the reasoning regarding jurisdiction over the duty of fair representation issue. Since six of the 10 judges felt the appellate court had jurisdiction of some sort, the appellate court agreed to hear the case. Beck v. Communications Workers of America, 800 F.2d 1280 (4th Cir. 1986). The majority also held that the three-judge panel had ruled correctly, and held in favor of Beck again.  CWA appealed again.
The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari on May 31, 1987.. In a surprising move, the U.S. Department of Justice supported CWA's appeal. The Solicitor General at the time, Charles Fried, argued that the voluntary nature of collective bargaining agreements (including agency fee clauses) made the issue of coercion moot.Fried, Charles. Order and Law: Arguing the Reagan Revolution: A Firsthand Account. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1990.  Because states could and did ban agency fee agreements, there was no governmental action on which to base a constitutional claim against the union. And because Section 8(a)3 plainly requires uniform dues and fees (e.g., unions could not charge agency fee payers more nor less than regular members), the Justice Department felt Beck's claim was unjustified. Upset by the Justice Department's stand, Republican Senators Jesse Helms, Dan Quayle, Steve Symms, and Strom Thurmond filed an amicus curiae brief urging the Supreme Court to rule in Beck's favor.
The Beck case was argued before the Supreme Court on January 11, 1988.
At the time, however, there was a concern that the court could split and issue no ruling.Savage, David G. "Justices to Hear Controversial Cases." Los Angeles Times. January 11, 1988. Associate Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr. had retired from the Supreme Court on June 26, 1987. President Ronald Reagan nominated Judge Robert Bork of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia to fill Powell's seat on July 1, but after a contentious nomination battle the U.S. Senate rejected Bork's nomination 58-to-42 on October 23.Bronner, Ethan. Battle for Justice: How the Bork Nomination Shook America. New York: Sterling, 2007.  Six days later, President Reagan nominated Douglas H. Ginsburg, Bork's fellow judge on the D.C. circuit court of appeals, for the Supreme Court. But Ginsburg withdrew his nomination eight days later after media reports that he had occasionally smoked marijuana as a law student and law professor. Reagan nominated Anthony Kennedy, a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, for the high court on November 11, 1987. Kennedy was unanimously confirmed on February 3, 1988.Greenhouse, Linda. "Senate, 97 to 0, Confirms Kennedy to High Court." New York Times. February 4, 1988. Kennedy had been unable to participate in oral argument in the Beck case, and Supreme Court tradition holds that a justice who has not participated in oral argument cannot participate in the decision a case (with only a few, rare exceptions).Brigham, John. The Cult of the Court. Reprint ed. Philadelphia, Pa.: Temple University Press, 1991. 
Ruling
Associate Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. delivered the opinion of the Court, joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Associate Justices Byron White, Thurgood Marshall, and John Paul Stevens.Beck, 487 U.S. at 738. Associate Justices Harry Blackmun, Sandra Day O'Connor, and Antonin Scalia joined in Parts I and II.  Justice Blackmun filed a concurring opinion in part and a dissenting opinion in part, in which Justices O'Connor and Scalia joined.  Associate Justice Anthony Kennedy took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.
The 20 workers sought relief on three claims: 1) That the agency fee was too high to cover only collective bargaining activities as authorized by NLRA Section 8(a)(3); 2) That the high agency fee breached the CWA's duty of fair representation; and 3) That the high agency fee violated the workers' First Amendment rights.Beck, 487 U.S. at 742.
Justice Brennan first addressed the jurisdictional question that divided the 4th Circuit Court of Appeals and asserted court jurisdiction over both the duty of fair representation and constitutional challenges.Beck, 487 U.S. at 742–744.
Brennan next turned to the workers' first two claims.  The majority noted that NLRA Section 8(a)(3) contains two provisions which clearly permit agency fee agreements.Beck, 487 U.S. at 744–745. For the majority, "The statutory question presented in this case, then, is whether this 'financial core' includes the obligation to support union activities beyond those germane to collective bargaining, contract administration, and grievance adjustment. We think it does not."Beck, 487 U.S. at 745. The majority reviewed the Court's previous decision in Machinists v. Street and found it controlling. The majority further concluded that Section 8(a)(3) and Section 2, Eleventh of the Railway Labor Act were statutorily equivalent.Beck, 487 U.S. at 745–746. The majority reviewed at length the legislative history of both the Railway Labor Act and the National Labor Relations Act to provide support for this conclusion, and to show why in each case Congress had approved of agency fee agreements.Beck, 487 U.S. at 747–761. Relying on the Court's analysis of the Railway Labor Act in Street, the Supreme Court said CWA was not justified in concluding that Section 8(a)(3) permits the collection of agency fees in excess of the amount necessary to cover the costs of collective bargaining.Beck, 487 U.S. at 754–755. The majority further found that the legislative history of the NLRA, the Taft-Hartley Act, and the Railway Labor Act (RLA) showed that Congress intended to restrict agency fee agreements to cover collective bargaining alone and no other purposes.Beck, 487 U.S. at 755–761.
Turning to the constitutional question, Brennan wrestled with the fact that "...in Railway Employees v. Hanson, 351 U.S. 225 (1956), [the Court held] that because the RLA pre-empts all state laws banning union-security agreements, the negotiation and enforcement of such provisions in railroad industry contracts involves 'governmental action' and is therefore subject to constitutional limitations."Beck, 487 U.S. at 761. The question before the Court in Beck, then, was whether such governmental action extended to the acts of unions in the private sector where there was no such federal pre-emption. CWA argued that because Section 14(b) of the NLRA permits each state make its own choice in this regard, there could be no federal pre-emption and thus no governmental action. Brennan concluded for the majority that the Supreme Court need not decide the issue: The Court's doctrine was to rule narrowly on grounds of statutory construction where possible, and that issue had already been decided on statutory grounds in the workers' favor.Beck, 487 U.S. at 761–762.
The Supreme Court affirmed the judgment of 4th Circuit Court of Appeals.Beck, 487 U.S. at 762.
Dissent
Associate Justice Blackmun, joined by Justices O'Connor and Scalia, concurred with the majority's assertion of jurisdiction in Part I of the ruling and with the majority's decision in the breach of duty of fair representation claim in Part II, but dissented from Part III and the holding in Part IV.Beck, 487 U.S. at 763 (Blackmun, J., dissenting). For Blackmun, the problem was that the majority had relied too heavily on Street, not utilized its traditional methods of statutory construction, and substituted a new method of statutory construction to "strain" to make Beck accord with Street:
Without the decision in Machinists v. Street, 367 U.S. 740 (1961), involving the Railway Labor Act (RLA), the Court could not reach the result it does today. Our accepted mode of resolving statutory questions would not lead to a construction of 8(a)(3) so foreign to that section's express language and legislative history, which show that Congress did not intend to limit either the amount of "agency fees" (or what the majority labels "dues-equivalents") a union may collect under a union-security agreement, or the union's expenditure of such funds. The Court's excessive reliance on Street to reach a contrary conclusion is manifested by its unique line of reasoning. No sooner is the language of 8(a)(3) intoned, than the Court abandons all attempt at construction of this statute and leaps to its interpretation over a quarter century ago of another statute enacted by a different Congress, a statute with a distinct history and purpose. See ante, at 744–745. I am unwilling to offend our established doctrines of statutory construction and strain the meaning of the language used by Congress in 8(a)(3), simply to conform 8(a)(3)'s construction to the Court's interpretation of similar language in a different later-enacted statute, an interpretation which is itself "not without its difficulties." Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, 431 U.S. 209, 232 (1977) (characterizing the Court's decision in Street). I therefore dissent from Parts III and IV of the Court's opinion.Beck, 487 U.S. at 763–764.
Blackmun then applied a plain meaning construction of the statutory language to both the RLA and NLRA, and concluded that CWA had not violated the NLRA.Beck, 487 U.S. at 764–769. The NLRB, Blackmun said, had not changed its policy on agency fees nor its justifications for its conclusions. Justice Blackmun pointed to the NLRB's decision in In re Union Starch & Refining Co. and Detroit Mailers Union No. 40, and noted that the Justice Department had adopted a similar view in its amicus curiae brief. Blackmun also chastised the majority for mis-stating the NLRB's conclusion in Teamsters Local 959:
Contrary to the Court's suggestion, the NLRB has not embraced and then "repudiated" the view that, for purposes of § 8(a)(3), "periodic dues and initiation fees" mean only "those fees necessary to finance collective-bargaining activities." Ante, at 752, n. 7. Teamsters Local No. 959, 167 N. L. R. B. 1042 (1967), does not demonstrate otherwise. In Teamsters Local, the NLRB held that "working dues" designated to fund a union building program and a credit union were actually "assessments" not contemplated by the proviso to § 8(a)(3). Id., at 1044. The Board found that the union itself regarded the levy as a "temporary assessment," clearly distinct from its "regular dues." Ibid. Moreover, because the financing for the programs was constructed in such a way that the union treasury might never have received 90% of the moneys, the Board concluded that the "working dues" were actually "special purposes funds," and that "the support of such funds cannot come from 'periodic dues' as that term is used in § 8(a)(3)." Ibid. In Detroit Mailers, the NLRB distinguished such assessments from "periodic and uniformly required" dues, which, in its view, a union is not precluded from demanding of nonmembers pursuant to § 8(a)(3). 192 N. L. R. B., at 952.
Blackmun noted that "the majority cannot cite one case in which the Board has held that uniformly required, periodic dues used for purposes other than 'collective bargaining' are not dues within the meaning of §8(a)(3).
Like the majority, Blackmun too extensively reviewed the history of the RLA and NLRA but rejected the majority's reading of those histories.Beck, 487 U.S. at 769–780. The Supreme Court had previously held that the RLA was not identical to the NLRA, he wrote, and had cautioned lower courts and appellants that they should draw parallels between the two statutes very carefully. The majority, Blackmun concluded, had not made a careful comparison this time, and therefore its conclusions based on the similarities between the RLA and NLRA should be rejected.Beck, 487 U.S. at 776–777.
Critiques of the Beck ruling
A number of criticisms have been made of the Beck ruling. These critiques include those made by supporters of the decision who feel the Supreme Court did not go far enough, and critiques made by those who feel the Court's ruling was wrongly decided.
A number of legal scholars who support the outcome of the ruling nonetheless criticize the Supreme Court's approach to Beck's First Amendment challenge. These scholars strongly criticize the Court for not deciding the case on First Amendment grounds, and argue that a constitutional ruling on agency fee issues would provide for clearer decisions, a sounder basis for workers to challenge agency fee calculations, and enhanced free speech rights not only for dissenting workers but for all employees.
A second major criticism of the case is that the Court did not clearly define what the First Amendment violation was.  The Supreme Court has a long-standing doctrine of not ruling on a statute's constitutionality if a case may be decided on statutory grounds. Subsequently, the Beck court's discussion of First Amendment issues was perfunctory, acknowledging that there might be grounds for a First Amendment challenge but refusing to discuss the issue further. This has generated confusion among legal scholars and workers as to what First Amendment challenges may be brought. For example, critics have pointed out that a claim under the First Amendment can only be brought when there is state action, as opposed to private action."The Constitution's protections of individual liberty and equal protection apply in general only to action by the government. ... With a few exceptions, such as the provisions of the Thirteenth Amendment, constitutional guarantees of individual liberty and equal protection do not apply to the actions of private entities." . The Supreme Court's early agency fee decisions (Hanson, Street, and Ellis) found that state action occurred under the Railway Labor Act because the Act prohibited union shops.To add to the confusion, in dicta in United Steelworkers v. Weber,, the Supreme Court explicitly said that a collective bargaining agreement does not involve state action: "Since the Kaiser-USWA plan does not involve state action, this case does not present an alleged violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment." ; see also . Yet, although the Court went to great lengths to identify the similarities between the RLA and NLRA in Beck, the Court (in dicta) refused to decide whether state action had occurred under the NLRA. Legal scholars have pointed out that the Beck Court cited two cases which did find state action under the NLRA, but did not make any determination in Beck. One scholar has concluded that the Court's tests for determining state action are not useful enough to determine the issue. Adding to the confusion is that the Supreme Court has never made it clear how to apply a First Amendment analysis to labor law. The Court and legal scholars point out that labor law is considered unique in the American statutory and constitutional framework, which may mean that traditional First Amendment analyses do not apply.Wellington, Harry. Labor and the Legal Process. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1968.Glendon, Mary Ann. The New Family and the New Property. Toronto: Butterworths, 1981. Selznick, Philip. Law, Society and Industrial Justice. New York: Transaction Publishers, 1980.  "[T]he Court consistently has upheld the validity...of the Labor Act. In doing so, the Court has repeatedly referred to the special nature of labor legislation to explain its unusual deference to a statute so incompatible with judicially developed constitutional norms." It may be that the Court's existing standard for assessing government interference with speech (the strict scrutiny standard) is inappopriate to apply to labor law.In his concurrence in Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, 431 U.S. at 260, n.14, Justice Powell argued that when examining First Amendment concerns in agency fee cases, the Supreme Court has purposefully avoided a standard of review. See also: Lazarus, Edward P. Closed Chambers: The First Eyewitness Account of the Epic Struggles Inside the Supreme Court. New York: Crown, 1998.  Many of these analyses conclude that the Beck court should have clarified these issues, and absent such clarification the First Amendment rights of workers remain unprotected.
Third, some legal scholars have criticized the ruling for not establishing a right which can be successfully exercised in the real world. The Supreme Court itself recognized in Abood that implementing its limitations on agency fees would be difficult to administer, and in dicta suggested that further rulings would clarify its thinking.Abood, 431 U.S. at 236–37. But the Beck decision did not provide this clarification. The ruling did not address whether or how unions should inform workers of their Beck rights, what charges are "germane" to collective bargaining, or what remedies non-members have if their rights are violated. Because of this confusion, some lower courts have gone so far as to approve schemes whereby union members may assert their Beck rights only during limited "window periods" (in apparent contravention of Pattern Makers) and that Beck objectors renew their objection annually (in apparent contravention of General Motors). A U.S. government report has concluded that it is uncertain whether notifying employees of their Beck rights but not other rights available under the NLRA would effectively protect workers' rights.McCallion, Gail; Treacy, Vince; and Whittaker, William. Labor Controversies: Suspension of Davis Bacon, Open-Shop Bidding Requirements, and "Beck" Rights. CRS Report 93-458E. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, April 15, 1993.
Other observers conclude that Beck was wrongly decided.  The reasons for reaching this conclusion vary, however.  Some critics, in reviewing the Supreme Court's First Amendment jurisprudence, have found that there is no simply no First Amendment burden imposed by an agency fee which includes charges not related to collective bargaining. Others conclude that while there may be some infringement on free speech, the voluntary nature of collective bargaining does not raise it to the level of state action under existing Supreme Court doctrine.Weiler, Paul C. Governing the Workplace: The Future of Labor and Employment Law. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990.  Many conclusions about state action rely on the fact that the NLRA grants unions the right to charge agency fees, thus making the union a state actor. But scholars critical of Beck point to the Court's ruling in Jackson v. Metropolitan Edison Co., where the Supreme Court held that even a governmental grant of power is insufficient to create state action..Unions are also granted the right to negotiate collective bargaining agreements, and these agreements are heavily regulated by the federal government.  Yet, in his concurring opinion in Abood, Justice Powell rejected the conclusion that collective bargaining agreements cause unions to be state actors: "If collective-bargaining agreements were subjected to the same constitutional constraints as federal rules and regulations, it would be difficult to find any stopping place in the constitutionalization of regulated private conduct." See Abood, 431 U.S. at 252 n.7 (Powell, J., concurring). At least one commentator has concluded that the Court's First Amendment analysis in Beck is unbalanced because it fails to take into account the associational liberties also protected by the First Amendment.
Fifth, some analyses conclude that the Court's method statutory interpretation in the Beck is flawed. Justice Blackmun made this claim in his dissent (as noted above).  Some legal commentators agree, noting that the ruling rejects the Court's well-settled doctrines of statutory construction, which leads to a misinterpretation of Congress' legislative intent.
Sixth, critics have argued that the Beck Court misapplied its duty of fair representation doctrine. One legal commentator has concluded that the Supreme Court's duty of fair representation decisions do not lead to the conclusion that agency fees can be restricted solely to collective bargaining purposes. Another has argued that the modern labor unions can only meet their duty to fairly represent workers if they engage in lobbying and legislative activity,Hyde, Alan. "Beyond Collective Bargaining: The Politicization of Labor Relations Under Government Contract." Wisconsin Law Review. 1982:1Hyde, Alan. "Economic Labor Law v. Political Labor Relations: Dilemmas for Liberal Legalism." Texas Law Review. 60:1 (1982). a conclusion which undercuts the Beck court's decision as well.
Seventh, some scholars point out that the Beck ruling may lead to unanticipated outcomes. At least one commentary on Beck concludes that Beck rights, if successfully implemented, may lead large numbers of workers to resign from a union during a strike. These workers will be able to continue to work during a strike (incurring none of the disadvantages a strike brings), and yet will still be able to enjoy the benefits of collective bargaining (assuming the strike is successful and an agreement is negotiated). The strike is the most powerful weapon unions have,Yoder, Dale. Personnel Management and Industrial Relations. 6th ed. New York: Prentice-Hall, 1942Winch, David M. Collective Bargaining and the Public Interest: A Welfare Economics Assessment. Toronto: McGill-Queen's Press, 1989. ; Zajicek, Anna M. and Nash, Bradley Jr. "Lessons From the UMWA." In The Transformation of U.S. Unions: Voices, Visions, and Strategies From the Grassroots. Ray M. Tillman and Michael S. Cummings, eds. Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1999.  and undermining the union's ability to strike would put labor unions at a distinct disadvantage in collective bargaining. The NLRB and Supreme Court have acknowledged the role that agency fee payers can play in undermining strikes. In NLRB v. Textile Workers Union, 409 U.S. 213 (1972), the Supreme Court ruled that once a union member had resigned, the union could not punish that worker for crossing picket lines.NLRB v. Textile Workers Union, 409 U.S. 213 (1972). And in Pattern Makers' League v. NLRB, (as noted above) the Court said unions must permit members to resign at any time. Decisions like these have informed the NLRB's rulings on the issue as well. The Board found that an employer did not commit an unfair labor practice when it distributed notices to employees prior to a strike that outlined an employee's rights during a strike (including the right to become an agency fee payer and cross picket lines).Laundry, Dry Cleaning, Government and Industrial Service, Local 3,  275 NLRB 697 (1985). The Board also held that, once a single employee has inquired about their right to become an agency fee payer, it is legal for an employer to notify all workers about this right.Lear Siegler, Inc., Inc., d/b/a Safelite Glass,  283 NLRB 929 (1987). But in the absence of an employee-initiated iniquiry, it is not, the Board says, legal for employers to approach striking workers and ask them to become agency fee payers.Naperville Ready Mix, Inc.,  329 NLRB 174 (1999). The negative implications of widespread worker resignation from unions prior to or during a strike is clear, some argue. This may be changing, however, as more unions turn away from strikes and toward comprehensive campaigns. It is also unclear how Beck may impact dues checkoff (an agreement between the employer, union, and employee under which the employer agrees to deduct union dues directly from the employee's paycheck and turn it over to the union).Hardin, Patrick; LaVaute, James R.; and O'Reilly, Timothy P. The Developing Labor Law: The Board, the Courts, and the National Labor Relations Act. 3d ed. Washington, D.C.: American Bar Association, 1992. ; Leibig, Michael T. and Kahn, Wendy L. Public Employee Organizing and the Law. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of National Affairs, 1987.  In 1991, the NLRB held that dues checkoff agreements create an obligation to pay dues in the same way that becoming a union member does.International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local No. 2088 (Lockheed Space Operations Co.),  302 NLRB 322 (1991). It is possible that Beck and subsequent rulings could also undermine dues checkoff agreements.
Impact
Further Supreme Court rulings
The Beck case created widespread confusion about how best to implement the rights the Supreme Court identified in its ruling. The Supreme Court has addressed the agency fee issue six times in the two decades since its holding in Beck, each ruling considering additional union expenditures which may or may not be charged to non-union members.
The Court first revisited the issue in Lehnert v. Ferris Faculty Association in 1991.. The Court was "sharply divided", writing "four opinions that were supported in whole or in part by varying numbers of Justices" and citing divergent reasons for supporting those parts of the decision they supported.Marcus, Ruth. "Court Ruling Stipulates Kinds of Fees Public Unions Can Assess Nonmembers." Washington Post. May 31, 1991.Davis, Jr. W. Kearns. "Crawford v. Air Line Pilots Association: The Fourth Circuit Determines What Expenses a Union May Charge to Nonunion Workers." North Carolina Law Review. 72:1732 (September 1994). "[A]ll nine Justices rejected a broader argument put forward by the objecting employees that the employees should not have to pay for activities of the national union ... that were not undertaken directly on behalf of the ... bargaining unit." Eight justices agreed that unions could not charge agency fee payers for lobbying activities. But on other issues, the court split. The case was more difficult to adjudicate because it involved state action (the bargaining unit was composed of public employees) and thus brought First Amendment issues into considerationImber, Michael and Van Geel, Tyll. A Teacher's Guide to Education Law. 2d ed. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2001.  and because of the unique nature of the union's dues structure.The collective bargaining unit was affiliated with the National Education Association (NEA). Almost no NEA locals provide their own collective bargaining activities. NEA's national headquarters provides this service through a unit called UniServ, with one or more full-time, professional UniServ staff representatives assigned to each bargaining unit (or, in the case of small or isolated bargaining units, to a cluster of local unions). A large majority of dues paid by NEA members goes to the national union to pay for UniServ activities, with only a small portion being collected by the local union, often for non-collective bargaining purposes. The unified dues structure and UniServ model complicated the Court's decision in Lehnert. See: Urban, Wayne J. Gender, Race, and the National Education Association: Professionalism and Its Limitations. Annotated ed. Florence, Ky.: Taylor & Francis, 2000. ; "National Education Association." In Encyclopedia of Education. Vol. 4. 2d ed. James W. Guthrie, ed. Newe York: Macmillan Reference USA, 2003. ; Lieberman, Myron. Understanding the Teacher Union Contract: A Citizen's Handbook. 2d ed. New York: Transaction Publishers, 2000. ; Culbertson, Drena. "Teachers Seek Influence Through Regional Group." Free-Lance Star. August 12, 1975. Writing for the majority, Justice Blackmun established a three-prong test for determining the constitutionality and statutory legality of agency fee charges in public employee bargaining units: 1) The charges must be "germane" to collective bargaining activity; 2) The charges must not "significantly" burden the non-members' free speech rights; and 3) Charges must be justified by the need for labor peace or to avoid the free rider problem.Lehnert, 500 U.S. at 514–519.Only four justices supported the three-prong test. See:  Acceptable charges included that part of affiliation fees which are spent on collective bargaining,Lehnert, 500 U.S. at 522–524. collective bargaining expenditures destined for other states,Lehnert, 500 U.S. at 527. expenditures for national union publications insofar as they support collective bargaining, information services and other miscellaneous items that are not political nor public in nature and which benefit of all workers even though they do not directly impact the bargaining unit,Lehnert, 500 U.S. at 529. expenditures to attend union meetings and conventions,Lehnert, 500 U.S. at 529–530. and strike expenses (whether the strike is legal or not).Lehnert, 500 U.S. at 530–532. Non-chargeable expenses include: Lobbying, electoral, or other political activities not directly related to contract bargaining or implementation;Lehnert, 500 U.S. at 519–522. political or public activities aimed at winning a greater budget for the collective bargaining unit; litigation or publications reporting on litigation that does not concern directly concern the bargaining unit;Lehnert, 500 U.S. at 528. and public relations efforts (including informational picketing, media purchases, signs, posters, and buttons) designed to enhance public respect for the workers' profession.Lehnert, 500 U.S. at 528–529. At least one legal scholar believes the Lehnert decision shifted away from the Court's traditional rationale that agency fees must have a strong link to collective bargaining purposes:
Subtly, but with significant impact..., the Supreme Court in Lehnert shifted away from its previous emphasis on the nexus between the expense and collective bargaining. Unlike its predecessors, Lehnert did not stress that the benefit to the unit must be in the area of collective bargaining or labor-management issues. Its statement that for an expense to be charged "there must be some indication that the payment is for services that may ultimately enure to the benefit of the members of the local union" implies that the benefit to the worker need not be in the form of increased leverage against the employer.Davis, "Crawford v. Air Line Pilots Association: The Fourth Circuit Determines What Expenses a Union May Charge to Nonunion Workers," North Carolina Law Review, September 1994, p. 1746. (footnotes omitted)
Adding additional confusion, the Lehnert court also concluded that even charges germane to collective bargaining were impermissible if they burdened First Amendment rights too heavily in order to achieve the policy outcomes intended by Congress (although the Court did not identify what constituted an impermissible level of burden).Adams, R. Bradley. "Note: Union Dues and Politics: Workers Speak Out Against Unions Speaking for Them." University of Florida Journal of Law & Public Policy. 10:207 (Fall 1998). The impact of Lehnert, however, appears minimal.  At least one legal scholar refused to list Lehnert among the past decade's most important cases in the public education law. Both courts and legal scholars have questioned whether the judicial system should be "drawn into this micro-level of dispute resolution".Quoted in 
Other Supreme Court rulings since Lehnert have focused more narrowly on technical issues.  In Air Line Pilots Association v. Miller, 523 U.S. 866 (1998), the Supreme Court addressed the issue of whether non-members must use the union's arbitration process in order to challenge the calculation of agency fees.Walsh, Mark. "Supreme Court Hears Challenge From 'Right To Work' Group." Education Week. April 1, 1998. In a 7-to-2 decision, the Court held that agency fee payers did not have to exhaust the union's challenge procedures.Russo, Charles J. Encyclopedia of Education Law, Volume 2. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE Publishers, 2008. Houston, Melvin. "To Mandate or Not Mandate Arbitration: An Analysis of Air Line Pilots Association v. Miller." Thurgood Marshall Law Review. 24:279 (Spring 1999). The same year, the Court addressed the issue of whether a union committed an unfair labor practice if its collective bargaining agreement contained the original NLRA language on union shops but no additional information (such as information about the Supreme Court's rulings in Beck and other cases). A unanimous Supreme Court held in Marquez v. Screen Actors Guild, 525 U.S. 33 (1998) that a union did not breach its duty of fair representation by merely including the language of the NLRA, as amended.. The Marquez Court relied heavily on its ruling in NLRB v. News Syndicate Co., 365 U.S. 695 (1961), where it had previously held that the NLRB had no authority invalidate a contract clause solely because the clause mirrored statutory language but did not go further to advise members to not violate the law.Devaney, Dennis M. and Kehoe, Susan E. "The NLRB Takes Notice to the Max in Paramax." Hofstra Labor Law Journal. 11:1 (Fall 1993). About a decade later, the high court revisited the agency fee issue three more times.  It upheld in Davenport v. Washington Education Association, 551 U.S. 177 (2007), a Washington state ballot initiative which required public employee unions to obtain each member's and nonmember's prior authorization before spend their dues or agency fees for election-related purposes.. The decision was moot even before it was handed down, because the Washington State Legislature had already changed the law to make it easier for unions to comply. The ruling was very narrowly decided, however, leading to much criticism. "Correctly understood, this decision promises little and delivers even less because it fails to deal decisively and comprehensively with the issues that both earlier private sector and public sector union dues disputes illuminated but failed to settle." Other legal scholars expressed dismay that the Davenport Court did not confront the First Amendment issues raised by the case. A year later, in Locke v. Karass, 07-610 (2008), the Supreme Court held that it was not unconstitutional for a local union to charge nonmembers for national litigation expenses unrelated to local collective bargaining activities.Locke v. Karass, 07-610 (2008). In 2009, the Supreme Court held in Ysursa v. Pocatello Education Association, 07-869 (2009), that a state's refusal to agree to dues checkoff did not abridge a union's First Amendment rights.Ysursa v. Pocatello Education Association, 07-869 (2009), at 5–11.
Regulatory and NLRB actions
On April 13, 1992, President George H. W. Bush issued an executive order, E.O. 12800, that required contractors doing business with the federal government to provide their non-union employees with notice of their Beck rights.Gerstenzang, James. "Bush OKs Order on Political Use of Union Dues." Los Angeles Times. April 14, 1992.Cantor, Joseph E. Political Spending by Organized Labor: Background and Current Issues. CRS Report No. 96-484 GOV. Washington, D.C.:  Congressional Research Service, February 18, 1998.Heilbronner, Steven. "Bush Takes Steps to Restrict Union Collections." United Press International. April 14, 1992.Bunis, Dena. "Bush Irks Unions About Use of Dues." Newsday. April 14, 1992. Executive branch officials estimated that about 2 million to 3 million (10.5 percent to 15.8 percent) of the 19 million workers represented by labor unions are nonmembers, and that NLRB officials had issued more than 300 citations accusing unions of not notifying their members of their Beck rights. Labor leaders dismissed the Executive Order, claiming they already met the requirements set down by the Supreme Court. The Bush administration estimated the Executive Order would keep $1.2 billion to $2.4 billion a year from being collected by labor unions. The administration also said it would order the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) to issue new regulations that would require unions to report in far greater detail the amount of money they spend on political activities, lobbying, and collective bargaining. Bush also asked Congress to enact legislation formally encoding the Beck ruling into federal labor law. Unions and Democrats derided the action as election year politicking, while right-to-work advocates hailed it as long overdue. At least one legal scholar criticized the order for not doing enough to implement the Beck decision, and for putting the onus of notification on the employer rather than the union.
The Clinton, Bush, and Obama administrations have each taken action to either rescind or reinstate this Executive Order. President Bill Clinton issued Executive Order 12836 on February 1, 1993, which revoked Executive Order 12800.Contrubis, John and Lee, Margaret Mikyung. The Use of Compulsory Union Dues for Political Purposes: A Legal Analysis. CRS Report No. 97-618A. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 1997.McCallion, Gail. The Use of Union Dues for Political Purposes and Agency Fee Objectors. CRS Report No. 97-555E. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service, 1998. The Labor Department subsequently withdrew its Bush-era regulations on union financial reporting on December 21, 1993.Pierce, Greg. "Unions No Longer Required to Reveal Political Funding." Washington Times. January 12, 1994. President George W. Bush then issued Executive Order 13201 on February 16, 2001, largely reinstating Executive Order 12800 and ordering DOL to re-issue its regulations.Swoboda, Frank. "Bush to Sign Orders Curtailing Labor's Influence." Washington Post. February 17, 2001"President Rolls Back Policies Favored By Organized Labor." Associated Press. February 17, 2001. A coalition of unions sued to enjoin enforcement of the Executive Order.  The United States district court for the District of Columbia overturned the Executive Order on the grounds that the NLRA gave the NLRB exclusive jurisdiction over Beck rights, but the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals reversed, the Supreme Court refused to hear the case, and Executive Order 13201 went into effect.UAW-Labor Employment and Training Corporation v. Chao No. 01cv00950 (DC), reversed, 325 F.3d 360 (D.C. Cir. 2003); cert. denied, ."Beck Notice Requirement Retracted." Fair Employment Practices Guidelines. February 15, 2002. The last action was taken on January 30, 2009, when President Barack Obama issued Executive Order 13496, revoking E.O. 13201 and the DOL regulations yet again."DOL Rescinds Rule on Beck Rights Notice Pursuant to Obama Executive Order." Labor Law Reporter – Labor Relations. April 4, 2009"Obama Administration Says to Organized Labor: 'Welcome Back To The White House'." Business & Management Practices. February 20, 2009.
The National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) struggled to implement the Court's holding in Beck. In 1989, the National Right to Work Committee polled NLRB offices nationwide, posing as workers and asking about the requirement to pay union dues.Scully, Matthew. "Survey Finds NLRB Misleads Workers." Washington Times. August 10, 1989. The group found that Board agents and other staff at 22 of 29 offices gave the wrong information. Although the NLRB initially dismissed the report, within a few weeks the agency admitted its errors and ordered all its regional offices to review recent developments in labor law and provide accurate information on agency fee rights.Scully, Matthew. "NLRB Brushes Up On Law After Right-to-Work Criticism." Washington Times. August 23, 1989King, John. "NLRB Orders New Training Following Right to Work Committee Study." Associated Press. August 29, 1989.
In 1992, for only the second time in its history,Swoboda, Frank. "Labor Board to Address Dues Issue." Washington Post. May 5, 1992. the National Labor Relations Board undertook a regulatory rulemaking aimed at resolving the divergent, complex issues raised by the Beck decision.  The proposed rulemaking was announced in May 1992, and the proposed rule issued on September 22, 1992.Zebrak, Scott A. "Comment: The Future of NLRB Rulemaking: Analyzing the Mixed Signals Sent by the Implementation of the Health Care Bargaining Unit Rule and by the Proposed Beck Union Dues Regulation." Administrative Law Journal. 8:125 (Spring 1994)."Proposed Union Dues Regulation." 57 FR 43635 (1992-09-22); "NLRB's Stephens Cites Advantages of Rulemaking to Deal With Beck Issues." Daily Labor Report. October 15, 1992; "NLRB Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Oral Argument on Enforcing Beck v. Communications Workers of America." Daily Labor Report. September 22, 1992. But after three and a half years of inaction on the proposed regulation, the Board withdrew the rule on March 19, 1996—concluding that it could proceed faster through its more traditional case-by-case approach."Board Drops 1992 Proposal to Engage in Rule-Making for Agency Fee Procedures." Daily Labor Report. March 19, 1996.
Shortly after the labor board published its proposed rule, it issued its first ruling addressing the issues raised in the Beck decision.  In Electrical Workers IUE, Local 444 (Paramax Systems), 311 NLRB 1031 (1993), the Board held that Beck imposed a duty on unions to provide information on members' and nonmembers' Beck rights via the mail at least once a year, whether an employee has requested the information or not.Electrical Workers IUE, Local 444 (Paramax Systems),  311 NLRB 1031 (1993). But over the next several years, the NLRB ruled on almost no other Beck cases even though nearly 400 complaints had been brought before the Board.Gould, William B. IV. "The labor Board's Deepening Somnolence: Some Reflections of a Former Chairman." Creighton Law Review. 32:1505 (June 1999).Pierce, Greg. "NLRB Dismisses Worker's Claim for Union Dues Used in Politics." Washington Times. April 6, 1994.Landauer, Robert. "Recent National Labor Rulings Bring Hillsboro Technician's Name to Fore." The Oregonian. February 28, 1996.
Finally, the Board consolidated 28 Beck cases under California Saw & Knife Works, 320 NLRB 224 (1995).California Saw & Knife Works,  320 NLRB 224 (1995), enf'd. sub. nom., International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers v. NLRB, 133 F.3d 1012 (7th Cir. 1998), cert. denied, 119 S. Ct. 47 (1998). The International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers (IAM) provided a Beck notification to each member yearly via its monthly magazine, and required members to exercise these rights once a year during a window period.California Saw & Knife Works, 320 NLRB 224, 230–231. The Board held that the union had committed an unfair labor practice by failing to provide a Beck rights notice to new members and by not providing a Beck rights notice to new members who were resigning from the union but had not yet received the annual notice,California Saw & Knife Works, 320 NLRB 224, 231. but did not commit a ULP by failing to notify resigning union members of their Beck rights at the time of their resignation. The Board distinguished its holding in California Saw from its prior ruling in Paramax Systems, and found the window period (as well as other restrictions on the submission of resignation and objector status) to be an unfair labor practice.California Saw & Knife Works, 320 NLRB 224, 233–237. The Board rejected numerous challenges to the way agency fees were calculated, challenges made, and expenditures verified.California Saw & Knife Works, 320 NLRB 224, 237–243. The California Saw decision was criticized for only applying to nonmembers. The NLRB addressed the Beck rights of members shortly thereafter in United Paperworkers International Union, Local 1033 (Weyerhauser Paper Co.), 320 NLRB 349 (1995).United Paperworkers International Union, Local 1033 (Weyerhauser Paper Co.),  320 NLRB 349 (1995), rev'd on other grounds, Buzenius v. NLRB, 124 F.3d 788 (6th Cir. 1997), United Paperworkers International Union v. Buzenius, 525 U.S. 979 (1998) cert. granted, cert. vacated and remanded in light of Marquez v. Screen Actors Guild. In that case, the NLRB upheld its ruling in California Saw and said that yearly notice to current members, including the rights outlined by the courts and NLRB (not just the statutory language of the NLRA), was all that was required of unions.United Paperworkers International Union, Local 1033 (Weyerhauser Paper Co.),] 320 NLRB 349.
Two years later, the NLRB decided on the preferred remedy that should be imposed where a union failed to inform employees of their Beck rights. In Rochester Manufacturing Co., 323 NLRB 260 (1997), the Board ordered that the union return to the status quo ante, give all workers their Beck rights notice, give each all workers the opportunity to submit agency fee calculation objections for every dues collection period at issue, and the reimburse each objecting employee.Rochester Manufacturing Co.,  323 NLRB 260 (1997).
From 1994 to 1998, the NLRB issued 18 consolidated or single Beck cases.
Legislative efforts
The Supreme Court's Beck decision generated a great deal of legislative activity at both the federal and state levels.
Congressional action
The first Congressional attempt to codify the Beck decision into law occurred a year after the Beck decision.  Representative Tom DeLay introduced H.R. 2589, the "Workers' Political Rights Act of 1989," on June 8, 1989.Workers' Political Rights Act of 1989. 101st Congress, 1st Session. H.R. 2589/S. 1645 The bill, which died in committee, would have amended the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 to: 1) Add union political committees to the list of political action committees regulated by the Federal Election Commission; 2) Require unions to give each worker separate, yearly Beck notices; 3) Require unions to give each worker Beck notices when they join the union and when they resign from the union; 4) Require unions to undergo independent audits each year to verify the calculation of agency fees; and 5) Require unions to provide members detailed information on the calculation of agency fees.
Additional action followed over the next several years. In July 1990, Senator Orrin Hatch proposed an amendment to the "Senatorial Election Campaign Act of 1989" (S. 137), a major campaign finance reform bill then under consideration in the U.S. Senate. The Hatch amendment was defeated on a close vote of 59-to-41. Senator David Boren then proposed a less restrictive amendment to S. 137, which was adopted by a vote of 57 to 43. Although the amended bill passed the Senate on August 1, 1990, it was never referred to the House and died at the end of the congressional session.Alexander, Herbert E. and Corrado, Anthony. Financing the 1992 Election. Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe, 1995.  DeLay reintroduced his Beck bill in 1991, where it died again without action.Workers' Political Rights Act of 1991. 102d Congress, 1st Session. HR 2915. In 1996, Representative Harris W. Fawell introduced the "Worker Right to Know Act" (H.R. 3580), a bill to amend the NLRA to ban unions from charging any worker (member or nonomember) fees unrelated to collective bargaining, contract administration, or grievance adjustment unless the worker gave the union explicit, annual consent.The Worker Right to Know Act. 104th Congress, 2d Session. H.R. 3580. Hearings on the legislation occurred, but the bill died in committee. In 1997, Senator Paul Coverdell introduced a bill (S. 497, the "National Right to Work Act of 1997") which would have banned all compulsory union membership.National Right to Work Act of 1997. 105th Congress, 1st Session. S. 497/HR 59. Introduced in the House as well, both bills died in committee.
The last major push for congressional action came in 1996–1997.  Several bills had been introduced in both the House and the Senate.Worker Paycheck Fairness Act. 105th Congress, 1st Session. H.R. 1625; Paycheck Protection Act. 105th Congress, 1st Session. S. 9; Common Sense Campaign Reform Act of 1997. 105th Congress, 1st Session. S. 976 (incorporating S. 9). The most prominent was Senator Don Nickles' "Paycheck Protection Act," which Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott re-introduced in 1998.Paycheck Protection Act. 105th Congress, 2d Session. S. 1663. The issue became caught in campaign finance reform legislation that year. Section 501 of the "Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 1997" (BRCA)Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 1997. 105th Congress, 1st Session. S. 25. merely codified the Beck decision, but the "Paycheck Protection Act" went much further and required all workers to affirm on an annual basis whether their dues could be used for political purposes. Senator Lott offered the Nickles bill as an amendment to the BRCA, which many Democrats (and some Republicans) saw as a poison pill amendment. Under procedures adopted by the Senate, Senators would need to reject the Lott amendment before voting on the BRCA. But with Republicans unwilling to vote against the amendment (which was popular with their conservative base), the Lott amendment was added to the BRCA and the Beck amendment died along with the BRCA after a number of other procedural votes.
Several bills were offered in Congress over the next few years to either ban agency shop agreements or to adopt various provisions of the 1997 Nickles bill, but all of them died in committee.Worker Paycheck Fairness Act of 1999. 106th Congress, 2d Session. H.R. 2434; Common Sense Federal Election Reform Act of 2001. 107th Congress, 1st Session. S. 602; Campaign Finance Integrity Act of 2001. 107th Congress, 1st Session. S. 559; Campaign Finance Improvement Act of 2001. 107th Congress, 1st Session. H.R. 1516; Citizen Legislature and Political Freedom Act. 107th Congress, 1st Session. H.R. 1444; Workers' Bill of Rights. 107th Congress, 2d Session. H.R. 4636; Worker's Freedom of Choice Act. 107th Congress, 2d Session. H.R. 3632. An analysis of the major bills under congressional consideration from 1988 to 1997 found, however, that nearly all of them suffered from significant legal flaws, and none went far enough in protecting workers' Beck rights.
State actions
Many states have proposed or passed legislation to address the Supreme Court's ruling in Beck for public employee unions. The National Labor Relations Act does not cover state or local public employees, and leaves it up to each state to grant these workers collective bargaining rights.Hogler, Raymond L. The Employment Relationship: Law and Policy. New York: Rowman & Littlefield, 1989. ; Gould, William B. IV. A Primer on American Labor Law. 4th ed. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2004.  By 2000, 28 states and the District of Columbia had enacted a collective bargaining law for some or all of their public employees.Gargan, John J. Handbook of State Government Administration. Volume 75: Public Administration and Public Policy. New York: CRC Press, 2000.  "Paycheck protection" acts—legislation requiring public employee unions to obtain permission from all workers on an annual basis in order to collect dues or fees for any purpose not germane to collective bargaining—were introduced in a number of state legislatures or became ballot initiatives.Asher, Herbert B. American Labor Unions in the Electoral Arena. New York: Rowman & Littlefield, 2001. Landy, Marc Karnis and Milkis, Sidney M. American Government: Balancing Democracy and Rights. 2d rev. ed. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008. Ellis, Richard J. Democratic Delusions: The Initiative Process in America. Lawrence, Kan.: University Press of Kansas, 2002.  In 1992, voters in Washington state approved Initiative 134, the nation's first paycheck protection act. Similar ballot initiatives and legislation appeared in 26 states in 1998.Love, Thomas. "Declaring War on Union Political Dues." Nation's Business. January 1998. The battle in California over that state's initiative, Proposition 226, was particularly important because supporters of the initiative believed a win there would lead to adoption of the proposal in many more states.Thurber, James A. and Nelson, Candice J. Campaign Warriors: The Role of Political Consultants in Elections. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2000. Lannon, Albert Vetere. Fight or Be Slaves: The History of the Oakland-East Bay Labor Movement. Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 2000.  But despite the support of Governor Pete Wilson and a lead of roughly 35 points in the polls in April,Sawyer, Jon. "California Proposition Targets Union Giving." St. Louis Post-Dispatch. June 1, 1998 the initiative went down to defeat 52-to-48 on election day in June after a fierce battle.Bayer, Amy. "Election '98 California Primary: Union Victory on Proposition 226 Called 'Political Miracle'." San Diego Union Tribune. June 4, 1998.An almost identical ballot initiative in California, Proposition 75, was defeated in 2005 by a 53.5 to 46.5 margin. See: "Voters Talked to Union Members on Prop. 75." Sacramento Bee. November 10, 2005Fund, John. "And the Winners Are..." The Wall Street Journal. November 14, 2005
The defeat of the initiative had a significant effect nationwide.  Similar initiatives and legislation were defeated in 29 states by 2002.Helpern, Martin. Unions, Radicals, and Democratic Presidents: Seeking Social Change in the Twentieth Century. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Greenwood Publishing Group, 2003.  By September 2009, only five states had adopted the proposal via initiative or legislation (Idaho, Michigan, Ohio, Washington, and Wyoming), while a sixth (Colorado) had done so via executive order.
Legislative prospects
Prospects for addition initiatives and legislation at the federal and state level appear mixed as of 2009. Former Federal Election Commission Chair Bradley A. Smith (who opposes compulsory unionism) has argued that even the most stringent laws are unlikely to have any impact, as the number of agency fee payers is small compared to the number of union members. At least one legal scholar has questioned the constitutionality of paycheck protection laws, while another, detailed analysis of the Washington state effort has concluded that instead of decreasing the amount of union dues available for political expenditures paycheck protection actually increased it (from approximately $630,000 to approximately $780,000) as unions shifted member dues internally to account for the agency fees going toward collective bargaining.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Sources
External links
Agency Fee/Fair Share Information from the American Federation of Teachers
Sample Beck notice from the United Auto Workers
Category:Communications Workers of America
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1988 in United States case law
"""

From "Communist Party of Indiana v. Whitcomb" ==> """
Communist Party of Indiana v. Whitcomb, 414 U.S. 441 (1974), was a United States Supreme Court case based on the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution that invalidated Indiana's loyalty oath requirement.
Summary
The state of Indiana, for the 1972 election, required nominees to submit a sworn oath stating that their party "does not advocate the overthrow of local, state or national government by force or violence."  The Communist Party of Indiana refused to submit such a declaration, and as a result Indiana refused to put their candidates on the ballot.  The Communist Party appealed to the Supreme Court.
In a unanimous verdict, the Supreme Court held in favor of the Communist Party. The majority opinion, authored by Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. and joined by four other Justices, stated that "a group advocating violent overthrow as abstract doctrine need not be regarded as necessarily advocating unlawful action."   The court also held that "the principle that the constitutional guarantees of free speech and free press do not permit a State to forbid or proscribe advocacy of the use of force or of law violation except where such advocacy is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and is likely to produce such action."
Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr. wrote a short opinion concurring in the judgment, joined by three other Justices. In his view, there is no need to decide the free speech question. Instead, he concluded that as the Indiana officials did not apply the loyalty oath requirement to the Democratic Party and the Republican Party, their discriminatory application of the requirement to the Communist Party violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 414
External links
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Communist Party USA litigation
"""

From "Communist Party v. Subversive Activities Control Board" ==> """
Communist Party of the United States v. Subversive Activities Control Board, 351 U.S. 115 (1956).  and 367 U.S. 1 (1961),.  was a federal court case in the United States involving the compelled registration of the Communist Party of the United States, under a statute requiring that all organizations determined to be directed or controlled by the "world Communist movement" publicly disclose detailed information as to their officers, funds, and membership.
The case resulted in two opinions from the Supreme Court of the United States, the second of which upheld the constitutionality of the registration requirement against challenges brought under the First and Fifth Amendments.
Background
In 1950, the United States Congress passed the Subversive Activities Control Act of 1950.  Its findings read, in part:
There exists a world Communist movement which, in its origins, its development, and its present practice, is a world-wide revolutionary movement whose purpose it is, by treachery, deceit, infiltration into other groups (governmental and otherwise), espionage, sabotage, terrorism, and any other means deemed necessary, to establish a Communist totalitarian dictatorship in the countries throughout the world through the medium of a world-wide Communist organization.
The Act required any organization qualifying as either a "communist-action" organization or a "communist-front" organization to register with the Attorney General of the United States and provided detailed information about their operations, including offices, finances, printing presses, names and addresses of officers, and in the case of "communist-action" organizations—those determined to be "substantially directed, dominated, or controlled by the foreign government or foreign organization controlling the world Communist movement...and...[that] operates primarily to advance the objectives of such world Communist movement—names and addresses of members.  This registry was to be updated annually by the organization, kept available to the public by the Attorney General, and be the basis for an annual report by the Attorney General to Congress.
The Act also established the Subversive Activities Control Board, and empowered the Attorney General of the United States to petition the Board for an order that an organization register that was required to but had not done so.  The Board was empowered to examine evidence, and to compel witnesses to appear before it and testify or produce documents.  Review of the Board's determinations were to be reviewed in the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.
Board and lower court proceedings
On November 22, 1950, the Attorney General petitioned the Subversive Activities Control Board for an order to require that the Communist Party of the United States register as a Communist-action organization.  The Party filed suit in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, and though a three-judge panel denied a preliminary injunction, it issued a stay of Board proceedings pending appeal.  After the Supreme Court denied a petition for extension of the stay, the Party abandoned its lawsuit.
The Board conducted hearings regarding the Party from April 23, 1951 through July 1, 1952.  After hearing testimony from twenty-two witnesses for the Attorney General and three for the Party, and reviewing 507 exhibits, the Board issued a 137-page report finding the Party was a "Communist-action" and ordering that it register.
On appeal, the Court of Appeals denied the Party's motion for leave to adduce additional evidence, which the Party had alleged would show that three witnesses for the Attorney General had committed perjury before the Board, and affirmed the Board's order.Communist Party of the United States v. Subversive Activities Control Board, 96 U.S. App. D.C. 66, 223 F.2d 531 (D.C. Cir. 1955).
The Supreme Court's first decision
Though the Party challenged the constitutionality of the Act, the Supreme Court did not address these issues in its opinion, delivered by Justice Felix Frankfurter. The majority found that the Attorney General had failed to deny the perjury allegations. It concluded that because the testimony of the three witness  was not insubstantial, the record had been impugned and therefore the Board's order could not stand.  The Court remanded the case to the Board "to make certain that (it) bases its findings upon untainted evidence."
Three justices dissented in an opinion by Justice Tom C. Clark, criticizing the Court for employing a "pretext," in order to avoid deciding the core issues that were before it.
Proceedings on remand
On remand, the Board denied several motions filed by the Party seeking to introduce additional evidence.  The Court of Appeals also denied a motion by the party for leave to adduce additional evidence, but granted the Board permission to consider a motion by the Party regarding another of the Attorney General's witnesses who had also allegedly committed perjury.  The Board granted the Party's motion, reopened the hearings, and the witness was recalled and crossexamined.
On December 18, 1956, the Board issued its 240-page Modified Report, finding that the recalled witness was credible but expunging the testimony of the other three challenged witnesses.  Making new findings of fact, the Modified Report reaffirmed the Board's conclusion that the Party was a "Communist-action" organization and recommended that the Court of Appeals affirm its registration order.  The Court of Appeals, however, remanded for the further production of documents regarding the recalled witness's testimony.Communist Party of the United States v. Subversive Activities Control Board, 102 U.S. App. D.C. 395, 254 F.2d 314 (D.C. Cir. 1958). 
The hearings were reopened, further documents were produced, and the Board struck additional testimony though not to the extent that the Party requested.  The Board then issued its Modified Report on Second Remand, with findings of fact largely consisting of the findings contained in its first Modified Report, and again concluding that the Communist Party of the United States was a Communist-action organization, and again recommending that its order to register be affirmed. The same panel of the Court of Appeals affirmed the order and denied the Party's motion for further discovery.Communist Party of the United States v. Subversive Activities Control Board, 107 U.S. App. D.C. 279, 277 F.2d 78 (D.C. Cir. 1960).
The Supreme Court's second decision
In an opinion again delivered by Justice Frankfurter, the Court upheld the constitutionality of the Act's registration requirements.
First, the Court rejected the argument that the Act was an unconstitutional bill of attainder.  The registration requirement did not target organizations, but was predicated upon certain conduct.  Second, the Court rejected the arguments that the registration requirement violated the rights of freedom of speech and freedom of association guaranteed by the First Amendment.  Though noting that registration requirements may be invalidated on First Amendment grounds and had been by the Court in prior cases, the Court stated that the present case was different because of the seriousness of the threat that international Communism posed.  The Court would not question Congress's findings regarding that threat, and would not reject its methods of dealing with it just because they might choose different methods.
Third, the Court deemed the Party's challenge under the Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination premature.  The Party claimed that admitting to be an officer of the Party was recognized as incriminating, and that its officers would invoke the privilege, but the Court found this speculative and noted that its officers had been a matter of public record rather than a secret.  Fourth and finally, the Court rejected the Party's due process challenge that Congress's findings of a "world Communist movement" predetermined facts that should be left for adjudication.  The determination that a particular organization was required to register was left to be litigated, and "[t]hat is all due process requires."
Chief Justice Earl Warren and Justices Hugo Black and William O. Douglas each authored dissents, all of which each joined as well.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Anti-communism in the United States
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:Communist Party USA litigation
Category:1961 in politics
Category:United States civil due process case law
"""

From "Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid" ==> """
Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid, 490 U.S. 730 (1989), is a US copyright law and labor law case of a United States Supreme Court case regarding ownership of copyright..
Facts
The Community for Creative Non-Violence, a homeless charity, paid sculptor James Earl Reid for a statue that depicted the plight of homeless people for a Christmas pageant in Washington DC, called "Third World America". CCNV members visited Reid's Baltimore studio as he made the statue, gave suggestions and directions about its appearance. CCNV paid Reid the final installment on delivery. They had not discussed copyright in the sculpture. They both filed competing copyright registration certificates.
The District Court held that CCNV had the copyright, as it was a ‘work made for hire’ under the Copyright Act of 1976, 17 U.S.C. § 101, owned exclusively by CCNV under § 201(b). This vests copyright ownership of works for hire in the employer or other person for whom the work is prepared, unless there is a written agreement to the contrary.
Judgment
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
The Court of Appeals, District of Columbia Circuit, held the sculpture was not a ‘work made for hire’ because Reid was not an employee, but an independent contractor. However it remanded to the lower court to determine if the statue's copyright was co-owned under §201(a)
Supreme Court
Justice Thurgood Marshall giving the court's opinion, the Supreme Court held Reid was an independent contractor, not an employee, so the work was not "made for hire" under §101, and the copyright belonged to Reid, at least in part.
The Court determined that Reid's commission was not "specially ordered or commissioned" under paragraph 2 of 17 USC 101's "work made for hire" definition. It then considered whether Reid was an "employee" preparing the sculpture "within the scope of his employment", whose work fell within "work made for hire", or an independent contract whose work did not fall within "work made for hire".
The Court held that common law agency principles should be applied to decide whether a work is made by an employee or an independent contractor. While the statute was silent on the meaning of "employee," Congress could be inferred to have wanted to incorporate agency law definitions, as it also referred to the term "scope of employment" that agency law uses. The general common law of agency must be used over the law of any particular state, in order to create a uniform, nationwide law.
The Court listed 11 factors in determining whether someone is an independent contractor or an employee. 
In determining whether a hired party is an employee under the general common law of agency, we consider the hiring party's right to control the manner and means by which the product is accomplished. Among the other factors relevant to this inquiry are [1] the skill required; [2] the source of the instrumentalities and tools; [3] the location of the work; [4] the duration of the relationship between the parties; [5] whether the hiring party has the right to assign additional projects to the hired party; [6] the extent of the hired party's discretion over when and how long to work; [7] the method of payment; [8] the hired party's role in hiring and paying assistants; whether the work is part of the regular business of the hiring party; [9] whether the hiring party is in business; [10] the provision of employee benefits; [11] and the tax treatment of the hired party.
Based on these factors, the Court held Reid was an independent contractor. Reid supplied his own tools, was without any extensive supervision and was free in the way he met his deadlines. CCNV could not assign more projects to Reid, and paid him in the normal manner independent contractors are done.
The case was remanded to determine whether CCNV could still be regarded as a joint author of the sculpture and co-owner of the copyright, if the District Court determined that the parties intended their contributions be merged into a unitary whole.
Significance
While the case was pending on remand, Mitch Snyder of CCNV died.  The parties subsequently filed a “Joint Motion for Entry of Consent Judgment.”  The consent judgment has the following terms:
 Reid was the author of Third World America and solely owned the copyrights to three-dimensional copies of the work, but Reid agreed to certain restrictions on how three-dimensional copies presented the work.
 CCNV solely owned the physical copy of the sculpture.
 CCNV and Reid were co-owners of two-dimensional copies of the work.  The consent specified certain restrictions on how both parties could authorize displays of the two-dimensional copies.
Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid, 1991 WL 415523 (D.D.C. 1991).
In Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Darden (1992), Justice David Souter used the Court's understanding of the term employee in Reid to influence the decision, applying the Reid reading to all cases where the term employee is not otherwise defined by the statute.
See also
 US labor law
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 490
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Notes
External links
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1989 in United States case law
"""

From "Compagnie Francaise de Navigation a Vapeur v. Louisiana Board of Health" ==> """
Compagnie Francaise de Navigation a Vapeur v. Louisiana Board of Health, 186 U.S. 380 (1902), was a United States Supreme Court case which held constitutional state laws requiring the involuntary quarantine of individuals to prevent the spread of disease.Bonnie, R.J. et al., Criminal Law, Second Edition. Foundation Press, NY: 2004, p. 663 Louisiana's quarantine laws, Justice Edward White said, were a reasonable exercise of the state's police power that conflicted with neither the Dormant Commerce Clause nor the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. In dissent, Justice Henry Billings Brown, joined by John Marshall Harlan, agreed that while quarantine laws were constitutional, Louisiana's went beyond the scope of the state's authority over interstate commerce, even violating several treaties between the United States and other nations.
The case had arisen in 1898, when the S.S. Britannia sailed from Palermo to Marseille, then across the Atlantic for New Orleans. Before docking there, it had stopped at a state-run quarantine station further down the Mississippi River, where all 408 passengers, most of whom were Italian immigrants, were certified as free from disease. At New Orleans, however, the ship was not allowed to land them there nor in any nearby parish, as it was told that a cordon sanitaire had been declared on land, forbidding the entry of any uninfected persons into the area.
Compagnie Française de Navigation à Vapeur ("French Steam Navigation Company", in English), the Britannias French owner, filed for a restraining order in Orleans Parish District Court enjoining the state Board of Health from enforcing the quarantine, arguing that the real purpose of the quarantine was to prevent the immigrants from landing in New Orleans; after the court declined the Britannia took its passengers to Pensacola, Florida, to be unloaded and then returned to New Orleans to deliver its cargo. The company's complaint against the state for damages was dismissed, a decision upheld by the Louisiana Supreme Court on appeal.
Quarantine laws had never been challenged, but dicta in the Court's opinions since Gibbons v. Ogden in 1824 had recognized them as a justifiable use of state power. Some earlier cases had challenged aspects of quarantine laws such as the taxes collected to fund them, but Compagnie Francaise challenged the application of quarantine law itself, under the provisions of the Fourteenth Amendment. It has been cited by later courts as holding involuntary quarantines constitutional, as recently as a case arising from the 2014 African Ebola epidemic and the COVID-19 pandemic.
Background
Starting in 1796, when it was under Spanish colonial administration, New Orleans began suffering outbreaks of yellow fever every few years, and reported cases every summer. Death tolls began increasing, both from the disease and some then-common treatments for it (such as mercury injections), as the city's population grew following its return to French rule in 1800 and cession to the United States as part of the Louisiana Purchase three years later. The first American territorial governor, William C. C. Claiborne, lost two wives and his daughter to the disease, which he himself also contracted but recovered from.
Many other migrants from elsewhere in the U.S. followed; they proved more susceptible to yellow fever than longtime residents. An 1817 outbreak killed 800 in New Orleans alone, prompting the state legislature to create a New Orleans Board of Health, the first government public health agency in the U.S., only to dissolve it two years later as ineffectual after an outbreak that year claimed 2,000 lives. These deaths were often exacerbated by local newspapers' refusal to report on the disease, as businesses feared the economic effects of a public panic.
After an 1853 outbreak left almost 8,000 residents of New Orleans dead, the state again created a Board of Health and made it permanent. The Union Navy's blockade of New Orleans six years later, as the Civil War began, the city for the first time in the century recorded no deaths from yellow fever. When General Benjamin Butler took over control of the city when it fell to Union forces in 1862, he went further, dispatching 2,000 troops to dispose of the city's garbage and instituting a quarantine requirement for arriving ships. At a point  down the Mississippi River from the city, all vessels were stopped by gunboats and held for 40 days while they were monitored for disease. There were few deaths from yellow fever in New Orleans for the remainder of the war.
thumb|left|Gravestone for family killed by 1878 yellow fever outbreak in New Orleans
Yellow fever epidemics in the city resumed after the war, when an 1867 outbreak killed 3,000. During this one the Board of Health was active, putting quarantine flags on houses with known cases and fumigating spaces. The 1878 outbreak, which afflicted cities in the Lower Mississippi Valley as far north as Memphis, Tennessee, led the newspapers to abandon their past practice of downplaying outbreaks to avoid public panics since, they realized, it had actually made the epidemics worse.
Businesses, particularly shipping companies, still chafed at the quarantine laws. In 1882 the Louisiana legislature amended the statutes to require that vessels stopping at the quarantine station pay as much as $30 ($ in today's dollars) in fees, depending on their size, with the proceeds going to fund the board's operations and infrastructure. One New Orleans-based shipper challenged this in court as a tonnage tax, which they called an unconstitutional violation of the Commerce Clause since the federal government alone had authority to levy one; they further alleged that it was being used for the city of New Orleans' general revenue rather than its stated purpose.
Four years later, the shipper's case reached the U.S. Supreme Court on appeal from its state counterpart. Unanimously, the nine justices held that the fee was not a tax and even if it were one, would still have been constitutional as while the federal government had the authority to require and enforce quarantines, it was only exclusive to it if it actually did so. As it had historically left that to the states, Louisiana could act as it saw fit within the Constitution to exercise its police power and protect public health.
"If there is a city in the United States which has need of quarantine laws, it is New Orleans", Justice Samuel Freeman Miller, a physician prior to his legal career, wrote for the Court. He noted that despite being a hundred miles (160 km) upriver from the Gulf of Mexico, it was the largest and busiest port on that waterbody. Many of the ships that came to New Orleans from the Gulf often came from warmer countries to the south, where tropical diseases were common, and past epidemics of yellow fever and cholera in the Mississippi Valley had all been identified as having spread from the city.Morgan's, at 459
thumb|right|Illustration of bodies of lynched Italian immigrants after 1891 incident
Around that time Italian immigrants began arriving in New Orleans in great numbers; eventually the city would be home to more of them than any other in the South. They were met with considerable fear and prejudice from longtime residents; in 1891 an angry mob lynched 11 Italians, one of the largest mass lynchings in U.S. history, after the city's popular police chief was killed, supposedly implicating Italians with his last words. Among the many reasons the Italian immigrants were considered undesirable was the belief that they brought diseases into the U.S.
In September 1897 a yellow fever outbreak believed to have originated in Ocean Springs, Mississippi, spread to New Orleans, where it led to a single death and several cases. The Louisiana Board of Health initiated quarantines on any travelers returning to New Orleans from Ocean Springs or neighboring Biloxi, ordering railroads not to stop there on the way to New Orleans, and fumigating all luggage that travelers had brought back. It told the newspapers that it was willing to spend a million dollars to contain the outbreak.
thumb|left|Quarantine camp in Louisiana during 1897 outbreak
The house quarantines ordered by the Board of Health, enforced by armed guards, aroused resentment in New Orleans. Despite the possibility of prison for violators, some quarantined residents began sneaking out of their back doors at night. Elsewhere in the state, fear of the disease led to violence. In Rayne a band of armed residents prevented a train from entering their parish. A group in Calcasieu Parish burned a rail bridge near Lake Charles with similar aims of controlling disease.
Underlying dispute
A year after the 1897 outbreak, the SS Britannia, owned by the French corporation Compagnie Française de Navigation á Vapeur, left the Sicilian port of Palermo carrying cargo and Italian emigrants, along with some returning U.S. citizens. After stopping in Marseille to pick up more passengers and cargo, it sailed across the Atlantic Ocean into the Gulf of Mexico, and up the Mississippi River. In late September, the vessel duly stopped at the quarantine station, near Fort Jackson, where all 408 passengers and the ship's cargo were certified as free from disease and allowed to continue to New Orleans.Whelan, Allison; "That's My Baby: Why the State's Interest in Promoting Public Health Does Not Justify Residual Newborn Blood Spot Research without Parental Consent", 98 Minn L Rev 419, 424; November 2013. Retrieved February 26, 2020; White, J. Hereafter Compagnie Francaise I
Two days later, when the Britannia reached its destination, port officials told the crew it could not unload any passengers. In the interim, the state's Board of Health had placed New Orleans and the neighboring parishes within a hundred miles. Hereafter Compagnie Francaise II under a cordon sanitaire forbidding the entry of any uninfected persons, a measure the state legislature had authorized the board to take earlier that year. The Britannia crew were reportedly additionally told that if they landed anywhere outside of the quarantined area with the intention of offloading their passengers, those areas would be added to the quarantine.
The company's agents in New Orleans filed a petition in Orleans Parish District Court for a restraining order enjoining the state from enforcing the quarantine against the Britannias passengers, and a judgement of $2,500 against the board and its members in solido. They argued the state's real objective had been to prevent it from landing Italian immigrants, noting that the board had taken no measures to prevent the entry into New Orleans of Italian immigrants who had disembarked at New York and taken the train to Louisiana, and had allowed other large groups to enter the city later. After the court dismissed the petition for failure to show cause, the Britannia took its passengers to Pensacola, Florida, to put off and returned to New Orleans, where it unloaded its cargo. The company refiled its action as a damage claim, increasing its requested judgement to $11,000 and naming the individual board members as defendants.Compagnie Francaise II, at 383
In this filing the company alleged that Act 192 of the Laws of 1898, authorizing the cordon sanitaire, violated a provision of the recently adopted state constitution requiring that laws have one goal clearly specified by a title, and in this case the title limited the act to applying to travel within the state, not vessels arriving from outside the state or country. Its application to an international arrival, they argued, also violated the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution, since only Congress could regulate foreign commerce, and was also banned by treaties with France and Italy, from whence the Britannia had come. Lastly, the company argued, the order barring the landing of the passengers was a denial of its equal protection and due process rights under the Fourteenth Amendment.Compagnie Francaise I, at 646
Again, the district court dismissed the case after the board of health made a peremptory plea arguing no cause of action existed for Compagnie Francaise. The company appealed the decision to the Louisiana Supreme Court.
Louisiana Supreme Court
right|thumb|Francis T. Nicholls
In March 1899 the state's Supreme Court reached its decision in the case. Chief Justice Francis T. Nicholls, a former governor of the state, wrote for a unanimous court affirming the district court.
Nicholls started with the state constitutional claim, and the presumption that the legislature intended Act 192 to be in accordance with the state constitution. He found its title had several clauses which could justify the power to declare and establish a cordon sanitaire, and reiterated another recent holding of the court that the titles of bills need only state the general purpose of the act rather than the enumerated specifics. The language of the act was broad enough to allow the board to impose the measure, as well, even if it did not specifically mention it. "[It] does not limit the board to prohibiting the introduction of persons from one portion of the state to ... an infected portion" Nicholls wrote, "but evidently looks as well to the prohibition of the introduction of persons from outside the state into any infected portion of the state"; it would defeat the purpose of the quarantine were it held to bar entry into an afflicted area only to those attempting to enter it from elsewhere in the state, he suggested.Compagnie Francaise I, 656–658
The company had also argued that Act 192 did not give the board any powers beyond those previous legislation had granted it. Nicholls dismissed this contention as in direct contradiction to the stated purpose and language of the act, noting also that the legislature had had a good reason. During the 1897 outbreak, Italian emigrants had continued to arrive in New Orleans by boat, but despite "excited public discussions", the board had concluded it lacked the power to prevent their entry at the time. In September 1898, the board had also been considering the possibility of increased travel to the United States through New Orleans from the Caribbean in the aftermath of the Spanish–American War.Compagnie Francaise I, 659–660
Lastly Nicholls considered the federal questions the company had raised. He found them as baseless as their arguments about the language of Act 192. A decade earlier, he wrote, the U.S. Supreme Court had rejected a claim that the Fourteenth Amendment changed in any way the states' police power to protect public health and safety, from what the Court had recognized in 1824's Gibbons v. Ogden. Nicholls quoted at length from Chief Justice Melville Fuller's opinion for a unanimous Court in In re Rahrer, to the effect that the police power "is a power originally and always belonging to the states ... [and] is not interfered with by the Fourteenth Amendment."Compagnie Francaise I, 660–661
Nicholls found Compagnie Française's due process arguments "utterly untenable" as the board's action was necessary under the law; he wondered rhetorically what else it could have done. The passengers had been inconvenienced, he agreed, and the company forced to incur extra expenses, but that was damnum absque injuria, meaning it could not recover from the state. Nicholls did not give much credence to the company's claim it had been specifically targeted, either, since it had merely been the first ship so excluded and "there is no reason to suspect that [the order] would not have been executed against any other ship or ships which might fall under its terms."Compagnie Francaise I, 663–664
Supreme Court
Compagnie Française filed a certiorari petition asking the U.S. Supreme Court to hear the case on appeal. It was granted and the Court heard oral arguments in October 1900. At the end of the Court's following term, 20 months later, it handed down its decision affirming the Louisiana Supreme Court. While all nine justices agreed that quarantines were an acceptable use of the police power, they differed on whether Louisiana's exercise of it in this instance had been a permissible use of it. Justice Edward Douglass White, a Louisiana native who would later serve as Chief Justice, wrote for himself and six colleagues in the majority, while Justice Henry Billings Brown's dissent was joined by John Marshall Harlan.
Majority opinion
thumb|right|Justice White in 1905, three years after Compagnie Francaise
After reiterating the facts of the case and the Louisiana Supreme Court's holdings, Justice White reduced the company's case to four arguments that were before the U.S. Supreme Court. He decided to treat the first two, the alleged Commerce Clause and Fourteenth Amendment violations, singly since they both involved the U.S. Constitution. The first, White argued, had been dealt with at length in Morgan's Steamship Company, the 1886 case, from which he quoted extensively, holding that the states were free to enact and enforce quarantine laws unless Congress decided to preempt them, a holding the Court had reaffirmed in 1900.Compagnie Francaise II, 387–390
Compagnie Française had offered "a most copious reference" to cases where the Court had held states to have overreached into Congress's domain in their regulations of commerce, White observed. Rather than review them all exhaustively, White wrote, it was enough to say they were "inapposite". The petitioners' primary error was in using as examples laws that excluded from a state objects which might carry disease, such as "criminals, diseased persons and things, and paupers", were not regulating "legitimate" commerce and were thus constitutional. That was true in some of those cases, but, White countered, "this implies no limitation on the power to regulate by health laws the subjects of legitimate commerce."Compagnie Francaise II, 390–391
Since Act 192 had been constitutional, White continued, it could also not have acted to violate the company's due process rights. "[T]he contention demonstrates its own unsoundness", he wrote, since it amounted to a theory that either the Fourteenth Amendment had eliminated the police power, or had rendered it unusable. "In other words," he characterized this argument, "that the lawful powers of government which the Constitution has conferred may not be exerted without bringing about a violation of the Constitution."Compagnie Francaise II, at 393
Likewise, the treaties Louisiana had allegedly violated "were not intended to, and did not, deprive the government of the United States of those powers necessarily inhering in it and essential to the health and safety of its people" since they would have deprived the federal government, as much as the states, of taking those actions, White wrote. Compagnie Française had in particular pointed to a treaty concluded with Greece, that had provided in part that Greek vessels coming to the U.S. would carry a certificate from authorities at the point of departure that its passengers and cargo were disease-free. But, White noted, the same section of the treaty allowed for local authorities to quarantine the ship on arrival, either as part of a general measure or if it specifically was found to have sick passengers. The documentation from Greece could not in any event be expected to exempt them since authorities there could not make any determinations about the health of the passengers at the port of arrival.Compagnie Francaise II, 394–395
The last of the company's four arguments was that Act 192 was superseded by federal immigration law, specifically an 1893 act of Congress expanding the quarantine powers of the Marine Hospital Service. "So far as the act of 1893 is concerned," White responded, "it is manifest that it did not contemplate the overthrow of the existing state quarantine systems and the abrogation of the powers on the subject of health and quarantine exercised by the states".Compagnie Francaise II, 395–396 He declined to go into detail, but included a footnote reprinting a section of the act that directs the service's supervising surgeon general to "cooperate with and aid state and municipal boards of health in the execution and enforcement of the rules and regulations of such boards".Compagnie Francaise II, at 396n2
Dissenting opinion
thumb|right|Justice Brown, in 1899
While he agreed that the power of states to impose quarantines is "so well settled by repeated decisions of this Court as to be no longer open to doubt", Justice Brown did not think the cordon sanitaire declared by the board was "a necessary or proper exercise of the police power". Preventing the entry of healthy individuals into quarantined areas did not seem to him to serve to curtail a disease's spread, but rather to reduce the likelihood that they would become infected in the quarantine area. "This is a danger not to the population, but to the immigrants", Brown wrote. "It seems to me that this is a possibility too remote to justify the drastic measure of a total exclusion of all classes of immigrants."Compagnie Francaise II, 397–399, Brown, J., dissenting
The Court should have looked not to Morgan's as a precedent, Brown argued, but instead to an earlier case, Railroad Company v. Husen, which the majority was "directly in the teeth of". In that 1877 case, the Court unanimously struck down a Missouri law forbidding the transport into the state of any cattle from Texas, Mexico or an Indian reservation from March through October of every year in order to prevent the illness then known as Spanish or Mexican fever from infecting local cattle as an impermissible regulation of interstate commerce, since it did not distinguish between sick and healthy cattle."The police power of a state cannot obstruct foreign commerce or interstate commerce beyond the necessity for its exercise, and under color of it objects not within its scope cannot be secured at the expense of the protection afforded by the federal Constitution." Husen, 473–474, Strong, J. "The statute was held to be a plain intrusion upon the exclusive domain of Congress, that it was not a quarantine law, not an inspection law, and was objectionable because it prohibited the introduction of cattle no matter whether they may do an injury to the inhabitants of a state or not." Brown noted that the state supreme courts of California and Maine had held similarly when faced with such cases.Compagnie Francaise II, at 400
Brown also believed that the exclusion of the Britannia from New Orleans was in conflict with the treaties. The same section of the treaty with Greece that the majority had relied on in dismissing the petitioners' argument also had a provision he quoted, stating that ships with the required documentation from health officers at the port of embarkation were free from disease "shall be subjected to no other quarantine than such as may be necessary for the visit of the health officer of the port where such vessels shall have arrived, after which said vessels shall be allowed immediately to enter and unload their cargoes." If the cordon sanitaire did not violate that provision, Brown concluded, "I am unable to conceive a state of facts which would" since the Constitution did not grant states the power to pass laws that conflicted with foreign treaties.Compagnie Francaise II, 400–401
Subsequent jurisprudence and commentary
No courts have revisited, reconsidered or modified Compagnie Francaise since it was handed down. It is cited in later opinions and commentary as holding constitutional the power to quarantine. The Supreme Court referred to it as such, quoting it at length, in 1913's Minnesota Rate Cases It has also been cited that way in a Minnesota Law Review article. In 2016 New Jersey federal district judge Kevin McNulty cited Compagnie Francaise, among other cases, in holding that existing case law on quarantines was sufficient to sustain state officials' defense of qualified immunity in a suit against them brought by Kaci Hickox, a nurse quarantined for 80 hours after she showed a fever upon her return to Newark International Airport from Sierra Leone, where she had been treating victims of the 2014 Ebola outbreak. "I do not find that prior quarantine case law establishes any unconstitutionality" in how she was dealt with, McNulty wrote.
Four years later, as the possibility of that year's COVID-19 pandemic coming to the U.S. loomed, The Atlantic cited Compagnie Francaise as establishing the broad nature of the quarantine power, "the most extreme use of government power over people who have committed no crime." It noted that, as it was at that time, the federal government still largely delegates that power to state and local authorities, which it was concerned could complicate a centralized response to any outbreak.
During the pandemic, Michigan Court of Claims Chief Judge Christopher Murray dismissed a challenge to Governor Gretchen Whitmer's stay-at-home order. He noted that contrary to the petitioners' claim that the Supreme Court had never held restrictions on the movements of healthy individuals during a pandemic constitutional, it had done just that in Compagnie Francaise.
See also
 1902 in the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 186
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Fuller Court
 Jacobson v. Massachusetts, case three years later where the Supreme Court upheld laws requiring vaccination.
 Zucht v. King, 1922 case holding constitutional the exclusion of unvaccinated children from public schools
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1902 in United States case law
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States federal preemption law
Category:Health law in the United States
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:Quarantine
Category:1898 in Louisiana
Category:Anti-Italian sentiment
"""

From "Compco Corp. v. Day-Brite Lighting, Inc." ==> """
Compco Corp. v. Day-Brite Lighting, Inc., 376 U.S. 234 (1964), was a United States Supreme Court decision that was a companion case to Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Stiffel Co. that the Court decided on the same day. Like Sears, Compco held that state law that, in effect, duplicated the protections of the US patent laws was preempted by federal law.. 
300px|thumb|right|Day-Brite's lighting fixture -- Drawing from Day-Brite's design patent
Background
Day-Brite obtained a design patent on a lighting fixture, a cross-ribbed reflector for fluorescent light tubes. Compco's predecessor copied the fixture and sold it in competition against Day-Brite. Day-Brite then sued for infringement of the design patent and unfair competition under Illinois state law, in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois.
The district court held the design patent invalid but ruled in Day-Brite's favor on the unfair competition claim.376 U.S. at 235. The court found that the overall appearance of Compco's fixture was "the same, to the eye of the ordinary observer, as the overall appearance" of Day-Brite's fixture, which embodied the design of the invalidated design patent; that the appearance of Day-Brite's design had "the capacity to identify [Day-Brite] in the trade, and does in fact so identify [it] to the trade"; that the concurrent sale of the two products was "likely to cause confusion in the trade"; and that "[a]ctual confusion has occurred." Accordingly, the court ordered Compco to pay damages and enjoined its further sale of the fixture.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit affirmed the judgment. It found that "several choices of ribbing were apparently available to meet the functional needs of the product," yet Compco "chose precisely the same design used by the plaintiff and followed it so closely as to make confusion likely."376 U.S. at 236. The only evidence of confusion was testimony by a Day-Brite employee that a third party plant manager had installed some of Compco's fixtures and later mistakenly asked Day-Brite to service the fixtures, thinking they had been made by Day-Brite. There was evidence that Compco clearly labeled its fixtures and their containers with Compco's name. The Supreme Court characterized this evidence as showing that Compco sold an article that was an exact copy of another unpatented article, and that the conduct was “likely to produce, and did in this case produce, confusion as to the source of the article.”376 U.S. at 237.
Ruling
200px|thumb|right|Justice Hugo L. Black
In a unanimous ruling (although Justice Harlan separately concurred), the Court reversed. The Court reiterated its holding in the Stiffel case that:
[W]hen an article is unprotected by a patent or a copyright, state law may not forbid others to copy that article. To forbid copying would interfere with the federal policy, found in Art. I, § 8, cl. 8, of the Constitution and in the implementing federal statutes, of allowing free access to copy whatever the federal patent and copyright laws leave in the public domain.
The Court held that the “findings” of the court of appeals about confusion, identification of the design with Day-Brite, lack of functionality of the design, and the like were immaterial because the absence of deception on Compco's part:
It is true that the trial court found that the configuration of Day-Brite's fixture identified Day-Brite to the trade because the arrangement of the ribbing had, like a trademark, acquired a "secondary meaning" by which that particular design was associated with Day-Brite. But if the design is not entitled to a design patent or other federal statutory protection, then it can be copied at will.
As we have said in Sears, while the federal patent laws prevent a State from prohibiting the copying and selling of unpatented articles, they do not stand in the way of state law, statutory or decisional, which requires those who make and sell copies to take precautions to identify their products as their own. A State, of course, has power to impose liability upon those who, knowing that the public is relying upon an original manufacturer's reputation for quality and integrity, deceive the public by palming off their copies as the original. That an article copied from an unpatented article could be made in some other way, that the design is "nonfunctional" and not essential to the use of either article, that the configuration of the article copied may have a "secondary meaning" which identifies the maker to the trade, or that there may be "confusion" among purchasers as to which article is which or as to who is the maker, may be relevant evidence in applying a State's law requiring such precautions as labeling; however, and regardless of the copier's motives, neither these facts nor any others can furnish a basis for imposing liability for or prohibiting the actual acts of copying and selling. And, of course, a State cannot hold a copier accountable in damages for failure to label or otherwise to identify his goods unless his failure is in violation of valid state statutory or decisional law requiring the copier to label or take other precautions to prevent confusion of customers as to the source of the goods.376 U.S. at 238-39 (citation omitted).
Subsequent developments
Day-Brite is still in the fluorescent lighting fixture business, as a division of Philips.See  and .
This case and Sears are widely cited for the proposition that federal patent law preempts state law that seeks to provide an alternative protection scheme that duplicates or is inconsistent with the balances that Congress carefully struck between competition and protection in the patent laws. See, for example, Bonito Boats, Inc. v. Thunder Craft Boats, Inc.. In that case, referring to Sears and Compco, the Court said:
Thus our past decisions have made clear that state regulation of intellectual property must yield to the extent that it clashes with the balance struck by Congress in our patent laws. . . . Where it is clear how the patent laws strike that balance in a particular circumstance, that is not a judgment the States may second-guess.
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 376
 References 
External links
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
"""

From "Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. Brady" ==> """
Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. Brady, 430 U.S. 274 (1977), is a United States Supreme Court case regarding the Commerce Clause and sales tax.. 
 Background 
Complete Auto was a Michigan-based auto transporter involved in moving General Motors vehicles from the railhead at Jackson, Mississippi to dealerships in Mississippi. The vehicles were assembled outside Mississippi.
The Mississippi State Tax Commission levied a tax upon Complete Auto "for the privilege of engaging or continuing in business or doing business" in the state of Mississippi.  The Court refers to the tax as a "sales tax"; however, it was a "transaction privilege" or gross receipts tax based on Complete Auto's gross receipts.
Complete Auto paid the taxes of $122,160.59 under protest, and then undertook a refund action in the Chancery Court of the First Judicial District of Hinds County. Complete Auto claimed that its transportation was but one part of an interstate movement, and that the taxes assessed and paid were unconstitutional as applied to operations in interstate commerce. The Chancery Court, in an unreported opinion, sustained the assessments.
Complete Auto appealed to the Mississippi Supreme Court. The Court unanimously affirmed and concluded:
It will be noted that Taxpayer has a large operation in this State. It is dependent upon the State for police protection and other State services the same as other citizens. It should pay its fair share of taxes so long, but only so long, as the tax does not discriminate against interstate commerce, and there is no danger of interstate commerce being smothered by cumulative taxes of several states. There is no possibility of any other state duplicating the tax involved in this case.
 Arguments 
Complete Auto argued against the constitutionality of tax, stating that they were part of an interstate operation, involved in transporting vehicles from the factories in Michigan to the dealers in Mississippi. According to Complete Auto, taxation on interstate operations not only discourages interstate commerce but also is a violation of the Commerce Clause.
 Ruling 
The Supreme Court ruled in favor of Mississippi. The ruling established a four-prong test for constitutionality of a tax under the Commerce Clause:
Substantial nexus - connection between a state and a potential taxpayer clear enough to impose a tax.
Nondiscrimination - interstate and intrastate taxes should not favor one over the other.
Fair apportionment - taxation of only the apportionment of activity that transpires within the taxing jurisdiction.
Fair relationship to services provided by the state - company enjoys services such as police protection while in a state.
Even though Complete Auto asserted that it was a part of an interstate operation, the Court agreed with Mississippi that while operating within the state, it was afforded services, such as police protection, provided for by taxation.
 Subsequent developments 
The test enunciated in Complete Auto Transit received significant interpretation in Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana, 453 U.S. 609 (1981).Raabe, William A.; Whittenburg, Gerald E.; and Sanders, Debra L. Federal Tax Research. 8th ed. Florence, Ky.: Cengage Learning, 2008. 
 References 
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1977 in United States case law
"""

From "Comptroller of the Treasury of Maryland v. Wynne" ==> """
Comptroller of the Treasury of Maryland v. Wynne, 575 U.S. 542 (2015), is a 2015 U.S. Supreme Court decision that applied the Dormant Commerce Clause doctrine to Maryland's personal income tax scheme and found that the failure to provide a full credit for income taxes paid to other states was unconstitutional.
Background
Dormant Commerce Clause
The Commerce Clause provides:
Although the text of the clause appears to be a simple grant of power to Congress, the Supreme Court has long held that the clause was intended to include a negative command prohibiting state taxation that discriminates against interstate commerce even if Congress has not acted. The doctrine, known as the Dormant Commerce Clause (or the "Negative Commerce Clause" by its detractors), "strikes at one of the chief evils that led to the adoption of the Constitution, namely, state tariffs and other laws that burdened interstate commerce."
Case background
Like most other U.S. states, Maryland imposes a tax on the income residents earn both in Maryland and out-of-state as well as on the income earned within Maryland by non-residents.. The Maryland income tax consists of both a "state" income tax and a "county" income tax, both of which are collected by the state's comptroller of the treasury. Residents who earn income outside of Maryland may receive a credit against the state, but not the county income tax for income taxes paid on that income to other states. Nonresidents who earn income in Maryland must pay the state income tax and, in lieu of the county income tax, a "special nonresident tax" that was set at a rate "equal to the lowest county income tax rate set by any Maryland county."
In 2006, Maryland residents Brian and Karen Wynne, a married couple, earned income from other states through an S corporation, which filed state income tax returns in 39 states. An S Corporation passes income through to its shareholders for income tax purposes; in contrast, C corporations are considered separate entities from their shareholders for income tax purposes. On their 2006 tax return, the Wynnes claimed an income tax credit against both their state and county income taxes. The office of the Comptroller of the Treasury allowed the credit against the state, but not the county, income tax and, accordingly, assessed a deficiency. The Hearings and Appeals Section of the Comptroller's Office and, on appeal, the Maryland Tax Court both upheld the assessment. The Circuit Court for Howard County reversed, finding that the county income tax system violated the Commerce Clause. The Maryland Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, upheld the Circuit Court's ruling that Maryland's income tax scheme violated the Commerce Clause, finding that the tax scheme violated the fair apportionment and nondiscrimination prongs of the four-prong test enunciated by the Supreme Court in Complete Auto Transit, Inc. v. Brady.
Opinion of the Court
Timeline
The case was first considered at the court's January 10, 2014 conference, and the view of the Solicitor General was then requested. The Solicitor General's amicus brief was received on April 4. The Supreme Court considered the case at their conferences on May 15 and May 22, after which they granted certiorari on May 27. Oral arguments were heard on November 12 and the court's opinion was released on May 18, 2015.
Majority opinion
Justice Alito wrote the majority opinion, in which Chief Justice Roberts, Justice Kennedy, Justice Breyer, and Justice Sotomayor joined.
The majority upheld the Maryland Court of Appeals' ruling on the grounds of stare decisis, stating that "our existing dormant Commerce Clause cases all but dictate the result reached in this case." Three previous cases were "particularly instructive" in deciding the case; the cases all involved taxes on gross receipts that the Supreme Court struck down for posing the risk of multiple taxation. The majority rejected arguments that those cases involved gross receipts rather than net income and corporations rather than individuals. The majority also rejected the Comptroller's argument that individuals should be distinguished from corporations for the purposes of this case because individuals can vote to change the discriminatory tax scheme. In the majority's view, "the notion that the victims of such discrimination have a complete remedy at the polls is fanciful" and that "it is even more farfetched to suggest that natural persons with out-of-state income are better able to influence state lawmakers than large corporations headquartered in the State." They also found "no merit" in the Comptroller's argument that the statute is constitutional because it was not intended to discriminate against interstate commerce because the Commerce Clause "regulates effects, not motives, and it does not require courts to inquire into voters' or legislators' reasons for enacting a law that has a discriminatory effect." The majority also criticized the primary dissent's arguments—that the Dormant Commerce Clause does not limit the States' sovereign power to tax income of their residents, wherever earned—as "confus[ing] what a State may do without violating the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment with what it may do without violating the Commerce Clause." 
The majority proceeded to explain the history and merits of the "internal consistency test." The test considers the hypothetical situation in which every state adopted the tax structure in question and then asks whether interstate commerce would be at a disadvantage to intrastate commerce. The majority applied the internal consistency test to the hypothetical situation, paralleling Maryland's tax scheme, in which every state imposed a 1.25% income tax on residents' income earned within the state, a 1.25% income tax on residents' income earned in other states, and a 1.25% income tax on income earned by nonresidents within the state. In this case, intrastate income would only be taxed once at 1.25% but interstate income would always be taxed by both states involved (1.25% by the state of residence and 1.25% in the state where the income was earned). The majority, quoting West Lynn Creamery, Inc. v. Healy, thus found that "Maryland's tax scheme is inherently discriminatory and operates as a tariff...which is fatal because tariffs are '[t]he paradigmatic example of a law discriminating against interstate commerce.'"
Subsequent developments
Maryland tax refunds
Following the ruling, Maryland offered refunds to Maryland residents who had paid the local income tax without a credit for income taxes paid to other states. Local governments in Maryland had prepared for the prospect of having to issue refunds before the Supreme Court issued its decision. The local governments were estimated to owe $200 million in refunds to 55,000 taxpayers, with $115 million (including interest) owed by Montgomery County alone. The state government planned to pay the refunds, then recover the refunded money from local governments by reducing future tax revenue distributions. Due to the statute of limitations, the refund was available to all taxpayers affected by the Wynne decision for 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014; refunds for tax years as early as 2006 were available for some taxpayers who had filed a timely amended return.
In September 2015, Maryland governor Larry Hogan launched a campaign to raise awareness of the availability of tax refunds. Hogan, who assumed office in January 2015 after the Supreme Court had heard oral arguments in the case, relished that he had "the pleasure of sending refund checks." The Comptroller of the Treasury of Maryland, Peter Franchot, said he had an obligation to defend Maryland's tax scheme, but that he "always kind of secretly agreed with them."
Iowa tax refunds
Iowa's personal income tax scheme did not offer a credit for out-of-state taxes against an income tax surcharge for local school districts. After the Wynne decision, the state determined that this was unconstitutional and began to offer refunds for 2012, 2013, and 2014. The state estimated that if every eligible taxpayer filed to claim a refund the total amount would be $3 million annually for 2012, 2013, and 2014. The state would pay for the refunds from its general revenue fund, but local school districts would have to raise tax rates to cover the lost revenue in future tax years.
References
External links
Case information from SCOTUSblog
Maryland tax refund information 
Iowa tax refund information
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:Maryland state case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
"""

From "Concepcion v. United States" ==> """
Concepcion v. United States, 597 U.S. ___ (2022), is a United States Supreme Court decision that concerns district courts' ability to consider changes of law or fact in exercising their discretion to reduce a sentence.
 Background 
In 2006, Carlos Concepcion was arrested on felony drug charges for an illegal sale of cocaine. He pled guilty for distribution of five grams of crack cocaine in 2008. His penalty carried a mandatory minimum sentence of five years in prison but with his previous criminal conviction, the mandatory minimum sentence was elevated to ten years. Ultimately, he was subsequently sentenced to 19 years imprisonment.
In 2010, Congress passed the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010, which increased the minimum threshold for the mandatory minimum sentence to be triggered to twenty-eight grams of crack cocaine. But because the Fair Sentencing Act didn't apply retroactively, his sentence remained the same. However, in 2018, Congress passed the First Step Act, which allowed for the Fair Sentencing Act's sentence reduction to apply retroactively and granted discretion to district courts to "impose or withhold" reducing a sentence. Subsequently, Concepcion filed a motion for sentence reduction due to Section 404(b) of the First Step Act. He also argued that the district court should no longer consider him a career-offender under the 2018 Federal Sentencing Guidelines, since one of his conviction was previously vacated. The district court denied Concepcion's motion.
Concepcion appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. The First Circuit affirmed, stating that Section 404(b) does not grant a new proceeding and that resentencing is "discretionary." He subsequently filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
The court granted certiorari on September 30, 2021, and heard oral arguments on January 19, 2022. On June 27, 2022, the Supreme Court reversed the First Circuit's ruling in a 5–4 vote and held that the "First Step Act allows district courts to consider intervening changes of law or fact in exercising their discretion to reduce a sentence." Justice Sotomayor wrote the majority opinion, while Justice Brett Kavanaugh authored the dissent.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
"""

From "Cone v. Bell" ==> """
Cone v. Bell, 556 U.S. 449 (2009), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that a defendant was entitled to a hearing to determine whether prosecutors in his 1982 death penalty trial violated his right to due process by withholding exculpatory evidence.. The defendant, Gary Cone, filed a petition for postconviction relief from a 1982 death sentence in which he argued that prosecutors violated his rights to due process under the Fourteenth Amendment by withholding police reports and witness statements that potentially could have shown that his drug addiction affected his behavior. In an opinion written by Justice John Paul Stevens, the Supreme Court held that Cone was entitled to a hearing to determine whether the prosecution's failure to disclose exculpatory evidence violated Cone's right to due process; the Court noted that "the quantity and the quality of the suppressed evidence lends support to Cone’s position at trial that he habitually used excessive amounts of drugs, that his addiction affected his behavior during his crime spree".Cone v. Bell, 556 U.S. 449, 471, 476 (2009). In 2016, Gary Cone died from natural causes while still sitting on Tennessee's death row.Stuart Ervin, Death row inmate Gary Cone dies WSMV (April 20, 2016).
Background
In 1982, Gary Cone was convicted and sentenced to death for a crime spree that included the robbery of a jewelry store, a police pursuit, and the murder of an elderly couple.. At trial, Cone's attorney argued that he was not guilty by reason of insanity, and several experts testified that Cone suffered from a long history of drug abuse and post traumatic stress disorder resulting from his military service during the Vietnam War.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 690. According to one expert, Cone's long-term drug abuse caused hallucinations and paranoia that "affected respondent's mental capacity and ability to obey the law."Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 690 (noting that Cone's drug use caused "chronic amphetamine psychosis, hallucinations, and ongoing paranoia"). The jury rejected Cone's insanity defense and found him guilty on all counts.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 690. At a sentencing hearing, Cone's attorney did not present evidence of Cone's drug use as mitigating evidence.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 706 (Stevens, J., dissenting). Cone's attorney also waived his final argument so that the prosecutors would not have an opportunity for a rebuttal argument.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 691–92. The trial court ultimately sentenced Cone to death, and on appeal, the Tennessee Supreme Court affirmed Cone's convictions and sentence.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 692 (citing State v. Cone, 665 S.W. 2d. 87 (1984)).
Previous petitions for postconviction relief
After the Tennessee Supreme Court denied Cone's direct appeal in 1984, Cone filed a petition for postconviction relief in which he argued that his attorney provided ineffective assistance of counsel by waiving his closing argument and by failing to present mitigating evidence during the sentencing phase of his trial.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 692. After conducting a hearing on Cone's petition, a Tennessee state court rejected Cone's contentions, and the Tennessee Court of Criminal Appeals affirmed the lower court's ruling.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 692 (citing Cone v. State, 747 S.W. 2d. 353 (1987)). The Tennessee Court of Criminal Appeals concluded that Cone's attorney acted within an acceptable range of competency and that Cone "received the death penalty based on the law and facts, not on the shortcomings of counsel."Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 692 (citing Cone v. State, 747 S.W. 2d. at 356–58). Both the Tennessee Supreme Court and the United States Supreme Court declined to consider further appeals.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 692 (citing Cone v. Tennessee, 488 U. S. 871 (1988)).
In 1997, Cone filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in federal court.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 692–93. In his petition, he alleged that his attorney provided ineffective assistance of counsel during the sentencing phase of his trial, but the federal district court denied his petition.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 693. On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed the district court's ruling with respect to Cone's conviction, but it revered the district court's ruling with respect to Cone's sentence.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 693 (citing Cone v. Bell, 243 F.3d 961, 979 (6th Cir. 2001)). The Sixth Circuit held that Cone "suffered a Sixth Amendment violation for which prejudice should be presumed" because his attorney's failure to ask for mercy "did not subject the State's call for the death penalty to meaningful adversarial testing."Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 693 (citing Cone v. Bell, 243 F.3d at 979) (quotation taken from Supreme Court opinion). Additionally, the Sixth Circuit held that the Tennessee Court of Criminal Appeals decision constituted "an unreasonable application of the clearly established law".Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 693 (citing Cone v. Bell, 243 F.3d at 979; ) (quotation taken from Supreme Court opinion). In 2001, the United States Supreme Court granted certiorari.Bell v.Cone, 534 U.S. 1064 (2001). 
Bell v. Cone
In Bell v. Cone, in an opinion written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, the Supreme Court reversed the Sixth Circuit's ruling and remanded the case to the Sixth Circuit for further proceedings.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 693, 702. Chief Justice Rehnquist stated that the Tennessee state court correctly identified Strickland v. Washington'''s two-part test as the proper legal standard for effective assistance of counsel when it rejected Cone's petition for postconviction relief.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 698 (citing Strickland, 466 U.S. at 688, 694) ("We hold, therefore, that the state court correctly identified the principles announced in Strickland as those governing the analysis of respondent's claim."). Citing various "tactical reasons" why Cone's attorney did not present mitigating evidence, Chief Justice Rehnquist concluded that the jury still had an opportunity to consider whether "evidence of a mental disease or defect" should mitigate Cone's ultimate sentence.Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 699–701. Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that Cone's attorney "entirely fail[ed] to subject the prosecution's case to meaningful adversarial testing."Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. at 702, 718–19 (Stevens, J., dissenting) (citing United States v. Cronic, 466 U.S. 648, 659 (1984)) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Further proceedings in the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
On remand, the Sixth Circuit ordered a new sentencing hearing "based on the purported invalidity of an aggravating circumstance found by the jury."Cone v. Bell, 556 U.S. at 463 (citing Cone v. Bell, 359 F.3d 785 (6th Cir. 2004). In a per curiam'' opinion, Bell v. Cone (2005), the United States Supreme Court again reversed the Sixth Circuit's decision. (per curiam). The case then returned to the Sixth Circuit for a third time.Cone v. Bell, 556 U.S. at 463. In a 2007 opinion, the Sixth Circuit reconsidered whether the prosecution violated Cone's rights to due process under the Fourteenth AmendmentSee . by withholding police reports and witness statements that potentially could have corroborated his claims about the effects of his drug use. The Sixth Circuit rejected Cone's claims, holding the due process claims were procedurally barred by the Tennessee state courts in prior proceedings.Cone v. Bell, 492 F.3d at 753. The Sixth Circuit noted that even if the police reports and witness statements were admitted, they would not outweigh "overwhelming evidence of Cone’s guilt in committing a brutal double murder and the persuasive testimony that Cone was not under the influence of drugs."Cone v. Bell, 492 F.3d at 756.
Opinion of the Court
The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari and vacated the Sixth Circuit's 2007 ruling.Cone v. Bell, 556 U.S. at 464, 476  ("We granted certiorari to answer the question whether a federal habeas claim is 'procedurally defaulted' when it is twice presented to the state courts." (Internal quotations omitted)). In an opinion written by Justice John Paul Stevens, the Supreme Court held that Cone's due process claims should not have been procedurally barred, and the Supreme Court remanded the case to the United States District Court that first examined Cone's habeas petition, "with instructions to give full consideration to the merits of Cone’s [due process] claim."Cone v. Bell, 556 U.S. at 476. Justice Stevens noted that "the quantity and the quality of the suppressed evidence lends support to Cone’s position at trial that he habitually used excessive amounts of drugs, that his addiction affected his behavior during his crime spree, and that the State’s arguments to the contrary were false and misleading."Cone v. Bell, 556 U.S. at 471. On April 19, 2016, Gary Cone died of natural causes while still sitting on Tennessee's death row.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 556
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Conley v. Gibson" ==> """
Conley v. Gibson, 355 U.S. 41 (1957), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that provided a basis for a broad reading of the "short plain statement" requirement for pleading under Rule 8 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.Yeazell, S.C.  Civil Procedure, Seventh Edition.  Aspen Publishers, New York, NY: 2008, p. 358
Opinion of the Court
The case arose from an alleged wrongful discharge of African-American employees from a railroad company and unequal protection from the union.  The court ruled that general allegations of discrimination were sufficient to fulfill the Rule 8 requirement of a "short plain statement" because liberal discovery guidelines allowed the complaint to gain much more specificity before trial.  The kind of pleading allowed by Conley was known as "notice pleading."Yeazell, p. 358
Conley presumes that the plaintiff's allegations are true, the facts are construed as most favorable to the plaintiff, and the case cannot be dismissed unless it is proven that the plaintiff can prove no set of facts.
Subsequent developments
In 2007, the United States Supreme Court overruled Conley, creating a new, stricter standard of a pleading's required specificity.  Under the standard the Court set forth in Conley, a complaint need only state facts which make it "conceivable" that it could prove its legal claims—that is, that a court could only dismiss a claim if it appeared, beyond a doubt, that the plaintiff would be able to prove "no set of facts" in support of her claim that would entitle her to relief. In Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, the court adopted a more strict, "plausibility" standard, requiring in this case "enough fact[s] to raise a reasonable expectation that discovery will reveal evidence of illegal agreement." The Twombly reading was upheld in Ashcroft v. Iqbal in 2009.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 355
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States motion to dismiss case law
Category:1957 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Connally v. General Construction Co." ==> """
Connally v. General Construction Co., 269 U.S. 385 (1926), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case in which the Court expanded and established key constructs of the Fourteenth Amendment's due process doctrine along with establishing the vagueness doctrine. It defined necessary requirements that are fundamental to any law, which, when lacking, are to be deemed void. The case was a dispute regarding Oklahoma state statutes, which, in essence vaguely required businesses to pay workers not less than the "current rate of per diem wages in the locality where the work is performed". The ruling determined that the standards set in place were unconstitutionally vague.
 Provisions rejected by the Supreme Court 
The Supreme Court nullified all enforcement of provisions §§ 7255 and 7257, of the Compiled Oklahoma Statutes, 1921. The provisions established basic requirements for workers and the rights they were to be prescribed, while working for the state or a company executing a contract for a state, or a subcontractor thereof.
 8-hour day for employees
 Necessary payments (min. wage)
The statutes together defined each day that the employer violated the provisions, as an additional count of the offense. The offense itself established fines of $50–500, and imprisonment of 3–6 months. This form of cumulative punishment made the crime extremely punitive..
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court determined that the sections provided for violation of the 5th amendment rights of the employers, by not specifically defining what was and was not punishable; this ruling is particularly famous for furthering the scope of the vagueness doctrine.
 References 
External links
Category:Due Process Clause
Category:United States Fifth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:1926 in United States case law
"""

From "Connecticut Department of Public Safety v. Doe" ==> """
Connecticut Department of Public Safety v. Doe, 538 U.S. 1 (2003), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the constitutionality of the Connecticut sex offender registration requirement which required public disclosure of information on sex offenders after they had been released from incarceration..
 Background 
A state statute required Connecticut's Department of Public Safety (PDS) to collect information gathered from sex offenders who registered into a sex offender registry and publicize it on an Internet website and to make the registry available to the public in specific state offices, as Connecticut's version of Megan's Law.
The website contained the following disclaimer:
John Doe, a convicted sex offender who was thereby subject to the law, filed suit in Federal court, claiming that the law violates the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause. The District Court issued an injunction regarding  the law's public disclosure provisions. The Court of Appeals affirmed, concluding  that such disclosure did indeed violate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment  because registrants were not provided Doe with a  hearing prior to the public disclosure.
The Supreme Court granted  certiorari to determine whether the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit was correct in enjoining the public disclosure of Connecticut's sex offender registry.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a unanimous opinion, the Second Circuit Court's judgment was reversed on the basis that due process does not require the opportunity to prove a fact that is not material to the State's statutory scheme. Injury to reputation in itself, even if defamatory, does not constitute deprivation of liberty.
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
 Brief for the Unisted States as Amicus Curiae Supporting Petitioner
 ACLU Brief for the Respondents in Connecticut Dept. of Public Safety v. Doe (10/2/2002)
 Amicus brief in Connecticut Dept. of Public Safety v. Doe  -  Urging the court to find that governmental dissemination of truthful information about a person does not trigger "due process" requirements.
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:Sex offender registration
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Sex offender registries in the United States
"""

From "Connecticut General Life Insurance Co. v. Johnson" ==> """
Connecticut General Life Insurance Company v. Johnson, 303 U.S. 77 (1938), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States dealt with corporate entities. The case involved whether California could levy a tax on a company licensed to do business in that state for transactions that occurred in a different state.
Judgment
Justice Stone delivered the opinion of the Court.  Justice Hugo Black dissented.
See also
Corporate personhood
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 303
Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States corporate case law
Category:United States due process case law
Category:1938 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Connecticut National Bank v. Germain" ==> """
Connecticut National Bank v. Germain, 503 U.S. 249 (1992), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that an interlocutory order of a district court, sitting as an appellate court in a bankruptcy case, is in turn reviewable by the court of appeals when authorized under 28 U.S.C. § 1292. Although the Justices were unanimous in deciding the specific statutory interpretation issue concerning bankruptcy appeals that the case presented, they disagreed on the extent to which it was appropriate to refer to the legislative history of the statute in resolving the case.
 Background 
In the United States, bankruptcy cases and many lawsuits involving a bankrupt party are heard by the United States Bankruptcy Court for the appropriate judicial district. Appeals from Bankruptcy Court decisions are ordinarily taken to the United States District Court for that district. Under Section 158(d) of title 28 of the United States Code, appeals from final judgments of the district courts in bankruptcy cases may be taken to the Court of Appeals for the circuit. However, Section 158(d) contained no provision for appeals from interlocutory, or non-final, District Court decisions in such cases.
A separate provision of title 28, 28 U.S.C. § 1292, addresses appeals from the District Court to the Court of Appeals where a District Court's decision is interlocutory, that is, is not the final decision in the case. (Section 1292 deals with all federal civil cases, as opposed to section 158 which deals specifically with bankruptcy cases.) Ordinarily, in the federal system, only final judgments may be appealed from the District Court to the Court of Appeals, under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. Section 1292 creates limited exceptions to this rule, including appeals from orders granting or denying injunctions, or cases in which the District Court and the Court of Appeals grant special permission to appeal.
In a bankruptcy case pending in Connecticut, a dispute arose as to whether the parties were entitled to a jury trial. The Bankruptcy Court ruled in favor of a jury trial, and on appeal, the District Court affirmed. The defendant, Connecticut National Bank, then sought to appeal this interlocutory ruling to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, but that court held it had no jurisdiction and dismissed the appeal.
The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve a dispute as to whether a District Court's interlocutory order on a bankruptcy appeal was appealable to the Court of Appeals in the circumstances authorized under section 1292. The case was argued by Janet C. Hall, now a federal judge in Connecticut, for the petitioner, and by bankruptcy trustee Thomas M. Germain for himself as respondent.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote the Court's opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justices Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, and David Souter. In his opinion, Justice Thomas reviewed the language of the different statutory provisions, concluding that while there was some overlap between the provisions of Section 158 and Sections 1291 and 1292, each section also covers some cases that the other would not. Thomas observed that "[r]edundancies across statutes are not unusual events in drafting, and so long as there is no "positive repugnancy" between two laws ... a court must give effect to both."
Thomas asserted that the meaning of the statutes was clear from their wording. Therefore, he asserted, there was no need for the Court to examine the legislative history of Section 158. The opinion concluded that "[t]here is no reason to infer from either § 1292 or § 158(d) that Congress meant to limit appellate review of interlocutory orders in bankruptcy proceedings. So long as a party to a proceeding or case in bankruptcy meets the conditions imposed by § 1292, a court of appeals may rely on that statute as a basis for jurisdiction."
 Opinions concurring in the judgment 
Two Justices, John Paul Stevens and Sandra Day O'Connor authored brief opinions "concurring in the judgment," meaning that they agreed with the outcome of the case but not with the reasoning of the majority. Justices Byron R. White and Harry Blackmun joined O'Connor's concurrence.
Justice Stevens began his opinion by stating that "[w]henever there is some uncertainty about the meaning of a statute, it is prudent to examine its legislative history." Here, the legislative history of Section 158(d) contained no indication that this statute was intended to supersede Sections 1291 or 1292. Stevens stated that he agreed with the Court's decision for this reason, in addition to the majority's textual analysis.
Justice O'Connor's one-paragraph opinion observed that the Court's decision did create some redundancy between the different provisions of title 28. However, she found it "far more likely that Congress inadvertently created a redundancy than that Congress intended to withdraw appellate jurisdiction over interlocutory bankruptcy appeals by the roundabout method of reconferring jurisdiction over appeals from final bankruptcy orders," and joined in voting to reverse the Second Circuit's judgment only for this reason.
 References 
External links
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Connecticut v. Doehr" ==> """
Connecticut v. Doehr, 501 U.S. 1 (1991), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a state statute authorizing prejudgment attachment of a defendant's real property upon the filing of an action without prior notice or hearing, a showing of extraordinary circumstances, or a requirement that the plaintiff post a bond violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Background
A Connecticut statute, Conn. Gen. Stat. § 52-278e(a)(1), provided that when a civil lawsuit was commenced, the plaintiff could ask a judge to attach any real property that the defendant owned, for the purpose of ensuring that the plaintiff would be able to collect any judgment that eventually resulted from the suit. The attachment impaired the defendant's ownership rights in the property, such as by clouding title to the property and making it impossible to sell or mortgage the property.
Under the Connecticut procedure, attachments were based solely on the plaintiff's submitting a "verification" (equivalent to an affidavit) asserting of probable cause to sustain the validity of his or her claim. There was no requirement that prior notice of the attachment be provided to the defendant, any hearing be held before the property was attached, the property have anything to do with the subject-matter of the lawsuit, or that any unusual or extraordinary circumstances be shown.
In 1988, John F. DiGiovanni sued Brian K. Doehr for $75,000 for assault and battery in Connecticut Superior Court. DiGiovanni moved for Doehr's real property to be attached, submitting a five-sentence affidavit opining that there was a good basis for his claim. The judge ordered the attachment. Doehr received no notice of the proceedings until after the sheriff had levied the attachment. The notice advised Doehr that he could request a post-attachment hearing if he wished.
Doehr filed a federal complaint in the United States District Court for the District of Connecticut, contending that the Connecticut pre-judgment attachment procedure violated his constitutional right to due process. The District Court upheld the statute, but the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed, concluding that the statute was unconstitutional because it authorized ex parte attachments without a showing of extraordinary circumstances and without a hearing.
The State of Connecticut and DiGiovanni sought review in the United States Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
Opinion of the Court
Justice White delivered the opinion of the Court. The Court was unanimous as to the result of the case and Parts I and III of the opinion but not the entire opinion.
The Court concluded that the constitutionality of the Connecticut prejudgment attachment procedure must be judged by the balancing test for due process claims described in Mathews v. Eldridge (1976). The Court concluded that the Connecticut law created too great a risk of erroneous deprivation of property to survive scrutiny under Mathews. In reaching that conclusion, the Court emphasized, among other things, that no notice of the proposed attachment was given to the defendant before it was levied, no pre-attachment hearing was provided  even though the plaintiff's perfunctory verification may provide the judge with little or no insight into the validity of the plaintiff's claim, there was no requirement that the subject-matter of the claim be related to the real property being attached, and there was no requirement that the plaintiff show special circumstances such as that the defendant was seeking to evade payment of any judgment that might be awarded. The Court also observed that while an attachment of defendans' real property did not deprive them of the use of the property, it nonetheless represented a significant interference with the defendant's ownership rights.
In Parts IV and V of his opinion, which spoke only for a plurality of the Court, Justice White asserted that due process also required that a plaintiff obtaining an attachment must post a bond or other security for the damages the defendant might suffer in the event the attachment and underlying lawsuit proved to be unjustified.
Rehnquist's concurrence
Chief Justice Rehnquist filed a concurring opinion, joined by Justice Blackmun. Chief Justice Rehnquist agreed that the Connecticut attachment statute failed to satisfy due process but objected to what he described as the majority opinion's "lengthy disquisition as to what combination of safeguards are required to satisfy Due Process in hypothetical cases not before the Court."
Scalia's concurrence
Justice Scalia filed a one-paragraph opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment. The only Justice who declined to join Part II of Justice White's opinion, he opined that because the Connecticut pre-judgment attachment procedure was "unknown at common law," it must be evaluated in light of the balancing test for due process that the Court set forth in Mathews v. Eldridge and agreed that it failed that test.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 501
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:1991 in Connecticut
Category:Legal history of Connecticut
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Connick v. Myers" ==> """
Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S. 138 (1983), is a United States Supreme Court decision concerning the First Amendment rights of public employees who speak on matters of possible public concern within the workplace context. It was first brought by Sheila Myers, an Orleans Parish, Louisiana, assistant district attorney (ADA). She had been fired by her superior, District Attorney Harry Connick Sr., when, after receiving a transfer she had fiercely resisted in private conversations with him and his chief assistant district attorney, she distributed a questionnaire to her fellow prosecutors asking about their experience with Connick's management practices. At trial, Judge Jack Gordon of the Eastern District of Louisiana found the firing had been motivated by the questionnaire and was thus an infringement on her right to speak out on matters of public concern as a public employee. After the Fifth Circuit affirmed the verdict, Connick appealed to the Supreme Court.
The justices reversed the lower courts by a 5–4 margin. Justice Byron White wrote for the majority that most of the matters Myers' questionnaire had touched on were of personal, not public, concern and that the action had damaged the harmonious relations necessary for the efficient operation of the district attorney's office. William Brennan argued in dissent that the majority's application of precedent was flawed. He argued that all the matters in the questionnaire were of public concern, and feared a  chilling effect on speech by public employees about such matters would result.
The case was the first in a line considering the right of public employees to speak contemporaneously with their employment that had started with Pickering v. Board of Education (1968) fifteen years earlier in which the Court sided with the employee. It introduced the test of whether the employee's speech had been on matters of public concern to the balancing of employer and employee interest prescribed in the earlier case. The two would guide the Court's interpretation of later cases such as Rankin v. McPherson (1987). In the 1990s and 2000s, Waters v. Churchill (1994) and Garcetti v. Ceballos (2006), the latter with some similarities to the circumstances of Connick, would further clarify the Court's holding.
Underlying dispute
By 1980, Myers had been an assistant district attorney for more than five years. She had been an effective trial attorney who had turned down promotions to remain in the courtroom. She had also participated in programs at law schools in the New Orleans area and participated in programs sponsored by Connick's office. A judge had also persuaded her to take part in a probation program for juvenile first offenders he ran.
In October of that year, Myers was told she would be transferred to the section run by that judge. She enjoyed the position she was in at the time, in another judge's section, and feared that if she were transferred she would have to recuse herself from cases where she had counseled defendants in the program. She expressed these concerns to Dennis Waldron, the chief assistant district attorney, and Bridget Bane, the head of training for the office.
She raised these concerns again in another meeting with Waldron and Connick about another subject. The next morning she received the formal memorandum making the transfer. At another meeting with Waldron, she repeated her unhappiness and broadened her concerns to include other issues in the office she was concerned about. She said Waldron told her that those concerns were not shared, to which she responded that she would research that.
That night she was unable to sleep. She instead prepared a questionnaire about her concerns for distribution to her coworkers. Early the next morning, she made 40 copies. Connick came in, canceling a day off, to discuss the transfer with her again. She told him she would "consider" the transfer.
At lunch she distributed the questionnaire to 17 other assistant district attorneys personally. Most accepted them. Waldron learned what was happening and called Connick about a "mini-insurrection" taking place. Connick was particularly disturbed by questions about whether respondents felt confident in Waldron, Bane and other supervisors, and about whether ADAs felt pressured to work on his political campaigns, feeling it would be damaging if it got into the media. He called Myers into his office and told her she was fired, effective at the end of the day. She continued to come in for another three days, putting her files and case notes in order.
Litigation
Shortly after her dismissal, Myers filed a Section 1983 suit in federal court for the Eastern District of Louisiana, against Connick both personally and in his official capacity. She alleged violation of her First Amendment rights and sought back pay, reinstatement and compensatory and punitive damages. At first she sought a preliminary injunction, but Judge Jack Gordon converted it to a trial on the merits. It was held before him two months after the firing. Myers argued that she had been fired for distributing the questionnaire; Connick claimed it was a matter of her insubordination in refusing to accept the transfer.
Myers and Connick's attorneys, George Strickler and William Wessel respectively, would represent their clients throughout the case. Wessel was himself a former assistant district attorney, and had in that capacity been the first to interview Myers when she had applied to Connick's office. He shared his former superior's positive assessment of her prosecutorial skills. 
In February 1981 Gordon issued his decision. After recounting the facts of the case, he found for Myers. "The preponderance of the evidence in this case," he wrote," indicates that the plaintiff was fired by the defendant because of her circulation of the questionnaire within the District Attorney's Office." He noted in support that another ADA testified that she had been preparing for her new cases with him, and that Connick had returned home after their morning meeting, satisfied with her answer. Only after Waldron's call about the questionnaire did he return and fire her.
Having established the facts, Gordon turned to the law. He applied the test from Mt. Healthy City Bd. of Ed. v. Doyle,Mt. Healthy City Bd. of Ed. v. Doyle, . a 1977 Supreme Court decision overturning the firing of a teacher for, among other things, sharing a proposed dress code with the media. First, Myers would have to prove that her distribution of the questionnaire was constitutionally protected speech, and that her firing was a result. If she could establish that, the burden would then be on Connick to show that she would have been fired whether she had distributed the questionnaire or not.
Gordon relied on Pickering v. Board of Education,Pickering v. Board of Education, . for the first test. In that landmark 1968 case, the Court had unanimously overturned the firing of a teacher who had written a letter to the editor of a local newspaper criticizing the school board and superintendent for its allocation of school finances. Gordon quoted Thurgood Marshall's majority opinion: "'Statements by public officials on matters of public concern must be afforded First Amendment protection' even though the statements may be directed at the public officials' 'nominal superiors.'" In a more recent case, Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District,Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District, . the Court had also held that the First Amendment protected private speech by public employees on matters of public concern. These two cases, Gordon wrote, established the possibility that her distribution of the questionnaires was constitutionally protected.
"Taken as a whole," Gordon continued," the issues presented in the questionnaire relate to the effective functioning of the District Attorney's Office and are matters of public importance and concern." He returned to Pickering, which further required a balancing test between Myers' free-speech interests and Connick's interest in the efficient operation of a public agency. A 1974 Fifth Circuit decision offered language that clarified this test: "[I]t is incumbent upon [the government] to clearly demonstrate that the employee's conduct substantially and materially interferes with the discharge of duties and responsibilities inherent in [public] employment."Smith v. United States, The decision upheld the firing of a clinical psychologist who had insisted on wearing a pin with a peace symbol while on the job at a veterans' hospital despite repeated requests from his superiors to stop, as it could have unnecessarily upset patients. For specifics Gordon looked to a 1972 Seventh Circuit decision that had offered four areas where this balance might be considered: confidentiality, discipline and harmonious relations among coworkers, relations between the employee and his or her superior, and the extent to which employee speech affected job performance.
Connick had not alleged that Myers had breached confidentiality. He had claimed that Myers violated office policy and thus impeded her job performance by photocopying the questionnaires. Gordon said Connick had offered no evidence of an office policy on photocopier use. "Even had such evidence been offered," he added, "this court could not conclude that such an act carries much weight in regard to striking a balance in the state's favor."
Connick had also not shown any evidence that the distribution of the questionnaires on work time impeded her job performance. As an assistant district attorney, Gordon wrote, she was entitled to some latitude in her work hours. "There is no evidence to indicate that plaintiff was anything other than a hardworking, conscientious attorney who fulfilled the requirements imposed upon her by her job."
Gordon called the last area, the purported effect of the questionnaire on relations between superiors and supervised, "the defendant's most forceful argument." He agreed it was important, but did not believe, as Connick did, that the mere act of distributing a questionnaire which asked, among other things, whether respondents trusted four named supervisors, was as prejudicial to discipline as a negative statement about those individuals would be. He cited a similar case where a college professor had alleged his contract was not renewed because of his role in disseminating a questionnaire. "[It was] not a statement of fact but the presentation and solicitation of ideas and opinions" and thus even more clearly protected.Lindsey v. Board of Regents of the University of Georgia, 607 F.2d 672 (5th Cir., 1979).
"When all factors are considered, it cannot be said that the defendant's interest in promoting the efficiency of the public services performed through his employees was either adversely affected or substantially impeded by plaintiff's distribution of the questionnaire", Gordon concluded. He thus found Myers had met her first test, and reiterated his finding of fact that she had been fired for the distribution of the questionnaire, which satisfied the second. Since that was the only possible reason he had found for her termination, it could not be alleged that she would have been fired without having done it, and thus she had won.
Gordon held that Connick was acting out of his official capacity, so he could not personally be held liable. He ordered her reinstated, although he worried that "it would be difficult for plaintiff to achieve a harmonious working relationship" due to the lawsuit, if she did. He also ordered back pay, $1,500 in compensatory damages, as well as costs and fees, but denied her declaratory relief and punitive damages, since there was no evidence that Connick had shown reckless or wanton disregard for her civil rights. Connick appealed to the Fifth Circuit, which summarily affirmed in mid-1981.
Before the Court
Connick petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari. In 1982 the Court granted the request.. Strickler "had this sinking feeling", when he heard the news, since it meant at least four justices disagreed with the district court; likewise, Wessel said he knew Connick would win. The American Civil Liberties Union and National Education Association filed amicus curiae briefs for Myers urging affirmance. Oral arguments were held in November.
The justices' questions to both were primarily focused on clarifying the facts of the case and distinguishing it from the precedent cases. They focused on the sequence of events, and whether Gordon had properly balanced the two interests at stake.Oral argument in Connick v. Myers, November 1982, oyez.org, retrieved February 12, 2011.
Wessel took issue with the idea that Myers' assignment could seriously be a matter of public interest. "[C]ertainly the public is not interested in which assistant district attorney worked in Section A or Section I of the criminal district court." Not even the question asking if ADAs had felt pressured to work on Connick's campaigns, which he described as "thrown in", were of public interest, he argued, since they were not civil service positions.
Strickler challenged Wessel's insistence that Myers had been fired for her refusal to accept the transfer. Gordon had found differently, he said, because the record did not suggest that she had done so, and that she was planning to accept it. "Since the petitioner cannot really do anything with those facts," he said, "he urges this Court to hold as a matter of law that the content of this questionnaire was so totally devoid of value as to be per se unfit for protection under the First Amendment." William Rehnquist asked him if the public interest argument would have covered the questionnaire had it been limited only to the question of whether the respondent trusted Connick's four lieutenants. Strickler noted in reply that none of them had said that impacted their working relationship with Myers. Connick, he added later, hadn't even consulted her immediate supervisor before firing her.
Decision
The Court announced its decision on April 20, 1983. By a 5-4 margin it had upheld Connick's firing of Myers, holding that her First Amendment rights had not been violated and the district court had imposed an overly onerous burden on him. Justice Byron White wrote for a majority that also included Chief Justice Warren Burger, Lewis Powell, Sandra Day O'Connor and William Rehnquist. William Brennan's dissent was signed by Harry Blackmun, Thurgood Marshall and John Paul Stevens.
Majority opinion
"The District Court got off on the wrong foot in this case" White wrote, when it found that all the matters on the questionnaire had been of public concern. He noted that Pickering had been very emphatic in making that qualification, and reviewed the history of the law in that area.Connick v. Myers, , 143, White, J.
For most of the 20th century, judges had followed a maxim of Oliver Wendell Holmes when he found in favor of the city of New Bedford as a justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court: "The petitioner may have a constitutional right to talk politics, but he has no constitutional right to be a policeman."Connick, 461 U.S. at 144 (citing McAuliffe v. Mayor of New Bedford, 155 Mass. 216, 220, 29 N.E. 517, 517 (1892)). Throughout the early 20th century the Supreme Court had held similarly. Around the beginning of the McCarthy era in the middle of the century, as public employees were required to sign loyalty oaths and deny or repudiate past membership in the Communist Party or similar organizations, the Court sided with challenges to those laws, often by holding them too vague to be enforceable. These culminated in Keyishian v. Board of Regents,Keyishian v. Board of Regents, . where the Court struck down a broad range of New York statutes and regulations requiring faculty at state-run colleges and universities to certify that they had never been members of the Communist Party.In that case Brennan had written the majority opinion, and White had joined Tom Clark's dissent.
Pickering had built on those cases and established a new line, that concerning public employees' right to speak on matters of public concern. "[These cases] lead us to conclude that, if Myers' questionnaire cannot be fairly characterized as constituting speech on a matter of public concern, it is unnecessary for us to scrutinize the reasons for her discharge", White wrote.
The majority did not find most of Myers' questions, those relating to transfer policies within the office, to be likely matters of public concern. "Indeed, the questionnaire, if released to the public, would convey no information at all other than the fact that a single employee is upset with the status quo." Rather, White said, Myers' real aim had been "to gather ammunition for another round of controversy with her superiors. These questions reflect one employee's dissatisfaction with a transfer and an attempt to turn that displeasure into a cause célèbre ... While, as a matter of good judgment, public officials should be receptive to constructive criticism offered by their employees, the First Amendment does not require a public office to be run as a roundtable for employee complaints over internal office affairs."Connick, 461 U.S. at 148.
Myers' question on whether employees felt pressured to work on campaigns did, White agreed, touch on a legitimate public concern. For that reason the Court had to determine whether the firing was justified nevertheless. White found Gordon's burden on Connick "unduly onerous". The district court judge, he wrote, had failed to take into account language in Pickering that said the state's burden in showing that the employee's speech impaired his or her ability to discharge official duties varies with the nature of the speech.Connick, 461 U.S. at 149–50.
While Gordon had properly found that Connick had offered no convincing evidence that Myers' own job responsibilities had been affected, White disagreed that there had been no impact on her working relationships with Connick or her coworkers. "When close working relationships are essential to fulfilling public responsibilities, a wide degree of deference to the employer's judgment is appropriate", White wrote. "Furthermore, we do not see the necessity for an employer to allow events to unfold to the extent that the disruption of the office and the destruction of working relationships is manifest before taking action."White did qualify this latter point: "We caution that a stronger showing may be necessary if the employee's speech more substantially involved matters of public concern."Connick, 461 U.S. at 151–52.
White rejected Gordon's analysis of the questionnaire as less subversive than outright criticism. "Questions, no less than forcefully stated opinions and facts, carry messages and it requires no unusual insight to conclude that the purpose, if not the likely result, of the questionnaire is to seek to precipitate a vote of no confidence in Connick and his supervisors." Following Givhan, he also found the time, place and manner relevant, since Myers had distributed her questionnaire in the office during work hours, shortly after her meeting with Connick, timing Myers said was intentional on her part. "When employee speech concerning office policy arises from an employment dispute concerning the very application of that policy to the speaker, additional weight must be given to the supervisor's view that the employee has threatened the authority of the employer to run the office."Connick, 461 U.S. at 153.
"The limited First Amendment interest involved here," White began his conclusion, "does not require that Connick tolerate action which he reasonably believed would disrupt the office, undermine his authority, and destroy close working relationships." He said the decision was not a narrowing of free speech rights but a reasonable response to the facts of the case. "[I]t would indeed be a Pyrrhic victory for the great principles of free expression if the Amendment's safeguarding of a public employee's right, as a citizen, to participate in discussions concerning public affairs were confused with the attempt to constitutionalize the employee grievance that we see presented here."Connick, 461 U.S. at 154.
Dissent
"It is hornbook law," Brennan wrote, "that speech about 'the manner in which government is operated or should be operated' is an essential part of the communications necessary for self-governance the protection of which was a central purpose of the First Amendment." Unlike the majority, he believed that Myers' questionnaire raised issues worthy of constitutional protection.Connick, 461 U.S. at 156 (Brennan, J., dissenting).
He found the majority's holding "flawed in three respects": 
it read Pickering to hold that the context of a statement should be considered not only in assessing whether it impaired a public employee's work function but also whether it was a matter of public interest;
it did not consider the effect of personnel policies on the efficiency of the district attorney's office to be a matter of public concern, and
it misapplied the Pickering balancing test by holding that Myers could have been properly fired even though one of her concerns was undeniably a matter of public interest without evidence that her conduct disrupted the office.Connick, 461 U.S. at 158 (Brennan, J., dissenting).
Brennan chastised the majority for using Givhan in this case to distinguish between speech on subjects of inherent public concern and issues of public import that might become public concern. He thought the context of the speech was irrelevant, pointing in a footnote to the extensive media coverage the incident received, as well as other coverage of the internal operations of Connick's office, in the Times-Picayune, New Orleans' daily newspaper. "The First Amendment affords special protection to speech that may inform public debate about how our society is to be governed—regardless of whether it actually becomes the subject of a public controversy."Connick, 461 U.S. at 159–60 (Brennan, J., dissenting).
Although all five of the supervisors named in the questionnaire had testified at trial that they could continue working with Myers were she to return, the majority had given greater weight to what it held to be Connick's reasonable belief that the distribution of the questionnaire would adversely affect his authority. "Such extreme deference to the employer's judgment is not appropriate" for public employment, Brennan responded. He pointed to Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District, the landmark free-speech case in which the Court had upheld the right of high-school students to wear black armbands to school in protest against the Vietnam War.Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District, . In that case a majority had held that the school officials' fear that the armbands would be disruptive, without any other evidence, did not justify prohibiting them. He did not see a difference in this case.Connick, 461 U.S. at 166–70 (Brennan, J., dissenting).
"The Court's decision today inevitably will deter public employees from making critical statements about the manner in which government agencies are operated for fear that doing so will provoke their dismissal," Brennan said, in conclusion. "As a result, the public will be deprived of valuable information with which to evaluate the performance of elected officials."
Aftermath
Sheila Myers continued practicing law and still does criminal defense work in New Orleans. Two decades later, in 2001, she said she had never expected her case to become the precedent it did. "I do believe that a positive outcome for me from the case is that people believe me when I say that I'm going to do something", she said. "I think people believe that I will stand up for what I believe in." However, she says public employees were "disserved" by it and hopes to live to see the decision overturned.
She and Connick, as well as Waldron, who later became a state criminal court judge, remained on good terms. "It is kind of ironic that we are all still around," Myers says. "When I see them, I speak and they speak. I think there is a level of mutual respect." Connick, too, who served as district attorney until 2003, also was surprised it reached the nation's highest court. "All of this free-speech foolishness was nonsense ... An employer should be able to fire an employee who fails to follow orders, plain and simple."
Subsequent jurisprudence
Because of the difference in circumstances and its opposite holding, Connick was considered as the complement of Pickering, establishing a test that required determining whether the employee's speech was on a matter of public concern. The Court has revisited the issue in three cases since 1983. White's caution against constitutionalizing every public employment dispute has also informed two cases on the Fourth Amendment rights of public employees in internal investigations.
Rankin v. McPherson
Four years later, in 1987, the Court again had to consider whether a public employee's speech could constitutionally cost her her job. The respondent in Rankin v. McPherson was a Harris County, Texas, deputy constable, newly hired and on probationary status in 1981, when she heard about the assassination attempt on President Ronald Reagan. She told a coworker that "if they go for him again, I hope they get him". Another deputy constable who overheard it told the constable, who fired her.Rankin v. McPherson, .
A 5-4 majority found that her First Amendment rights had been violated. Thurgood Marshall wrote that the speech was on a clear matter of public concern, the president's health. Applying Connick and considering the context, he held that the statement was not disruptive to the function of the constable's officeRankin, he noted, had not even argued that it was. and therefore was protected speech.Rankin, 380 et seq., Marshall, J. Lewis Powell, a member of the Connick majority, wrote in a separate concurrence that it was so private as to not even need the analysis required by that case. "It will be an unusual case where the employer's legitimate interests will be so great as to justify punishing an employee for this type of private speech that routinely takes place at all levels in the workplace."Rankin, 392–94, Powell, J., concurring.
Antonin Scalia, appointed to the Court by Reagan to replace Burger, wrote in dissent that Myers' questionnaire had far more of a claim to legitimate public interest than McPherson's remark. "Once [she] stopped explicitly criticizing the President's policies and expressed a desire that he be assassinated, she crossed the line." Even if it were a matter of public concern, he continued, the constable had a strong interest, recognized in prior case law, in protecting its public image, in particular since his office was a law enforcement agency.Rankin, 394 et seq., Scalia, J., dissenting.
Waters v. Churchill
The next case to consider the First Amendment rights of public employees was Waters v. Churchill. In that 1994 case, from the Seventh Circuit, a nurse at an Illinois state hospital charged that her dismissal after remarks she made to a coworker expressing concern about the effect a supervisor's cross-training policies were having on patient care were reported to that supervisor. As in Connick, the speech at issue included personal matters as well as matters of possible public concern. It was distinguished by a dispute of fact between the parties as to the substance of the remark.
O'Connor, writing for a four-justice plurality, held that due to the dispute the Connick test should have been applied to what the supervisor reasonably believed Churchill had said, rather than what a trier of fact might find. Since the former was that she had generally disparaged the supervisor and discussed various personal disputes with her, there was no need to assess whether the statements were, as Churchill had claimed, matters of public concern.Waters v. Churchill, , 664 et seq., O'Connor, J. Scalia's concurrence, signed by the other three justices, complained that her opinion left open the question of how courts should resolve the question if the employer's belief was found to be unreasonable. "Loose ends are the inevitable consequence of judicial invention," he complained. "We will spend decades trying to improvise the limits of this new First Amendment procedure that is unmentioned in text and unformed by tradition."Waters, 686 et seq/, Scalia, J., concurring. John Paul Stevens, writing for himself and fellow dissenter Harry Blackmun, likewise found this unnecessary. "The [constitutional] violation does not vanish merely because the firing was based upon a reasonable mistake about what the employee said," he wrote. "A proper regard for that principle requires that, before firing a public employee for her speech, management get its facts straight."Waters, 694 et seq., Stevens, J., dissenting.
San Diego v. Roe
In 2004, the Court issued a per curiam opinion in San Diego v. Roe that provided with another opportunity to discuss Connick. It reversed the Ninth Circuit and upheld the firing of a police officer who sold pornographic videos of himself, wearing a generic police uniform, on eBay. The opinion admitted "the boundaries of the public concern test are not well-defined", but found it useful in determining that the officer's pornographic videos were not, as the Ninth Circuit had held, commentary on matters of public concern. "[E]ven under the view expressed by the dissent in Connick from four Members of the Court," it said, "the speech here would not come within the definition of a matter of public concern" since it did not inform the public about the police department's activities. It was "linked to his official status as a police officer, and designed to exploit his employer's image."San Diego v. Roe, , per curiam.
Garcetti v. Ceballos
In 2006, a similar case, in that it involved an assistant district attorney in a large city challenging a nationally known superior over a job action, came before the Court. In Garcetti v. Ceballos, a Los Angeles County prosecutor claimed the office of Gil Garcetti had retaliated against him with a series of adverse personnel moves after he questioned the veracity of a search warrant affidavit following a conversation with a defense attorney, to the point of testifying to them in a hearing. It was initially argued with O'Connor's seat vacant following her retirement, and the justices deadlocked. Following the appointment of Samuel Alito, it was reargued and he cast the deciding vote to reverse the Ninth Circuit and find that Ceballos had not been unduly deprived of his First Amendment rights.
For the majority, Anthony Kennedy found that while Ceballos was speaking on a matter of undeniable public concern, his speech, unlike Myers' or those in the other cases, was made as part of his job duties. Therefore, the First Amendment did not reach it. "Restricting speech that owes its existence to a public employee's professional responsibilities does not infringe any liberties the employee might have enjoyed as a private citizen," Kennedy wrote. "It simply reflects the exercise of employer control over what the employer itself has commissioned or created".Garcetti v. Ceballos, , Kennedy, J. He cited language from his majority opinion in Rosenberger v. University of Virginia to the effect that the government has control over all speech it pays for.Rosenberger v. University of Virginia, , 833, Kennedy, J., cited in Garcetti.
David Souter, in one of three dissents, used Connick to indicate one extreme of the continuum of free speech claims, that where no constitutional interest could be found.Schenck v. Pro-Choice Network of Western New York, , was his other extreme. He argued the majority was applying precedents in an overly broad fashion; Ceballos was not being paid for his speech as much for his legal skills. "The only sense in which his position apparently required him to hew to a substantive message was at the relatively abstract point of favoring respect for law and its evenhanded enforcement, subjects that are not at the level of controversy in this case."Garcetti, Souter, J., dissenting. Stephen Breyer also noted that Ceballos had professional and ethical reasons that could have compelled him to speak as he did, and the Court should have been mindful of that.Garcetti, Breyer, J., dissenting.
Application to Fourth Amendment rights of public employees
In another case from the 1987 term, White's "common-sense realization that government offices could not function if every employment decision became a constitutional matter" became the guiding principle for evaluating public employees' Fourth Amendment rights during non-criminal administrative investigations. In O'Connor v. Ortega, Sandra Day O'Connor cited that aspect of the holding when she wrote for a four-justice plurality that while public employees did not lose their Fourth Amendment rights by virtue of their employment the government need only meet a reasonable suspicion standard in order to search their desks or belongings to investigate alleged violations of workplace policy.. Waters expanded on that with another holding, that the government has a lower standard to uphold in meeting its constitutional obligations when it acts as employer instead of sovereign. Both would be quoted again in 2010, when Ontario v. Quon considered the same issue in holding unanimously that an audit of police pagers which revealed sexually explicit personal messages was legitimately work-related and constitutional..
Analysis and commentary
Two decades later, Strickler still disagreed with the Court. "This had been an easy case for the lower courts and, I think, rightfully so", he told the Freedom Forum. Justice Brennan had been right, he said, "that public employees are more at risk for expressing dissent." He also called its standard "not very workable", due to conflicting opinions from lower courts trying to apply it. Wessel characterized the speech as "petty bickering" and called the Court's ruling "a common-sense approach." Myers' questionnaire "was nearly 100 percent internal".
Brennan's biographer David Marion sees the case as reaffirming two principles behind the justice's majority opinions in New York Times Co. v. United States, the Pentagon Papers case from 1971. That case had also involved, to some extent, the First Amendment rights of government workers in disputes at work. "[His dissent] is fully consistent with [his] generous view of the Court's powers ... and his commitment to the fullest possible degree of freedom of expression and access to information." 
Lewis Maltby, founder of the National Work Rights Institute, is highly critical of the decision. He castigated the public-concern requirement as "[something] the Court just made up" in his book Can They Do That?. "Justice White seems to have missed the Catch-22 quality of his rule", he wrote. "You don't need to question management when you agree with them, and you can't question management when you disagree with them because the very act of questioning them could hurt your working relationship." With exceptions like McPherson, he believes this rule has cost too many public employees their jobs. "The sad reality is that freedom of speech is a myth where your employment is concerned, whether you work in the private or the public sector."
When San Diego v. Roe was handed down, two decades later, Tony Mauro worried that its holding could potentially narrow the public-concern test. Writing at the First Amendment Center website, he noted that it suggested that it was not enough for public-employee speech to excite actual public interest to be adjudged worthy of First Amendment protection, but that such public interest must be in something legitimate. "Applying those subjective terms to Officer Roe's videotapes may have been an easy task," he wrote. "But they could prove perilous in future cases involving, for example, supermarket tabloids or gossipy Web sites."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 461
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:Government of New Orleans
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Connick v. Thompson" ==> """
Connick v. Thompson, 563 U.S. 51 (2011), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court considered whether a prosecutor's office can be held liable for a single Brady violation by one of its members on the theory that the office provided inadequate training..
Background
In 1984, John Thompson, a 22-year-old African American father of two, was charged along with another man for killing a prominent New Orleans businessman. After his picture was published in the newspaper because of the arrest, victims of an unsolved attempted armed robbery identified Thompson as the person involved.
Handling both cases, the district attorney of the Parish of Orleans, Harry Connick Sr., chose to first bring to trial the armed robbery charge against Thompson in hopes that a conviction would help with the murder case. Based solely on the identification by the three victims, Thompson was found guilty of attempted armed robbery and sentenced to 50 years in prison. Then during the murder trial, Thompson was effectively precluded from testifying in his own defense because the prosecution would have impeached his testimony by referring to his armed robbery conviction. His codefendant was able to testify that he saw Thompson commit the murder without rebuttal testimony from Thompson. Thompson was convicted of the murder and sentenced to death. However, Connick suppressed a critical blood sample test. Elisa Abolafia, a private investigator, discovered that the blood splatter on the victim from the robbery did not match the blood type of Thompson. This meant that Thompson was wrongfully convicted of the robbery; a conviction that prohibited him from defending himself vigorously in the murder case. Connick also suppressed evidence in the murder trial, failing to disclose to Thompson's legal team the existence of an eyewitness description that matched one of the prosecution's witnesses, Kevin Freeman, and audio of witness Richard Perkins which implied Perkins had come forward for a cash reward and had used Freeman as his source. Thompson's murder case was vacated in 2002 and he was retried with his defense providing evidence that Freeman had committed the murder.
After nearly two decades of wrongfully being imprisoned, Thompson was found not guilty in the retrial. Thompson eventually sued Connick and several of his assistant district attorneys for suppression of evidence and won a verdict of $14 million.
Opinion of the court
On March 29, 2011, the United States Supreme Court, in a 5–4 decision written by Justice Clarence Thomas, overturned the $14 million award by the lower court, with the decision split along ideological lines."Supreme Court rules against exonerated death row inmate who sued prosecutors" By Robert Barnes, Tuesday, March 29, 10:51 PM The Washington Post The majority found for the appellant, Harry Connick Sr., holding that the prosecutor's office is not liable under §1983, saying that "the only issue before [the Court] is whether Connick, as the policy maker for the district attorney's office, was deliberately indifferent to the need to train the attorneys under his authority" to which Justice Thomas said the answer to that question was no, given an absence of proof concerning a pattern of misconduct.
The dissent, written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, observed that Thompson was the victim of much more pervasive misconduct by the District Attorney's office than a single Brady violation.
Criticism
The New York Times opined that "Justice Ginsburg's dissent is the more persuasive...","Failure of Empathy and Justice" March 31, 2011 and the Los Angeles Times wrote that "[t]he court got this one wrong.""A wrong decision by the Supreme Court on civil rights" no date Nina Totenberg wrote that "a bitterly divided U.S. Supreme Court all but closed the door" to prosecutors being held liable for damages when prosecutors violate the law to deprive a person of a fair trial."Man Wrongly Convicted: Are Prosecutors Liable?" NPR - Nina Totenberg - April 2, 2011 Dahlia Lithwick wrote "Both Thomas and Scalia have produced what can only be described as a master class in human apathy. Their disregard for the facts of Thompson's thrashed life and near-death emerges as a moral flat line...only by willfully ignoring that entire trial record can [Scalia] and Thomas reduce the entire constitutional question to a single misdeed by a single bad actor.""Cruel but Not Unusual" Radley Balko noted that "...[t]here's something pretty unsavory about a judicial philosophy that cites a ruling that we now know sent an innocent man back to prison as an authority to deny compensation to another innocent man who was nearly executed because the government hid the evidence that would have and eventually did exonerate him.""Scalia and the Innocent" Kieran Healy called the tone of the majority opinion "spiteful", and the decision a "Lord Denning Moment" for the court. Healy continued, "[t]he conservative majority preferred to affirm an obvious wrong rather than face the appalling vista of a brutal and corrupt justice system.""Connick v. Thompson " Andrew Cohen called the majority's argument a "warped rationale.""Prosecutors Get a Mulligan, Wrongfully Convicted Man Gets Squat" By Andrew Cohen March 30, 2011, 8:07 PM Atlantic Wendy Kaminer wrote that "...what's striking about this case, aside from the majority's apparent indifference to practical realities and the actual sufferings of an innocent man wrongfully sentenced to die, is its indifference to the facts of the case outlined by Justice Ginsburg's dissent.""When the Supreme Court Fears Too Much Justice" March 31, 2011, 9:11 AM ET Atlantic Bennett Gershman and Joel Cohen called the majority's reasoning "bizarre," and wrote that "[Ginsburg's] dissent was so contemptuous of the majority's decision that it provoked a gratuitous concurring opinion from Justice Scalia in a likely effort to seek to legitimize the majority opinion from her savage rebuke."Bennett L. Gershman and Joel Cohen, "Cops Are Stupid, But Prosecutors Are Smart" Posted: 04/ 1/11 11:30 AM ET Writing for the American Constitution Society, Brandon Garrett called the ruling "chilling" and the majority's arguments "formalistic and circular."Brandon L. Garrett, "Hiding the Forensics"  April 1, 2011
See also
 Harry Connick Sr.
 Shareef Cousin
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 563
References
Further reading
External links
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:Brady material case law
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Consolidated Edison Co. v. Public Service Commission" ==> """
Consolidated Edison Co. v. Public Service Commission, 447 U.S. 530 (1980), was a United States Supreme Court decision addressing the free speech rights of public utility corporations under the First Amendment.. In a majority opinion written by Justice Lewis Powell, the Court invalidated an order by the New York Public Service Commission that prohibited utility companies from including inserts on controversial matters of public policy with billing statements.Consolidated Edison Co., 447 U.S. at 544.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 447
References
 External links 
 First Amendment Library entry on Consolidated Edison Co. v. Public Serv. Comm'n
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:New York Public Service Commission
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Consolidated Edison
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Consolidated Safety-Valve Co. v. Crosby Steam Gauge & Valve Co." ==> """
Consolidated Safety-Valve Co. v. Crosby Steam Gauge & Valve Co., 113 U.S. 157 (1885), was a patent case to determine validity of patent No. 58,294,. granted to George W. Richardson September 25, 1866, for an improvement in steam safety valves.. 
Technical background
Richardson was the first person who made a safety valve which, while it automatically relieved the pressure of steam in the boiler, did not, in effecting that result, reduce the pressure to such an extent as to make the use of the relieving apparatus practically impossible because of the expenditure of time and fuel necessary to bring up the steam again to the proper working standard.
His valve was the first which had the strictured orifice to retard the escape of the steam and enable the valve to open with increasing power against the spring and close suddenly, with small loss of pressure in the boiler.
Ruling
The direction given in the patent that the flange or lip is to be separated from the valve seat by about one sixty-fourth of an inch for an ordinary spring, with less space for a strong spring and more space for a weak spring, to regulate the escape of steam as required, is a sufficient description as matter of law, and it is not shown to be insufficient as a matter of fact.
Letters patent No. 85,963, granted to said Richardson January 19, 1869, for an improvement in safety valves for steam boilers or generators, are valid.
The patents of Richardson were infringed by a valve which produces the same effects in operation by the means described in Richardson's claims, although the valve proper is an annulus and the extended surface is a disc inside of the annulus, the Richardson valve proper being a disc and the extended surface an annulus surrounding the disc, and although the valve proper has two ground joints, and only the steam which passes through one of them goes through the stricture, while, in the Richardson valve, all the steam which passes into the air goes through the stricture, and although the huddling chamber is at the center instead of the circumference, and is in the seat of the valve, under the head, instead of in the head, and the stricture is at the circumference of the seat of the valve instead of being at the circumference of the head.
The fact that the prior patented valves were not used and the speedy and extensive adoption of Richardson's valve support the conclusion as to the novelty of the latter.
Suits in equity having been begun in 1879 for the infringement of the two patents, and the circuit court having dismissed the bills, this Court in reversing the decrees after the first patent had expired but not the second, awarded accounts of profits and damages as to both patents, and a perpetual injunction as to the second patent.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Steam power
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:Safety valves
"""

From "Consumer Financial Protection Bureau v. Community Financial Services Association of America, Limited" ==> """
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau v. Community Financial Services Association of America, Limited (Docket 22–448) is a pending United States Supreme Court case related to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau's funding mechanism.
 Background 
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau was created after the financial crisis of 2007–2008 as part of the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Its structure included a director that could not be fired by the President except for cause, and the ability to request funding from the Federal Reserve rather than the United States Congress. In Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2020), the Supreme Court of the United States held the CFPB director's removal protections were unconstitutional.
The Community Financial Services Association of America, a trade group for the payday lending industry, filed a lawsuit in 2018 challenging a CFPB rule restricting payday lending. The United States District Court for the Western District of Texas upheld the rule. The CFSAA appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, which in October 2022 upheld the rule against an Administrative Procedure Act challenge, but held it must be vacated because it was created when the agency was funded by the Federal Reserve. The Fifth Circuit held this funding mechanism was unconstitutional.
 Supreme Court 
Less than a month after the Fifth Circuit decided the case, the CFPB filed a petition for a writ of certiorari at the Supreme Court, and the Biden administration asked for the Supreme Court to "fast track" the case to be heard during the current 2022 Supreme Court term. The Supreme Court granted certiorari on February 27, 2023.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
"""

From "Continental Paper Bag Co. v. Eastern Paper Bag Co." ==> """
Continental Paper Bag Co. v. Eastern Paper Bag Co., 210 U.S. 405 (1908), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States established the principle that patent holders have no obligation to use their patent.
 Facts 
Eastern Paper Bag brought an action to prevent its competitor Continental Paper Bag from using its patent for a "self-opening" paper bag. Continental Paper Bag alleged that Eastern Paper Bag was not using its patent but simply trying to suppress competition.
 Decision of the Supreme Court 
The Supreme Court rejected this argument by Continental Paper Bag, holding that it was the essence of the patent to exclude others without question of motive.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 210
Hartford-Empire Co. v. United States, 
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:1908 in United States case law
Category:Bags
"""

From "Continental Television, Inc. v. GTE Sylvania, Inc." ==> """
Continental Television v. GTE Sylvania, 433 U.S. 36 (1977), was an antitrust decision of the Supreme Court of the United States. It widened the scope of the "rule of reason" to exclude the jurisdiction of antitrust laws.
Facts
Facing declining sales, GTE-Sylvania attempted to reduce the number of competing Sylvania retailers by "limit[ing] the number of franchises granted for any given area [of the country] and requir[ing] each franchisee to sell his Sylvania products only from the location or locations at which he was franchised." 433 U.S., at 38. When Continental was denied such a franchise, they filed a lawsuit alleging violation of the Sherman Act.
Continental's chances looked good, because the Supreme Court had held such restrictions to be subject to a per se rule in United States v. Arnold, Schwinn & Co., 388 U.S. 365 (1967).
Judgment
The Supreme Court overruled Schwinn (which had itself been a change in course from White Motor Co. v. United States, 372 U.S. 253 (1963), where the court had refused to adopt such a rule, 433 U.S., at 47) and held that such business practices must be analyzed under the rule of reason. Noting that "per se rules of illegality are appropriate only when they relate to conduct that is manifestly anticompetitive," 433 U.S., at 49-50, the court concluded that GTE's behavior transgressed the Sherman Act only if it was an unreasonable restraint of trade that would diminish competition and promote inefficiency.
Significance
The Sylvania case became the first shot in the court's march to the "Chicago School" version of antitrust economics as the touchstone of antitrust law. Attributed to the influence of Robert Bork, summarized in The Antitrust Paradox, and Richard Posner, explained in Antitrust Law (both published in 1978), these legal scholars popularized what Chicago economists had produced.
The initial ground was broken by economist George McGee, who reanalyzed the biggest antitrust ruling in history, the Supreme Court's split up of Standard Oil in 1911. McGee disputed Standard Oil's engagement in predatory pricing, the linchpin of its antitrust violations. McGee's view is now widely criticized, by lawyers Christopher Leslie, Elizabeth Granitz, Benjamin Klein, economists James Dalton, Louis Esposito, and historians Ron Chernow, Daniel Yergin. Bork and Posner wrote books that advised attorneys and courts that McGee's paper showed antitrust's foundation was uncertain. Other Chicago economists who influenced antitrust debates in ways that narrowed and limited its legal basis include Ronald Coase, Gary Becker, and George Stigler.
McGee was inspired to rethink antitrust law by his University of Chicago economics co-professor Aaron Director in the 1950s, according to Posner. Director was Milton Friedman's brother-in-law, and shared his agenda to move mainstream economics away from Keynesian macroeconomics and towards laissez-faire.
The case staked out the ground for cases like Broadcast Music v. Columbia Broadcasting System, State Oil Co. v. Khan, Verizon v. Trinko, and Leegin v. PSKS.
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:Verizon Communications
"""

From "Cook v. Gralike" ==> """
Cook v. Gralike, 531 U.S. 510 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that an attempt by the state of Missouri to influence Congressional elections in favor of candidates who supported term limits was unconstitutional.Varat, J.D. et al.  Constitutional Law Cases and Materials, Concise Thirteenth Edition.  Foundation Press, New York: 2009, p. 103
 Opinion of the Court 
Missouri had adopted a state constitutional amendment with a change that, during primary general elections, warnings would be affixed to the voting ballots of candidates that did not support term limits.
The Court held that the powers delegated to the states by the Elections Clause related only to the power over the procedural mechanisms of elections.  Because this amendment sought to influence the outcome of elections, it exceeded state powers over national elections.Varat, p. 104
 See also 
 U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton (1995)
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States elections case law
"""

From "Cooley v. Board of Wardens" ==> """
Cooley v. Board of Wardens, 53 U.S. (12 How.) 299 (1852), was a US Supreme Court case that held that a Pennsylvania law requiring all ships entering or leaving Philadelphia to hire a local pilot did not violate the Commerce Clause of the Constitution. Those who did not comply with the law had been required to pay a fee. Benjamin R. Curtis wrote for the majority, "It is the opinion of a majority of the court that the mere grant to Congress of the power to regulate commerce, did not deprive the States of power to regulate pilots, and that although Congress had legislated on this subject, its legislation manifests an intention, with a single exception, not to regulate this subject, but to leave its regulation to the several states."
Legal historian Charles W. McCurdy viewed Cooley as a defining case which clarified the Court's hitherto contradictory jurisprudence on state powers over interstate commerce.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 53
 Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution
 References 
External links
Summary of Cooley v. Board of Wardens
Category:1852 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:Water transportation in Pennsylvania
Category:1852 in Pennsylvania
Category:History of Philadelphia
"""

From "Coolidge v. New Hampshire" ==> """
Coolidge v. New Hampshire, 403 U.S. 443 (1971), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the Fourth Amendment and the automobile exception.
The state sought to justify the search of a car owned by Edward Coolidge, suspected of killing 14-year-old Pamela Mason in January 1964, on three theories: automobile exception, search incident to arrest, and plain view.
Facts
14-year-old Pamela Mason of Manchester, New Hampshire placed an ad in the window of a local merchant offering to babysit. On January 13, 1964, she was picked up by a man who had called her, saying that he needed a babysitter. He picked her up to take her to the alleged babysitting location but she was never seen again. Eight days later, Mason was found stabbed and shot to death in a snowbank near Manchester, New Hampshire. The state Attorney General took charge of police activities relating to the murder. When the police applied for a warrant to search suspect Coolidge's automobile, the Attorney General, acting as a justice of the peace, authorized it. Additionally, local police had taken items from Coolidge's home during the course of an interview with the suspect's wife. Coolidge was found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment.
Opinion of the Court
In a decision in which a number of justices chose to concur in part and dissent in part, the Court held that the searches and seizures of Coolidge's property were unconstitutional. Justice Stewart's opinion held that the warrant authorizing the seizure of Coolidge's automobile was invalid because it was not issued by a "neutral and detached magistrate." Justice Stewart also rejected New Hampshire's arguments in favor of making an exception to the warrant requirement. Justice Stewart held that neither the "incident to arrest" doctrine nor the "plain view" doctrine justified the search, and that an "automobile exception" was inapplicable. The Court noted that although the "automobile exception" exists, "the word 'automobile' is not a talisman in whose presence the fourth amendment fades away and disappears...".
Aftermath
Coolidge was released from prison in 1991 maintains his innocence in Mason's murder and the other murders he was suspected in. 
References
Further reading
. 
https://www.oyez.org/cases/1970-1979/1970/1970_323
External links
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Legal history of New Hampshire
"""

From "Coon v. Wilson" ==> """
Coon v. Wilson, 113 U.S. 268 (1885),. was a suit filed in the United States Supreme Court regarding the infringement of reissued letters patent No. 8, 169, granted to the plaintiff, Washington Wilson, as inventor, April 9, 1878, on an application therefor filed March 11, 1878, for an "improvement in collars," the original patent, No. 197,807, having been granted to him December 4, 1877..
The patent was for a "standing collar" resulting in a more comfortable fit.
Background
The final decree in this case was entered July 28, 1881. The decisions of the Court in Miller v. Brass Co., 104 U.S. 350, and James v. Campbell, 104 U.S. 356, were made January 9, 1882. Under those decisions and many others made by this Court since, the first and fourth claims of the reissue cannot be sustained. Although this reissue was applied for a little over three months after the original patent was granted, the case is one where it is sought merely to enlarge the claim of the original patent by repeating that claim and adding others; where no mistake or inadvertence is shown, so far as the short or sectional bands are concerned; where the patentee waited until the defendants produced their continuous band collar, and then applied for such enlarged claims as to embrace the defendants' collar, which was not covered by the claim of the original patent, and where it is apparent from a comparison of the two patents that the reissue was made to enlarge the scope of the original. As the rule is expressed in the recent case of Mahn v. Harwood, 112 U.S. 354, a patent "cannot be lawfully reissued for the mere purpose of enlarging the claim unless there has been a clear mistake, inadvertently committed, in the wording of the claim and the application for a reissue is made within a reasonably short period after the original patent was granted."
But a clear mistake, inadvertently committed, in the wording of the claim, is necessary, without reference to the length of time. In the present case, there was no mistake in the wording of the claim of the original patent. The description warranted no other claim. It did not warrant any claim covering bands not short or sectional. The description had to be changed in the reissue to warrant the new claims in the reissue. The description in the reissue is not a more clear and satisfactory statement of what is described in the original patent, but is a description of a different thing so ingeniously worded as to cover collars with continuous long bands and which have no short or sectional bands. The drawings showed no continuous band, and the statement in the original patent that "the use of the short or sectional bands produces a saving of material, as compared to the old style of continuous band," shows that the patentee was drawing a sharp contrast between the only bands he contemplated—short or sectional bands—and a continuous band of one piece of material as long as the collar. The original patent industriously excluded from its scope a continuous band. In the reissue, to cover a continuous graduated band, the two bands B B are converted into a single band composed of the parts B B and, while that is described as extending along the top or body of the collar, the "shorter graduated bands" are described as saving material, as compared with an old style continuous band, of uniform width.
While we are of opinion that the views of the circuit court, as before recited, were erroneous, we presume that if this case had been decided after January 1882, the decree would not have been for the plaintiff.
Decision
The decree of the circuit court was reversed, and the case was remanded to that court, with a direction to dismiss the bill, with costs.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
"""

From "Cooper Industries, Inc. v. Leatherman Tool Group, Inc." ==> """
Cooper Industries, Inc. v. Leatherman Tool Group, Inc., 532 U.S. 424 (2001), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court involving the standard of review that Federal Appeal Courts should use when examining punitive damages awards.
Prior history
Leatherman Tool Group made a multifunction tool that was arguably uniquely new at the time of its introduction.  In 1995, Cooper Industries, a competing toolmaker, decided to enter the same market niche with a similar tool.  The competing product was originally to be nearly identical to the original, save a few cosmetic changes.  When introducing the new tool at the 1996 National Hardware Show, the advertising materials, catalogs, and a mock-up were, in fact, modified versions of the original Leatherman tool.
After the trade show, Leatherman Tool Group filed a civil suit against Cooper Industries asserting claims of trade-dress infringement, unfair competition, and false advertising  under the Lanham Act and a common-law claim of unfair competition for advertising and selling an imitation.  In October 1997, a federal jury returned a verdict against Cooper Industries on the false advertising, imitation, and unfair competition claims and assessed damages.  It awarded Leatherman Tool Group $50,000.00 in compensatory damages and $4.5 Million in punitive damages.  The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the punitive damages on appeal, stating that the damages were not "grossly excessive" under BMW of North America, Inc. v. Gore .
Case
The case was argued on February 26, 2001.  Cooper Industries asked the Court to decide whether the Court of Appeals reviewed the constitutionality of the punitive damages award under the correct standard.  
Because the Court itself has recognized that determining if a fine is grossly excessive is "inherently imprecise" Gore held that it was necessary to evaluate a number of factors.  
The degree of the defendant's reprehensibility or culpability
The relationship between the penalty and the harm to the victim caused by the defendant's actions
The sanctions imposed in other cases for comparable misconduct
The Appeals Court has the responsibility on appeal of determining if the lower District court had evaluated these factors correctly.  Instead of merely deciding whether the lower court had abused its judicial discretion, the punitive damages should be reviewed in their entirety.  By doing so, the Appeals courts would ensure that the courts in its circuit applied these standards in a uniform manner and that citizens would receive uniform treatment.
Effects of the decision
In making its decision, the Court extended the holding in Furman v. Georgia  that the Eighth Amendment applied to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment.  While Furman confirmed the earlier incorporation of the 8th Amendment's Cruel and Unusual Punishment clause in Robinson v. California, 370 U.S. 660, 667 (1962)  Cooper Industries v. Leatherman Tool Group incorporated the Excessive Fines clause.
The Court later seemed to back away from this holding.  Justice Stevens' Opinion for the Court directly stated: "...the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause imposes substantive limits on the States' discretion, making the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against excessive fines and cruel and unusual punishments applicable to the States."  Nine years later, however, in a footnote to his Opinion for the Court in McDonald v. City of Chicago, , Justice Alito wrote: "We never have decided whether the Third Amendment or the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition of excessive fines applies to the States through the Due Process Clause."  The discrepancy between these two views was resolved in Timbs v. Indiana, wherein the Court unanimously ruled that the Eighth Amendment's prohibition of excessive fines is an incorporated protection applicable to the states under the Fourteenth Amendment.
Subsequent history
On remand to the Ninth Circuit, applying the de novo review standard the Appeals court reduced the punitive damages to $500,000.00. [citation: http://www.ca9.uscourts.gov/coa/newopinions.nsf/970AC2B13F32751B88256BAE00575CFB/$file/9835147.pdf?openelement]
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 532
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States trademark case law
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Cooper Manufacturing Co. v. Ferguson" ==> """
Cooper Manufacturing Co. v. Ferguson, 113 U.S. 727 (1885), was a suit regarding the legitimacy of a sale of a steam engine and other machinery in the State of Ohio..
Background
The plaintiff, which was a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Ohio, with its principal place of business at Mount Vernon, Ohio, on February 22, 1880 at the County of Larimer, in the State of Colorado, entered into a contract in writing of that date with the defendants, who were citizens of Colorado, by which it was agreed that the plaintiff should sell to the defendants, and deliver to them on the cars at Mount Vernon, in the State of Ohio, a steam engine and other machinery, in consideration whereof the defendants were to pay the plaintiff the price stipulated in the contract for such machinery.
A suit was brought by the plaintiff on August 10, 1880, to recover of the defendants damages for their breach of the contract.
The defendants, among other defenses, first pleaded that when the contract was entered into, the plaintiff had not filed the certificate required by Colorado § 23 of the act of 1877; and second, that at the time of making the contract, the plaintiff did not have a known place of business in the State of Colorado, and did not have an authorized agent or agents in the state upon whom process might be served.
The plaintiff demurred to both these answers because they did not state facts sufficient to constitute a defense to the action. Upon the hearing of the demurrer, the judges of the circuit court were divided in opinion, and the presiding judge being of opinion that the demurrer should be overruled, it was overruled accordingly, and the plaintiff electing to stand by its demurrer, judgment was entered against it dismissing its suit, and for costs. By the present writ of error, the plaintiff brings that judgment under review.
Decision
The certificate of division of opinion recites the facts above set forth, and states the question upon which the judges differed to be:
Justice Woods delivered the opinion of the Court:
Justice Matthews and Justice Blatchford concurred, on different grounds from those stated in the opinion:
In the opinion of the court, there was error in the judgment of the circuit court, the judgment should be reversed and remanded for further proceedings.
And it was so ordered.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Knox County, Ohio
Category:Larimer County, Colorado
"""

From "Cooper v. Aaron" ==> """
Cooper v. Aaron, 358 U.S. 1 (1958), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States, which denied the school board of Little Rock, Arkansas the right to delay racial desegregation for 30months. On September12, 1958, the Warren Court handed down a per curiam decision which held that the states are bound by the Court's decisions and must enforce them even if the states disagree with them, which asserted judicial supremacy established in Marbury v. Madison (1803). The decision in this case upheld the rulings in Brown v. Board of Education and Brown II which held that the doctrine of separate but equal was unconstitutional.
Background of the case
In the wake of Brown v. Board of Education (1954), the school district of Little Rock, Arkansas formulated a plan to desegregate its schools. Meanwhile, other school districts in the state opposed the Supreme Court's rulings and did not make any attempts to desegregate their schools. The Arkansas state legislature amended the state constitution to oppose desegregation and then passed a law relieving children from mandatory attendance at integrated schools. During this time the school board of Little Rock still continued with desegregation.
However, on February 20, 1958, five months after the integration crisis involving the Little Rock Nine, members of the Little Rock school board (along with the Superintendent of Schools) filed suit in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas, seeking to suspend their plan for desegregation. They alleged that public hostility to desegregation along with opposition by Governor Orval Faubus and the state legislature created "chaos, bedlam and turmoil". The relief the plaintiffs requested was for the African-American children to be returned to segregated schools and for the implementation of the desegregation plan to be postponed until January 1961. The district court granted the school board's request, but the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reversed that decision after the NAACP, represented by Thurgood Marshall, appealed. Prior to the Eighth Circuit's decision, the Supreme Court had denied the defendants' request to decide the case without waiting for the appeals court to deliberate on the case. Once the appeals court handed down their decision in favor of the defendants, the school board appealed to the Supreme Court, which met in a rare special session to hear arguments.
The court's decision
In a joint opinion authored by all nine Justices (the only instance of that occurring on record), but primarily drafted by Justice Brennan, the Court noted that the school board had acted in good faith, asserting that most of the problems stemmed from the official opposition of the Arkansas state government to racial integration. Nonetheless, it was constitutionally impermissible under the Equal Protection Clause to maintain law and order by depriving the black students of their equal rights under the law.
More importantly, the Court held that since the Supremacy Clause of Article VI made the US Constitution the supreme law of the land and Marbury v. Madison (1803) made the Supreme Court the final interpreter of the Constitution,The Court claimed that Marbury... declared the basic principle that the federal judiciary is supreme in the exposition of the law of the Constitution, and that principle has ever since been respected by the Court and the country as a permanent and indispensable feature of our constitutional system. 358 U.S. 1, 18Chief Justice John Marshall wrote in Marbury,it is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is. Those who apply the rule to particular cases must of necessity expound and interpret that rule. U.S. (1 Cranch) at 177 For a different understanding of Marbury see Pryor, William. "The Unbearable Rightness of Marbury v. Madison: Its Real Lessons and Irrepressible Myths" , Engage, Volume 12, Issue 2, p. 94 (2011). the precedent set forth in Brown v. Board of Education is the supreme law of the land and is therefore binding on all the states, regardless of any state laws contradicting it. The Court therefore rejected the contention that the Arkansas legislature and Governor were not bound by the Brown decision. The Supreme Court also rejected the doctrines of nullification and interposition in this case, which had been invoked by segregationists. Segregation supporters argued that the states have the power to nullify federal laws or court rulings that they believe to be unconstitutional and the states could use this power to nullify the Brown decision. The Arkansas laws that attempted to prevent desegregation were Arkansas' effort to nullify the Brown decision. The Supreme Court held that the Brown decision "can neither be nullified openly and directly by state legislators or state executive or judicial officers nor nullified indirectly by them through evasive schemes for segregation." Thus, Cooper v. Aaron held that state attempts to nullify federal law are ineffective.
Moreover, since public officials are required to swear an oath to uphold the Constitution (as per Article VI, Clause 3), the officials who ignored the supremacy of the Court's precedent in the Brown case violated their oaths. Cooper also maintained that even though education is the responsibility of the state government, that responsibility must be carried out in a manner consistent with the requirements of the Constitution, particularly the Fourteenth Amendment.
Critical response
Despite all nine Justices signing the opinion, Justice Frankfurter published a separate, concurring, opinion. He was, however, dissuaded from announcing it the same day as the main opinion by Justices Brennan and Black, who felt a unanimous decision would emphasize how strongly the Court felt about the issue. Frankfurter's opinion did not directly contradict the majority opinion, but it did reemphasize the importance of judicial supremacy and expressed disdain for the Arkansas State Legislature's actions.
Some legal scholars criticized the Court's rationale in Cooper.  Perhaps the most famous criticism of the case was that of former US Attorney General Edwin Meese, in a law review article entitled The Law of the Constitution.Meese, Edwin. "The Law of the Constitution", Tulane Law Review, Vol. 61, p. 979 (1986-1987). There, Meese accused the Court of taking too much power for itself by setting itself up as the sole institution responsible for the interpretation of the Constitution. He wrote that while judicial interpretation of the Constitution binds the parties of the case, it should not establish a supreme law of the land that must be accepted by all persons.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 358
Notes
Sources
Farber, Daniel A.; Eskridge, William N., Jr.; Frickey, Philip P.  Constitutional Law:  Themes for the Constitution's Third Century.  Thomson-West Publishing, 2003.  
Hall, Kermit L. ed.  The Oxford Companion to the Supreme Court of the United States, Second Edition.  Oxford University Press, 2005.  
Freyer, Tony A. Little Rock on Trial: Cooper v. Aaron and School  Desegregation. Lawrence (KS), 2007.
External links
Encyclopedia of Arkansas History & Culture entry: Aaron v. Cooper
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Supremacy Clause case law
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:1958 in United States case law
Category:Nullification (U.S. Constitution)
Category:Legal history of Arkansas
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Education in Little Rock, Arkansas
Category:Thurgood Marshall
Category:United States Supreme Court per curiam opinions
"""

From "Cooper v. Harris" ==> """
Cooper v. Harris, 581 U.S. ___ (2017), is a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court ruled 5–3 that the North Carolina General Assembly used race too heavily in re-drawing two Congressional districts following the 2010 Census..
 Background 
At issue in particular were the 1st and 12th districts. Voters in Mecklenburg County asserted that the 1st was "akin to a Rorschach ink blot," and that the 12th, though 120 miles long, at times "averag[ed] only a few miles wide." The 12th had already been a part of several cases that went to the Supreme Court.North Carolina's 12th district was the subject of , , and . North Carolina residents being represented by Harris deemed districts 1 and 12 unconstitutional due to the districts being designed as majority black districts after the 1990 census. Districts 1 and 12 were drawn with the black voting-age populations (BVAP) being less than fifty percent; following the 2000 census, both districts continued to vote for candidates preferred by black voters in the next five elections. Nonetheless, the Republican-controlled legislature designed a new map after the 2010 census that again redrew districts 1 and 12 as majority black, thus prompting the present lawsuit.
On February 5, 2016, the three-judge United States District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina found that both districts were unconstitutional due to the predominance of racial considerations in their creation, in which Circuit Judge Roger Gregory was joined by Judge Max O. Cogburn Jr., over the dissent of Judge William Lindsay Osteen Jr. regarding District 12.The Supreme Court, 2016 Term — Leading Cases, 131 Harv. L. Rev. 303 (2017).
 Supreme Court 
On December 5, 2016, oral arguments were heard before the Supreme Court, where Paul Clement appeared for the governor, Marc Elias appeared for the voters, and an assistant to the U.S. Solicitor General appeared as a friend in support of the voters. The state argued that the African-American population of the districts was increased in order to comply with the Voting Rights Act of 1965, but the Court found that argument "does not withstand strict scrutiny" for the 1st district, as its African-American population had previously been less than a majority of its voters, yet African-Americans' "preferred candidates scored consistent victories."
On May 22, 2017, the Supreme Court delivered judgment in favor of Harris, voting 5–3 to affirm the judgment of the district court.  Justice Elena Kagan wrote for the Court, joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, and Clarence Thomas.  Justice Samuel Alito, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Anthony Kennedy, issued an opinion concurring in the judgment and dissenting in part, arguing that District 12 was constitutional. Neil Gorsuch did not take part in the case, which was argued before he was confirmed to the Supreme Court.
When the state redrew the maps from the District Order, they did not use any racial profiling data, but did rely heavily on partisan distributions. The subsequent map has been challenged again, and the case was heard by the Supreme Court as Rucho v. Common Cause in March 2019.
References
External links
Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Gerrymandering in the United States
"""

From "Cooper v. Oklahoma" ==> """
Cooper v. Oklahoma, 517 U.S. 348 (1996), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court reversed an Oklahoma court decision holding that a defendant is presumed to be competent to stand trial unless he proves otherwise by the second highest legal standard of proof, that of clear and convincing evidence, ruling that to be unconstitutional.. The court said the defendant's Fourteenth Amendment rights to due process were violated.
In this case, the defendant's ability to understand the charges against him and his ability to assist in his own defense was challenged on five separate occasions before and during his trial and sentencing for capital murder, but the trial judge ruled he was competent to stand trial because he did not meet Oklahoma's high standard of proof.
Circumstances
Byron Keith Cooper was charged in 1989 with the murder of an 86-year-old man while in the course of committing burglary. Both before and during his trial, the question of his competency to stand trial was raised five times. The first time the question arose, the trial judge relied on the opinion of a state psychologist in determining to commit the defendant to a state psychiatric hospital for three months of treatment. Upon Cooper's return, the trial judge heard testimony from two state psychologists regarding Cooper's competence, but as these experts disagreed over whether Cooper was competent to stand trial, the judge decided to rule against Cooper and ordered the trial to proceed. After the pretrial hearing was completed, the defense attorney raised the issue of Cooper's competence a third time, telling the court that Cooper's behavior was "odd" and that he refused to communicate with his attorney. The attorney said that it could be a serious matter "if he's not faking".  However, the judge declined to review his earlier decision that Cooper was competent to proceed.
On the first day of trial, Cooper's bizarre behavior (such as fleeing from his defense attorney, refusing to change his prison clothes because regular clothes "burned" him, and talking to himself while in the fetal position) induced the court to conduct a further competency hearing. This time the trial judge observed Cooper and heard testimony from people including lay witnesses, defendant Cooper, and a third psychologist who concluded that Cooper was incompetent. While expressing his uncertainty and not disagreeing with the psychologist, the judge ruled against Cooper and ordered the trial to proceed, finally opining:
The trial proceeded with Cooper continuing to act in a bizarre manner and refusing to be near his attorney. Cooper was convicted of first degree murder, and during the sentencing phase of the trial the history of Cooper's childhood abuse was recounted. Finally the defense attorney pleaded for either a mistrial or further evaluation into Cooper's competence, describing Cooper's courtroom behavior:
The court summarily denied the motion. Cooper received the death penalty after the jury recommended death.
Cooper appealed, and the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals affirmed both the conviction and the sentence. Cooper appealed to the Supreme Court on a writ of certiorari.
Decision
In a unanimous verdict, the Supreme Court reversed the judgment and remanded the case back to  the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals for further consideration in light of their opinion. The Court held that the State may not proceed with a criminal trial when the defendant has demonstrated that he is more likely than not to be incompetent. Requiring a higher standard of proof, that of "clear and convincing evidence", was too high a standard of proof for a defendant to demonstrate a need for a competency evaluation, increasing the possibility of error to a level "incompatible with the dictates of due process".Cooper, 517 U.S. at 368-69. Criminal defendants must be allowed to avoid trial if they prove incompetence by a "preponderance of the evidence."
The court used the relevant history of common law regarding competency and the treatment of the insane and also compared Oklahoma's standards with the contemporary practices  of other states, finding that only 4 of the 50 states used Oklahoma's heightened standard of proof.Cooper, 517 U.S. at 360-61. They concluded that this "demonstrates that the vast majority of jurisdictions remain persuaded that the heightened standard of proof imposed on the accused in Oklahoma is not necessary to vindicate the State's interest in prompt and orderly disposition of criminal cases."Cooper, 517 U.S. at 360. The court found most states uses a burden of proof far lower, or imposed no burden of proof at all, once the competency question is raised.Cooper, 517 U.S. at 361-62.
Significance
The American Academy for Psychiatry and the Law unofficially considers this decision a landmark case in competency to stand trial case law. The court stated that no one questions the fundamental right of competency to stand trial. As established in Dusky v. United States, a defendant has a fundamental right not to be put to trial unless he has "sufficient present ability to consult with his lawyer with a reasonable degree of rational understanding  . . . [and] a rational as well as factual understanding of the proceedings against him." A State may not proceed with a criminal trial after the defendant has demonstrated that he is more likely than not to be incompetent.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 517
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Drope v. Missouri (1975) 
Ford v. Wainwright (1986)
Footnotes
External links
Oklahoma Uniform Jury Instructions regarding competency decisions
Retarded Defendants Gain More Protection - New York Times article on Cooper v. Oklahoma
Category:Mental health case law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment case law
"""

From "Cooper v. Pate" ==> """
Cooper v. Pate, 378 U.S. 546 (1964), was a U.S. Supreme Court case in which the court ruled for the first time that state prison inmates have the standing to sue in federal court to address their grievances  under the Civil Rights Act of 1871. This case followed Jones v. Cunningham (1963) allowing prison inmates to employ a writ of habeas corpus to challenge the legality of their sentencing and the conditions of their imprisonment.
Background
The petitioner, an inmate at the Illinois State Prison, brought a writ of certiorari alleging that solely because  he was a Black Muslim he was denied permission to buy religious publications and also denied other privileges accorded other prisoners. The District Court had granted the respondent's motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim for which relief could be granted.  The Court of Appeals affirmed..
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court reversed the judgment, stating the lower courts were in error to dismiss the stated cause of action as the petitioner is entitled to have his case heard on its merits.
Significance
This case made clear that  prison authorities must do whatever is within their ability to treat individuals of every  religious group equally, unless they can demonstrate good reasons  to do otherwise.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 378
References
Further reading
External links
The Religious Justice and Law Religious Liberty Archive
Category:Imprisonment and detention in the United States
Category:Penal system in the United States
Category:United States Eighth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1964 in United States case law
"""

From "Coppage v. Kansas" ==> """
Coppage v. Kansas, 236 U.S. 1 (1915), was a Supreme Court of the United States case based on United States labor law that allowed employers to implement contracts—called yellow-dog contracts—which forbade employees from joining unions.
The case was decided in the era prior to the Great Depression, when the Supreme Court invalidated laws that imposed restrictions on contracts, especially those of employment. The liberty of contract became viewed as a fundamental right that could be abridged only in extreme circumstances; abridgments violate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Background
Coppage, an employer, forbade his employees from joining labor unions by making it part of their contract, which the employee signed before being hired. That violated a Kansas law that prohibited such contracts.
Decision
The majority opinion was written by Justice Pitney. It held that the law prohibiting such contracts violated Coppage's due process rights, as the government did not have a responsibility to prevent inequality of bargaining power:
He concluded that a state in the exercise of its police power did not have the right to redress imbalances of bargaining power and that requiring a man to give up the right to be in a union as a condition of employment does "not to ask him to give up any part of his constitutional freedom."
Dissents
Justice Holmes wrote a dissent in which he called again for Lochner to be overruled and stated that the Constitution does not specifically prohibit a law like the one Kansas had and so it should be upheld:
Justice Day's dissent would have affirmed the liberty of contract against arbitrary legislative restraints but deferred more to the legislature on the question of whether the law upheld the public welfare. He also argued, "A man may not barter away his life or his freedom, or his substantial rights."
See also
US labor law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 236
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:1915 in United States case law
Category:History of labor relations in the United States
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States labor case law
"""

From "Copperweld Corp. v. Independence Tube Corp." ==> """
Copperweld Corp. v. Independence Tube Corp., 467 U.S. 752 (1984), is a major US antitrust law case decided by the Supreme Court concerning the Pittsburgh firm Copperweld Corporation and the Chicago firm Independence Tube. It held that a parent company is incapable of conspiring with its wholly owned subsidiary for purposes of Section 1 of the Sherman Act because they cannot be considered separate economic entities. 
Section 1 of the Sherman Act states that "Every contract, combination in the form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations, is declared to be illegal." However, for a condition of conspiracy to exist, there must be at least two parties involved. Copperweld held that separate incorporation was not enough to render a parent and its subsidiary capable of conspiring, since forcibly the economic interests of a wholly owned subsidiary must be those of its parent. It does not apply to partially owned subsidiaries.Columbia Law Review, Vol. 86, No. 1, Jan., 1986
Facts
Independence Tube commenced a civil action under Section 1 of the Sherman Act against Copperweld Corporation, its wholly owned subsidiary (" Regal Tube Corporation"), and a third party company that supplied mill  ("Yoder Company"). Amongst others, Independence Tube claimed that Copperweld Corporation and Regal Tube Corporation had induced Yoder Company to breach a supply contract with Independence Tube to provide a tubing mill. This led to a nine months delay in Independence Tube's entry into the steel tubing business. The Supreme Court considered whether Independence Tube's claim under Section 1 of the Sherman Act could succeed in relation to coordinated acts of a parent and its wholly owned subsidiary.
Judgment
The Supreme Court, in an opinion by Chief Justice Burger and joined by Justices Blackmun, Powell, Rehnquist and O'Connor, held that an agreement between a wholly owned subsidiary and a parent did not fall under the definition of an "agreement" in Section 1 of the Sherman Act because the two companies, while legally separate, constituted a single economic entity.
The majority also observed that Section 1 of the Sherman Act only applied to concerted action between two (or more) independent firms:
"It cannot be denied that § 1's focus on concerted behavior leaves a "gap" in the Act's proscription against unreasonable restraints of trade. An unreasonable restraint of trade may be effected not only by two independent firms acting in concert; a single firm may restrain trade to precisely the same extent if it alone possesses the combined market power of those same two firms. Because the Sherman Act does not prohibit unreasonable restraints of trade as such - but only restraints effected by a contract, combination, or conspiracy - it leaves untouched a single firm's anticompetitive conduct (short of threatened monopolization) that may be indistinguishable in economic effect from the conduct of two firms subject to § 1 liability."Copperweld Corp. v. Independence Tube Corp.
Justice Stevens, joined by Justices Brennan and Marshall, dissented.
See also
US antitrust law
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:Anti-competitive practices
Category:1984 in United States case law
"""

From "Corcoran v. Levenhagen" ==> """
REDIRECT 2009 term per curiam opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States#Corcoran v. Levenhagen
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2009 in United States case law
"""

From "Corn Products Refining Co. v. Commissioner" ==> """
Corn Products Refining Company v. Commissioner, 350 U.S. 46 (1955), is a United States Supreme Court decision that helps taxpayers classify whether or not the disposition of a commodity futures contract by a business of raw materials as part of its hedging of business risk is an ordinary or capital gain or loss for income tax purposes..
 Background 
Corn Products suffered large losses in the early 1930s, when prices of its main raw material grain corn rose dramatically during droughts in the Midwest's Dust Bowl. As a result, it later engaged futures contracts to protect itself from such prices rises in the future.
In its initial tax returns of 1940 and 1942, it declared gains and losses on such futures contracts to be ordinary. Later, in amended returns, the taxpayer reversed itself.
The Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service held the such gains and losses were not a capital but ordinary loss.
 Issue 
Are futures contracts on a company's raw material more like capital assets or more like insurance?  (The Internal Revenue Code (IRC) treats capital assets of brokers as ordinary trade assets, if they are part of that business' inventory, so gains and losses would be ordinary and not capital.)
 Decision 
The Supreme Court affirmed the Tax Court's determination that the loss was an ordinary loss because it seemed more like hedging and thus insurance and not like an investment. Even though the petitioner's actions were not true hedging (which would include protections against a fall in price), the purchase of the futures were an integral part of its manufacturing business.
Thus, the petitioner was in the business of purchasing corn futures, meaning that IRC § 1221(a)(2)defines petitioner's income as ordinary income, not capital gains.
The Court reasoned that the broad definition of the term "capital asset" does not bring operations of a business. Hedging transactions that are an integral part of a business's inventory-purchase system fall within the inventory exclusion of section 1221.
 Notes 
 Corn Products Refining Co. v. Commissioner, 350 U.S. 46 (1955) 
The Corn Products case involved discussion of whether income arising from the sale of corn futures by a company that refined corn into other forms and food products were entitled to capital gains treatment. The company bought corn futures to protect their future corn supply and pricing and would sell the futures if it had excess inventory corn for its processes.  As the corn futures were essentially inventory, they were classified as such property which would “properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer … in the ordinary course of his trade or business.”  IRC § 1221(a)(1).
 IRC § 1221(a)(7) 
Since the time of Corn Products, IRC § 1221(a)(7) was added which specifically excludes from the definition of capital asset "any hedging transaction which is clearly identified as such before the close of the day on which it was acquired, originated, or entered into (or other such time as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe)."
This is essentially a codification of the result in Corn Products and removes the necessity of classifying hedging transactions as "inventory" under IRC § 1221(a)(1).
 Importance 
This case signals that the Court will closely read the exclusions in IRC. § 1221 in classifying capital versus ordinary losses.  By sticking with the explicit language of the section the Court clarifies this section for other courts and practitioners interpreting and implementing the Code.
See also
 Arkansas Best Corp. v. Commissioner
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 350
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Warren Court
References
External links
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1955 in United States case law
"""

From "Corporation of Presiding Bishop of Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints v. Amos" ==> """
Corporation of Presiding Bishop v. Amos, 483 U.S. 327 (1987), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the court decided that the exemption of religious organizations from the prohibition of religious discrimination in employment in Title VII of the Civil Rights Act is constitutional. Appellee Arthur Frank Mayson worked for 16 years in an organization operated by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). He was terminated from employment when he "failed to qualify for a temple recommend, that is, a certificate that he is a member of the Church and eligible to attend its temples."Corporation of Presiding Bishop v. Amos, 483 U.S. 327–349. He filed suit in district court, arguing that his firing violated discrimination on the basis of religion in Title VII of the Civil Rights Act. The district court agreed. The case was appealed directly to the Supreme Court (under Title 28 U.S.C. § 1252). The Supreme Court reversed, holding that Title VII's exemption of religious organizations from the prohibition on religious discrimination, even in secular activities, did not violate the First Amendment.
History and District Court ruling
In the early 1980s, five individuals were terminated from employment at Deseret Gymnasium, a non-profit facility in Salt Lake City, Utah, which was operated by the Corporation of the Presiding Bishop of the LDS Church. The reason for termination was "solely because each of them was unable or refused to satisfy the worthiness requirements for a temple recommend from the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints."Amos v. Corporation of Presiding Bishop, 594 F.Supp. 791–831 (Utah 1984). The individuals filed suit, alleging impermissible discrimination on the basis of religion in violation of § 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. They argued that section 703 stated, "It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer—(1) to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or national origin," with the exception that "it shall not be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to hire and employ employees . . . on the basis of his religion, sex, or national origin in those certain instances where religion, sex, or national origin is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that particular business or enterprise."42 U.S.C. § 2000e–2(a), (e)(1) [section 703(a)(1) and (e)(1) in the original bill].
The LDS Church argued that section 702 protected the organization in its employment decisions, because the act included an exemption: "This subchapter shall not apply to an employer with respect to the employment of aliens outside any State, or to a religious corporation, association, educational institution, or society with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by such corporation, association, educational institution, or society of its activities."42 U.S.C. § 2000e–1(a) (section 702 in the original bill). The individuals responded that permitting a religious organization to discriminate "against employees performing secular, non-religious jobs on the basis of religion would violate the establishment clause of the [F]irst [A]mendment."
The district court concluded that the individuals were engaged in non-religious activity but noted that section 702 protected religious organizations in their employment decisions related to any position in the organization, no matter how religious or nonreligious the activity was. The court then addressed whether the exemption violated the Establishment Clause by using the Lemon test. The court ruled that the exemption permitted by section 702 violated the second prong of the Lemon test (principal effect not advancing or inhibiting religion) because the section "singles out religious entities for a benefit, rather than benefiting a broad grouping of which religious organizations are only a part" and "burdens the free exercise rights of employees of religious institutions who work in nonreligious jobs."
Supreme Court rulings
Majority opinion
In reversing the district court on the supposition that section 702 singled out religious entities for a benefit, the Court stated that it had "never indicated that statutes that give special consideration to religious groups are per se invalid" and that "[w]here, as here, government acts with the proper purpose of lifting a regulation that burdens the exercise of religion, we see no reason to require that the exemption come packaged with benefits to secular entities."
In addressing the issue of a free exercise burden of employees, the Court noted that "it is a significant burden on a religious organization to require it, on pain of substantial liability, to predict which of its activities a secular court will consider religious." Further, although the appellee's "freedom of choice in religious matters was impinged upon, [] it was the Church (through the COP and the CPB), and not the Government, who put him to the choice of changing his religious practices or losing his job."
The Court also reiterated, "A law is not unconstitutional simply because it allows churches to advance religion, which is their very purpose. For a law to have forbidden "effects" under Lemon, it must be fair to say that the government itself has advanced religion through its own activities and influence. . . . [W]e do not see how any advancement of religion achieved by the Gymnasium can be fairly attributed to the Government, as opposed to the Church."
Concurrence in judgment by Brennan and Marshall
Justices Brennan and Marshall agreed with the court on the significant burden issue, stating that nonprofit organizations should be categorically exempt from religious discrimination issues because the prospect that a court would attempt to determine whether or not the nonprofit activity was reasonably religious or related to the religion's purposes would "chill" religious activity.
Concurrences in judgment by Blackmun and O'Connor
Though he wrote a brief separate opinion, Blackmun stated he basically agreed with O'Connor's reasoning that the Court's majority opinion could be read too deferentially toward religion, and that though in this particular case the judgment was correct, there was concern that profit-making enterprises run by religions may be improperly exempted from religious discrimination laws.
Implications
According to Google Scholar search results, the Court's ruling (or one of the concurring opinions) has been relied on in about 2,700 court cases as of June 2019, indicating that this case has had substantial impact on the development of First Amendment religion case law. The case is also cited in thousands of articles and books on case law.
References
External links
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
Category:Mormonism and law
"""

From "Correctional Services Corp. v. Malesko" ==> """
Correctional Services Corporation v. Malesko, 534 U.S. 61 (2001), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court, in which the Court found that implied damages actions first recognized in Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents. should not be extended to allow recovery against a private corporation operating a halfway house under contract with the Bureau of Prisons.
A Bivens action is a civil rights violation suit against the government.  The Supreme Court limited this court-invented private right of action to exclude corporate defendants like Correctional Services Corporation.  Plaintiff's actions against the individual employees were barred by the statute of limitations because the names of the John Doe defendant prison guards (esp. Jorge Urena) were not known to the plaintiff.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 534
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:Implied constitutional cause of action case law
Category:Private prisons in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in United States case law
"""

From "Corrigan v. Buckley" ==> """
Corrigan v. Buckley, 271 U.S. 323 (1926), was a US Supreme Court case in 1926 that ruled that the racially-restrictive covenant of multiple residents on S Street NW, between 18th Street and New Hampshire Avenue, in Washington, DC, was a legally-binding document that made the selling of a house to a black family a void contract.. This ruling set the precedent upholding racially restrictive covenants in Washington; soon after this ruling, racially restrictive covenants flourished around the nation.  Subsequently, in Shelley v. Kraemer (1948) the court reconsidered such covenants and found that racially restrictive covenants are unenforceable.
Background
Buchanan v. Warley (1917) barred the government from enforcing segregation through explicitly racial zoning provisions. But in the aftermath of Buchanan, other less explicit methods to force and maintain segregation were created, such as racially-restrictive covenants. Another tactic, exclusionary zoning, was not explicitly racial in description but maintained de facto racial segregation and was upheld in Euclid v. Ambler (1926). The covenants were documents drawn up by members of a neighborhood and stated that the signers would not sell their homes to any nonwhite person. The agreements were instituted on a private scale and so had never had to face justification from the courts. Many citizens who signed the papers were afraid of blacks moving in and lowering their property values. The whites gave numerous reasons for how the exclusion of blacks was logical and understandable. However, the reasons were used in the end as a façade to cover up the racism that was still prevalent at that time. Washington had always been a racially-segregated city, and one such covenant was signed for the block on S Street NW, between 18th Street and New Hampshire Avenue.
thumbnail|The covenant signed by John J. Buckley and Irene H. Corrigan
Case
Corrigan v. Buckley resulted from an infringement upon a covenant. An agreement was made in 1921 by 30 white homeowners that none among them would sell, rent, or allow black people to obtain their land by any means."Constitutional Law. Covenant Prohibiting Sale of Property to Negro Is Constitutional." Virginia Law Review 11, no. 1 (November 1924): 68–69. In 1922, Irene Corrigan broke the restrictions put in place by the covenant. Corrigan sold her land to a black couple, Helen and Dr. Arthur Curtis. Corrigan vs. Buckley went through a five-year court case before finally it was settled by the Supreme Court in 1926. Buckley and the offense hoped that since the covenant was a written and signed document, it would be considered viable in a court of law. Curtis and Corrigan "moved to dismiss the bill on the ground that the covenant deprived the negro of property without due process of law, abridged the privileges and immunities of citizens of the United States, and denied him the equal protection of the law." Corrigan and Curtis argued that not selling her house would be a violation of Curtis's civil rights, but Buckley argued that the contract was binding and that Corrigan had no right to break it.
The District Supreme Court sided with Buckley and stated that legal segregation happened all around DC and was a legal practice. The DC Court of Appeals also sided with Buckley and stated that since blacks had the ability to exclude others from their neighborhoods in which they lived, it did not discriminate against them and so did not violate Curtis's civil rights."Mapping Segregation." Prologue DC LLC. Accessed January 24, 2016. http://prologuedc.com/blog/mapping-segregation. Both courts used the landmark case of Plessy v. Ferguson, which legalized segregation if the separate races had equal facilities, to state their case.
The NAACP lawyers kept the appeals process going to the Supreme Court. They cited that the racially-restrictive covenants would "drive colored folk out of Washington." Once again, the court sided with Buckley. Justice Sanford delivered the decision: "in the absence of any substantial constitutional or statutory question giving us jurisdiction of this appeal under the provisions of section 250 of the Judicial Code, we cannot determine upon the merits the contentions earnestly pressed by the defendants in this court that the indenture is not only void because contrary to public policy, but is also of such a discriminatory character that a court of equity will not lend its aid by enforcing the specific performance of the covenant.""1920s–1948: Racially Restrictive Covenants."  Accessed January 24, 2016. http://www.bostonfairhousing.org/timeline/1920s1948-Restrictive-Covenants.html. The ruling meant that the purchase that Curtis had made on the house was now void and that the covenant was upheld.
Aftermath
By upholding the dismissal of the case, the Supreme Court set the precedent that racially exclusive covenants were acceptable and not prohibited by law.Shay, Allison. "On This Day: Corrigan v. Buckley and Housing Discrimination." Publishing the Long Civil Rights Movement RSS. May 24, 2012. Accessed January 24, 2016. That led to the spread of covenants throughout the DC area. In the years following the case, petition covenants quickly spread to many white neighborhoods in DC. Hundreds of lots signed onto petition covenants in 1927, the year after Corrigan v. Buckley. The covenants were not a federally-mandated form of segregation, and the decision in Corrigan v. Buckley seemed to take a few steps back in the progress concerning black civil rights in the United States.
One major impact of the Corrigan v. Buckley case was on the neighborhood on S Street NW, where the covenant was originally signed by Corrigan and Buckley. Buckley stopped Helen Curtis from moving into No. 1727 on S Street. However, as the court case was being fought, Dr. Emmett J. Scott, a black man, moved into No. 1711 of S Street in April 1923. That caused a very quick migration of the white community out of the neighborhood. By 1934, the neighborhood had an 86% nonwhite population. The population shift showed the extreme effect that one black could have on a neighborhood that was almost completely inhabited by whites. Many neighborhoods shifted dramatically during this time, as many DC white people left the city for the suburbs. The "white flight," as it was coined, was often the result of a black moving into a neighborhood that was almost completely inhabited by whites. The white people still living in those houses feared that their property values would go down dramatically unless they sold right away; they would thus move out to the suburbs as quickly as possible.
The ramifications of Corrigan v. Buckley were felt throughout the DC area. The use of covenants spread rapidly until almost entire neighborhoods were promised to be racially homogeneous. Blacks now faced the possibility of lawsuits if they used loopholes to work around the housing restrictions. Some blacks who managed to sneak past the covenants and the occasionally-racist sellers, and to move into a home would often lead to a mass exodus of whites to other areas. The precedent that racial exclusion in terms of housing was acceptable lasted for a few decades before the issue was reconsidered by the judicial system. It was only at Shelley v. Kraemer (1948) that the Supreme Court determined that it was unconstitutional for the legal system to enforce covenants. Corrigan v. Buckley set the precedent that racially restrictive covenants were just, and it lasted for years.
 See also 
 Hansberry v. Lee (1940), a Supreme Court of the United States case which allowed renewed challenges to racial covenants
 Shelley v. Kraemer (1948), a Supreme Court of the United States case which struck down racially restrictive housing covenants
 References 
External links
Category:1926 in United States case law
Category:Anti-black racism in Washington, D.C.
Category:Covenant (law)
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Cort v. Ash" ==> """
Cort v. Ash, 422 U.S. 66 (1975), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court determined whether a court may imply a cause of action from a criminal statute.
 Background 
Defendant/petitioner Stewart S. Cort, chairman of the board of directors of Bethlehem Steel Corporation, published a series of political advertisements in nineteen local newspapers where the company had plants, as well as several national publications (including Time, Newsweek, and U.S. News & World Report).  The advertisements were in support of the business community, asserting that an allegation (supposedly made by 1972 Presidential candidate George McGovern) that big business was not paying its fair share of taxes was untrue, and suggesting that people mobilize “truth squads” to spread this idea.  The funding for these ads came from Bethlehem's general corporate funds.
The plaintiff/respondent was a shareholder of Bethlehem, and a qualified voter.  He sued in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, on behalf of both himself and the corporation (a derivative suit).  He sued under both  (a criminal statute forbidding corporations from making contributions or expenditures in connection with Presidential elections), and the corporate law of the state of Delaware.  He then amended his complaint to drop the state law claim, after he declined to post $35,000 in security for expenses in order to proceed with the claim.
The District Court held that the criminal penalties of the federal statute did not include any private cause of action, and granted summary judgment for the defendant. The plaintiff appealed.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit reversed, holding that because the plaintiff sought money damages for the corporation, that a private cause of action was proper.
Issue
Could the court properly assume a private cause of action for damages against corporate directors under 18 U.S.C. § 610?
Decision
Justice William J. Brennan wrote for a unanimous Court.  He found that because § 610 was a criminal statute, and because at the time suit was filed, there was no provision for civil enforcement of the statute, there was no need to imply a private cause of action.  Furthermore, a statute enacted in 1974 amended the Federal Election Campaign Act to create the Federal Election Commission, which was granted primary jurisdiction over such complaints.  Because of this intervening law, the Court chose to apply the law which was in effect at the time the case was commenced.
Brennan also laid out four factors for determining when a cause of action should be implied from a statute:
Is the plaintiff within the class for whose benefit the statute was enacted (i.e., does the statute create a federal right in the plaintiff's favor)?
Is there any indication of legislative intent, explicit or implicit, either to create or deny a cause of action?
Is it consistent with the underlying purposes of legislative scheme to imply such a remedy for the plaintiff?
Is the cause of action one traditionally relegated to state law, in an area specifically of concern to the states, so that it would be inappropriate to infer a cause of action based solely on federal law?
422 U.S. at 78.
Here, the Court found that there was no legislative indication that private cause of action was intended by Congress, or that the plaintiffs in this action were within the class sought to be benefited by the statute.  Brennan commented that the intent to protect corporate shareholders “was at best a subsidiary purpose” of the statute.  422 U.S. at 80.  He also found that implying a cause of action was inconsistent with the statute's purpose, and that the plaintiff had a remedy under state corporate law.  Thus, the Third Circuit's decision was overturned.
These factors were also used in the case of Cannon v. University of Chicago, .
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 422
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Implied statutory cause of action case law
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Costco Wholesale Corp. v. Omega, S. A." ==> """
Omega S.A. v. Costco Wholesale Corp., 541 F.3d 982 (9th Cir. 2008), was a case decided by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals that held that in copyright law, the first-sale doctrine does not act as a defense to claims of infringing distribution and importation for unauthorized sale of authentic, imported watches that bore a design registered in the Copyright Office. It is contrasted with Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc..
Factual background
The plaintiff, Omega SA, is a luxury watchmaker based in Switzerland that distributes its watches through authorized retailers.  The Omega watches feature a copyrighted globe design on the back of the watch. The defendant Costco obtained the watches through the gray market: Omega would sell the watches to authorized distributors, third parties would buy the watches and sell them to the New York state company ENE Limited, and ENE would sell the watches to Costco. Omega did not authorize the importation or resale in the United States, and Omega sued for copyright infringement under 17 U.S.C. §§ 106(3) and 602(a). Costco asserted that the first-sale doctrine precluded any infringement claims against them. The trial court ruled in favor of Costco.Omega, 541 F.3d at 984.
Ninth Circuit decision
The Ninth Circuit reversed the trial court.  The court cited Ninth Circuit precedents that interpreted the first-sale doctrine as applying only to goods made in the United States.Omega, 541 F.3d at 986.  The court found its interpretation to be consistent with the Supreme Court case Quality King v. L'anza, which held that the first-sale doctrine was a defense to an infringement claim based on unauthorized importation of copyrighted materials made within the United States.Omega, 541 F.3d at 987.  The court noted that the first-sale doctrine only covered the resale of copies obtained lawfully, and declined to apply the Copyright Act extraterritorially and ascribe lawfulness to copies made outside of the United States.  Because the Omega watches at issue were made outside of the United States, the court held that the first-sale doctrine could not act as a defense and that Costco was liable for infringing Omega's importation rights.
Supreme Court case
Certiorari to the Supreme Court of the United States was granted on April 19, 2010.Supreme Court Docket File, No. 08-1423 Justice Kagan took no part in the consideration or decision of the case. She was the Solicitor General before the case came to the Supreme Court. The remaining Justices split 4–4, which means the Court affirms the Ninth Circuit's decision..
Subsequent history
On remand to the district court, both Costco and Omega moved for summary judgment on the issue of copyright misuse.  Judge Terry Hatter found for Costco, holding that Omega's application of a copyrighted work to an uncopyrighted watch for the purpose of controlling importation of the uncopyrighted good constituted copyright misuse.Omega S.A. v. Costco Wholesale Corp., no. 04-05443, (E.D. Cal. Nov. 9. 2011), order. ("Here, Omega concedes that a purpose of the copyrighted Omega Globe Design was to control the importation and sale of its watches containing the design, as the watches could not be copyrighted. Accordingly, Omega misused its copyright of the Omega Globe Design by leveraging its limited monopoly in being able to control the importation of that design to control the importation of its Seamaster watches.")  Retrieved April 12, 2012.
On January 20, 2015, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the district court judgment, including awarding attorney's fees to Costco.
Impact
The decision has been characterized as a loss for consumers in the sense that manufacturers will better be able to control the prices of their goods when the grey market cannot serve as competition.  Also, the distinction drawn in the case between goods manufactured inside the United States and goods manufactured outside could be a possible motivation for companies to locate their manufacturing outside of the United States, where the first-sale doctrine would not stand as an obstacle to suing grey market importers.Field, Abigail.  Supreme Court Rules Against Consumers in Costco vs. Omega.  Daily Finance, 13 December 2010.
As a 4–4 decision, however, Omega only operates as mandatory authority in the Ninth Circuit and does not set a nationwide precedent.
In December 2011, petitions for certiorari in two cases from the Second Circuit with a similar issue were filed in the Supreme Court, providing the Court with another opportunity to revisit the still-unresolved issue in Omega: Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.Kirtsaeng v. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., no. 11-697, petition for certiorari (docket).  December 5, 2011.  Retrieved April 12, 2012. and Liu v. Pearson EducationLiu v. Pearson Education, Inc., et al., no. 11-708, petition for certiorari (docket).  December 8, 2011.  Retrieved April 12, 2012.   In 2013, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed lower court rulings and ruled that Kirtsaeng's sale of lawfully-made copies purchased overseas was protected by the first-sale doctrine. Liu and another Pearson case were subsequently remanded to the lower courts to rehear, in light of Kirtsaeng.
References
Further reading
External links
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals (2008)
 Oral argument (July 15, 2008)
Supreme Court (2010)
 Docket
 Oral argument: recording, transcript (November 8, 2010)
 SCOTUSBlog entry
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Tie votes of the United States Supreme Court
Category:Costco
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Cottage Savings Ass'n v. Commissioner" ==> """
Cottage Savings Association v. Commissioner, 499 U.S. 554 (1991), was an income tax case before the Supreme Court of the United States..
The Court was asked to determine whether the exchange of different participation interests in home mortgages by a savings and loan association was a "disposition of property" under § 1001(a) of the Internal Revenue Code (since this was the requirement for them to realize, and deduct, their losses on these mortgages)..
The Court determined that it was a "disposition of property" by making the following three holdings:
Under § 1001(a), exchange of property gives rise to realization (a "disposition of property") only if the exchanged properties are "materially different."
This concept of "material difference" is not defined by an economic substitute test (whether various parties would consider their differences to be "material"); rather, two properties are materially different if their respective possessors enjoy legal entitlements that are different in kind or extent.
The S&L's 90% participation interest in its mortgages embodied legally distinct entitlements (and so was "materially different" from) the 90% mortgage participation interest it received from the other savings associations. Even if mortgages are "substantially identical" for purposes of Federal Home Loan Bank Board "Memorandum R-49" on reporting losses, they can still exhibit "material difference" for the purposes of finding a "disposition of property."
Background
Cottage Savings Association was a savings & loan association (S&L) serving the Greater Cincinnati area.  Like many other S&L's, Cottage Savings had a large number of long-term, low-interest mortgages on its books, which declined in value as interest rates increased during the late 1970s.
These S&Ls could have achieved a tax savings from selling these mortgages at a loss, but they were dissuaded from doing so because the accounting regulations of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB) would have required them to report these losses on their books, possibly putting them into insolvency.  Hoping to find another way for these S&Ls to realize their tax losses, the FHLBB promulgated a new regulation called "Memorandum R-49", under which the S&Ls would not have to show a loss on their books if they exchanged their mortgages for "substantially identical" mortgages held by other lenders.
Cottage Savings made a transaction pursuant to this regulation by exchanging 90% participation interests in 252 mortgages to four other S&Ls, receiving in return 90% participation interests in 305 mortgages.  All the mortgages involved in the transaction were for homes in the Greater Cincinnati region.  The fair market value of the interests exchanged by each side was approximately $4.5 million.  The face value of the interests which Cottage Savings relinquished was approximately $6.9 million.  On its 1980 federal income tax return, Cottage Savings claimed a loss of $2,447,091, the adjusted difference between the face value of the participation interests it gave up and fair market value of the interests it received.
The Commissioner of Internal Revenue disallowed Cottage Savings' deduction, so the S&L filed a petition for redetermination in the United States Tax Court, which reversed the Commissioner's decision and permitted the deduction.  The Commissioner appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, which reversed the decision of the Tax Court, holding that even though Cottage Savings realized a loss in the transaction, it had not actually realized the loss during the 1980 tax year.  The U.S. Supreme Court then granted certiorari.
Issues
§ 1001(a) of the Internal Revenue Code requires that the tax consequences of a gain or loss in property value be deferred until it is realized by "the sale or other disposition of property". Since the transaction was certainly not a sale, the Court identified the main legal issue to be whether the exchange was a "disposition of property." 
The Commissioner had argued that an exchange of properties can be a "disposition" only if the properties involved in the transaction are "materially different".
Cottage Savings argued that "material difference" was not a requirement—that any exchange of property could be considered a disposition.  Just in case, it also argued that the participation interests exchange were materially different because they were secured by different real property.
Thus, to determine whether the exchange was a "disposition of property," the court first had to determine whether §1001 incorporated a "material difference" requirement, and if so, what that requirement involved.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion by Justice Marshall, the Court came to three key findings:
Material difference is a requirement for a disposition under §1001. Justice Marshall cited Treasury Regulation §1.1001-1 (), which required that an exchange of materially different properties constitutes a realization under the Tax Code. Congress delegated to the Commissioner the authority to make rules and regulations to enforce the Internal Revenue Code. Because Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations represents the Commissioner's interpretation of the Code, the Court deferred to the Commissioner's judgment, holding that the regulation was a reasonable interpretation of the Code and consonant with prior case law.
Material difference defined. Justice Marshall defined what constituted a "material difference" in property under §1001 by examination at what point "realization" had been found in past case law. He started with Eisner v. Macomber (1920), which dealt with exchange of stock in corporations. In several cases after Eisner, the court held that an exchange of stock which occurred when a corporation reorganized in another state was a realization, because corporations have different rights and power in different states. Marshall reasoned that properties materially differ for tax purposes when their respective possessors enjoy different legal entitlements from each. As long as the properties being exchanged were not identical, a realization had taken place. This was a simpler, black letter rule, as compared to what the Commissioner was arguing for, which would have examined not just the underlying substance of the transaction, but also the market and other non-tax regulations.
The properties exchanged were "materially different." Justice Marshall held that the participation interests exchanged by Cottage Savings and the other S&Ls were "materially different" because the loans involved were made to different obligors and secured by different properties. Even though the interests were "substantially identical" for the FHLBB's purposes, that did not mean they were not materially different for taxation purposes. Therefore, the exchange was a "disposition of property," Cottage Savings had realized a loss, and their deduction was appropriate.
Dissent
Justice Blackmun dissented, joined by Justice White.
First, Blackmun wanted to define "material difference" with reference to how the term "materiality" was defined.  In TSC Industries, Inc. v. Northway, Inc. (1976), Justice Marshall himself had stated, in the context of securities fraud, that an omitted fact is material if there is a substantial likelihood that a reasonable shareholder would consider it important in deciding how to vote. By implication, a material difference is a difference capable of influencing the decision made by the parties to the transaction.
Second, Blackmun pointed out that the majority created something of an anomaly by allowing the property interests exchanged here to be "identical" for accounting purposes but "different" for tax purposes.
Finally, he explained that he felt the substance of the transactions, including the fact that Cottage Savings retained a 10% interest in loans it traded away so it could continue servicing them, did not point to any real difference that should permit the allowance of a deduction.
Academic Commentary
The emphasis in Cottage Savings on realization as an administrative requirement makes evident the capricious role that realization plays in the tax field.
If the realization requirement can be met at a very low threshold, as the decision implies, then "realization" virtually becomes elective with the taxpayer.
The hazard of elective or voluntary realization arises in connection with much investment activity.
To prevent an investor from selling underwater assets to deduct realized losses from gross income without restriction, the Code permits the investor to offset so-called capital losses only against his realized capital gains. (Unused losses may be carried forward to subsequent years.) Investment losses are thus confined by the Code to a separate schedule, and so isolated from other kinds of taxable income.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 499
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:Savings and loan crisis
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:History of Cincinnati
Category:Legal history of Ohio
"""

From "Cotton Petroleum Corp. v. New Mexico" ==> """
Cotton Petroleum Corp. v. New Mexico, 490 U.S. 163 (1989), was a United States Supreme Court case that decided states may impose taxes on non-Tribal commercial activity that takes place on Tribal land. 
 Background 
This case followed the earlier Supreme Court ruling in Merrion v. Jicarilla Apache Tribe (1982). In that case the high court approved of the Jicarilla Apache charging a severance tax for oil extraction on tribal land.
Accordingly, Cotton Petroleum, a non-Indian corporation, extracted oil and  agreed to pay the tribe a 6% severance tax. However, the State of New Mexico collected an additional 8% severance tax, which it levied on all oil producers in the State. Cotton paid the state tax in protest and filed this lawsuit, asserting that the state tax was preempted by federal law.
 Opinion of the court 
The Court applied Bracker balancing, weighing state, Tribal and federal interests. Because the state provided Cotton $89,384 in services, the Court found sufficient state interest to justify the state tax.Cotton Petroleum Corp. v. New Mexico, 490 U.S. 163, 185 (1989) While amount collected in taxes, $2,293,953, far exceeded the value of the state services, the Court held there was no "proportionality requirement." The Court further explained that current case law allows states to impose non-discriminatory taxes on non-Tribal entities that do business with Tribes, noting that Congress could offer immunity if it chose to do so.490 U.S. at 175
 References 
External links
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of New Mexico
Category:Severance taxes
Category:Taxation in New Mexico
Category:Native American history of New Mexico
Category:Jicarilla Apache
Category:United States Native American tax case law
Category:History of the petroleum industry in the United States
"""

From "Counselman v. Hitchcock" ==> """
Counselman v. Hitchcock, 142 U.S. 547 (1892), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that not incriminating an individual for testimony was not the same as not requiring them to testify at all. The court reasoned that as long as evidence arising from the compelled testimony could incriminate the individual in any way, the Fifth Amendment guarantee against self-incrimination was not satisfied. The court then adopted the broader "transactional immunity" rule..
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1892 in United States case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:Legal history of Illinois
"""

From "Counterman v. Colorado" ==> """
Counterman v. Colorado is a pending case of the Supreme Court of the United States concerning whether the First amendment's free speech clause requires proof of intent in order to a person to be convicted for threats under the true threat doctrine. Oral argument was held April 19, 2023.
Background
Counterman was convicted for stalking (serious emotional distress) under section 18-3-602(1)(c), C.R.S. 2020 and sentenced to four-and-a-half years of prison for messages he sent to singer-songwriter Coles Whalen over a six-year period. The Colorado Court of Appeals affirmed his conviction and the Colorado Supreme Court denied review. On January 13, 2023, the United States Supreme Court granted his petition for certiorari.
External links
Colorado Court of Appeals, Division II opinion in case No. 17CA1465 People v. Counterman. July 22, 2021. 497 P.3d 1039. 
Colorado Court of Appeals Oral Argument (from 18:03 to 49:04)
Footnotes
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
*
Category:2023 in United States case law
"""

From "County of Allegheny v. American Civil Liberties Union" ==> """
County of Allegheny v. American Civil Liberties Union, 492 U.S. 573 (1989), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court considered the constitutionality of two recurring Christmas and Hanukkah holiday displays located on public property in downtown Pittsburgh. The first, a nativity scene (crèche), was placed on the grand staircase of the Allegheny County Courthouse. The second of the holiday display in question was an  public Hanukkah menorah, which was placed just outside the City-County Building next to the city's  decorated Christmas tree and a sign saluting liberty. The legality of the Christmas tree display was not considered in this case.
In a complex and fragmented decision, the majority held that the County of Allegheny violated the Establishment Clause by displaying a crèche in the county courthouse, because the "principal or primary effect" of the display was to advance religion within the meaning of Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971), when viewed in its overall context. Moreover, in contrast to Lynch v. Donnelly (1984), nothing in the crèche's setting detracted from that message.
A different majority held that the menorah display did not have the prohibited effect of endorsing religion, given its "particular physical setting". Its combined display with a Christmas tree and a sign saluting liberty did not impermissibly endorse both the Christian and Jewish faiths, but simply recognized that both Christmas and Hanukkah are part of the same winter-holiday season, which, the Court found, had attained a secular status in U.S. society.
Background
Since 1981, the Holy Name Society of Pittsburgh had placed a crèche on the grand staircase of the Allegheny County Courthouse. In 1986, the county also placed poinsettia plants and two Christmas trees around the crèche. Attached to the manger was an angel carrying a banner, with the words: Gloria in Excelsis Deo!
The Pittsburgh City-County Building (serving as City Hall) is separate from the courthouse, and is jointly owned by the city and county. The city had placed a 45-foot Christmas tree in front of the building "for a number of years." In 1986, the city placed a plaque beneath the tree with the mayor's name, entitled "Salute to Liberty." Below the title, the sign stated: "During this holiday season, the city of Pittsburgh salutes liberty. Let these festive lights remind us that we are the keepers of the flame of liberty and our legacy of freedom." Since 1982, the city had also placed a menorah with the Christmas tree in front of the City-County Building. The city did not own the menorah, but placed, removed, and stored it each year. The menorah was owned by Chabad House, Pittsburgh's Lubavitch Center.
On December 10, 1986, the Greater Pittsburgh Chapter of the ACLU and seven local residents sued the city of Pittsburgh and the county of Allegheny. The lawsuit, argued by Roslyn Litman, sought to enjoin the county from displaying the crèche in the courthouse, and the city from displaying the menorah in front of the city-county building. Chabad was allowed to intervene to defend the menorah. The plaintiffs argued that the displays violated the Establishment Clause, applicable via the Fourteenth Amendment. On May 8, 1987, the District Court denied the injunction to remove either the crèche or the menorah. The Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit reversed the district court's ruling, stating that the two displays each violated the Establishment Clause. The county, city, and Chabad all subsequently filed petitions for certiorari.
Opinion of the Court
The majority holding of the Court found that the crèche display violated the Establishment Clause while the menorah did not. In her opinion, Justice O'Connor explained the slightly different reasons why she also supports Justice Blackmun's holding. Justice Brennan, joined by Justices Stevens and Marshall, joined parts III-A, IV, and V of Blackmun's opinion. However, Brennan disagreed with Blackmun and O'Connor's respective opinions by stating that the menorah and Christmas tree are also violations of the Establishment Clause. Justice Kennedy, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices White and Scalia, disagreed with Blackmun's reasoning in part VI and agreed with the previous judgment of the district court. Justice Stevens, in his own opinion, stated that the appeals court was correct in its ruling. He believed that the menorah display, together with the Christmas tree, signified a double violation of the establishment clause. Since the menorah is a religious symbol, he felt that Judaism and Christianity were being endorsed by the government to the exclusion of all other religions.
The following table breaks down the Justices' opinions:
JusticeNativity sceneMenorahBlackmunviolationconstitutionalO'ConnorviolationconstitutionalBrennanviolationviolationStevensviolationviolationMarshallviolationviolationKennedyconstitutionalconstitutionalWhiteconstitutionalconstitutionalScaliaconstitutionalconstitutionalRehnquistconstitutionalconstitutional
Part I
Justices Blackmun and O'Connor both believed that the Christmas tree is a secular symbol in American society today. However, Justice O'Connor states that the "menorah standing alone may well send a message of endorsement of the Jewish faith." By placing the menorah with the Christmas tree, she believed that the city is representing the pluralism of the freedom of religion.
Part II
Justice Blackmun believed that the menorah has become a secular symbol, emblematic of the "winter-holiday season." Justice Brennan disagreed with this, stating that the menorah retains religious meaning. Justice O'Connor joined in Justice Blackmun's belief.
Part III
In part III-A, Justice Blackmun discussed the Establishment Clause. In III-B, Justice Blackmun sets the issue of the case as deciding if the crèche and menorah have "the total effect of endorsing or disapproving religious beliefs." Justice Brennan dissented from the opinions of Justices O'Connor and Blackmun, which had proposed that the presence of multiple religious displays, so long as one is not favored over the other. Justices Blackmun and Brennan also argue that Hanukkah's social prominence in America may be due to the proximity to Christmas. Justice Blackmun stated that December is not the "winter holiday season" for Judaism, and believes that the presentation of the menorah with the Christmas tree promotes a "Christianized version of Judaism." Justice Brennan questions why the city recognizes a "relatively minor Jewish holiday," while not the "far more significant Jewish holidays of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur."
Part IV
Justice Blackmun found that the crèche endorsed a "patently Christian message," and permanently enjoined its display in the context presented. In his dissenting opinion, Justice Kennedy believed that the crèche does not fail the second prong of the Lemon test, and its display is therefore constitutional. He also concurred that the display of the menorah is constitutional.
Part V
Throughout Part V, Justice Blackmun attacked the reasoning of Justice Kennedy. Citing Marsh v. Chambers (1983), Justice Kennedy argued that the Constitution allows the display of the crèche. Justice Blackmun disagreed with Justice Kennedy's logic, arguing that Justice Kennedy advocates a lower level of scrutiny when evaluating the Establishment Clause.
Part VI
Justice Blackmun found that the menorah display did not endorse religion in violation of the Establishment Clause. However, the Court remanded the decision to the appeals court to decide whether the menorah failed the Lemon test on the "entanglement" and "purpose" prongs, which were not considered in this case.
Part VII
Justice Blackmun sums up the opinion, stating that the display of the crèche in the courthouse is unconstitutional.  He also states that the display of the menorah in this "particular physical setting" is constitutional.  The cases were remanded to the appeals court for further proceedings in light of this decision.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 492
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971)
 Lynch v. Donnelly (1984)
 Pittsburgh Crèche
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:Hanukkah
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:1989 in religion
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:History of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania
Category:Christmas in Pennsylvania
"""

From "County of Maui v. Hawaii Wildlife Fund" ==> """
County of Maui v. Hawaii Wildlife Fund, No. 18-260, 590 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case involving pollution discharges under the Clean Water Act (CWA). The case asked whether the Clean Water Act requires a permit when pollutants that originate from a non-point source can be traced to reach navigable waters through mechanisms such as groundwater transport. In a 6–3 decision, the Court ruled that such non-point discharges require a permit when they are the "functional equivalent of a direct discharge", a new test defined by the ruling. The decision vacated the ruling of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, and remanded the case with instructions to apply the new standard to the lower courts with cooperation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
Background
The Clean Water Act (CWA), enacted in 1972 as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,United States. Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972. . October 18, 1972. regulates water pollution into "waters of the United States."Clean Water Act (CWA) sec. 301(a), . One of its provisions involves the regulation of pollutants from point sources (such as the drainage from an industrial plant) into surface waters. Operators of any point source are required to obtain a permit through the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) that limits what pollutants may be emitted by the point source, necessary treatment steps to take to limit those pollutants, and other considerations.CWA sec. 402, .
It is unclear whether the Act covers discharges into waters of the U.S. through groundwater. A plain reading of the statute indicates that it does, "The term "discharge of a pollutant" and the term "discharge of pollutants" each means (A) any addition of any pollutant to navigable waters from any point source, (B) any addition of any pollutant to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft."CWA sec. 502, . Whether the CWA covers fairly traceable discharges through groundwater into navigable waters of the U.S. was the fundamental question of the Maui v. Hawaii Wildlife Fund appeal before the United States Supreme Court.
The Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) directly regulates discharges into groundwater aquifers, such as through injection wells, and additional regulations set by each state. The EPA still regulates the type of wastewater that can be injected through the Underground Injection Control (UIC) Program, but broadly, the UIC Program allows much higher levels of pollutants to be injected compared to the NPDES, due to the natural filtration action that occurs in groundwater aquifers. Of particular interest to the case are Class V UIC wells—wells used to dispose of non-hazardous water waste into underground aquifers. Typically these will include stormwater drainage or agricultural runoff. The EPA estimates there are 650,000 such Class V wells in place across the United States.
thumb|upright|left|Map of the northwestern shore of the island of Maui, highlighting the location of the Lahaina Wastewater Reclamation Facility and its proximity to the shoreline
In the present case, the Lahaina Wastewater Reclamation Facility in Maui County, Hawaii treats wastewater from homes and businesses. The facility is authorized by the EPA and the Hawaii Department of Health under the SDWA to inject the reclaimed water into four Class V wells on the island, with an average total effluent of  per day. Because of the geologic nature of Hawaii, it was estimated that more than 90% of this water eventually enters the surrounding ocean through seepage. During the planning and subsequent reviews of the facility, both the EPA and the state had determined that there was no need for the facility to apply for a NPDES permit, since it was not a point source under the CWA. However, work done by University of Hawaii at Manoa proved that approximately 60% of the injections of wastewater from the Lahaina facility were reaching nearby ocean waters via groundwater using tracer dye studies to track the destination of the wastewater, and piezometer studies observed heightened levels of nutrients at the site.
Trial court
In 2012, several environmental activist groups, including the Hawaii Wildlife Fund, the Surfrider Foundation, the Sierra Club-Maui Group, and the West Maui Preservation Association, represented by Earthjustice, sued the county for lacking appropriate NPDES permits, arguing that their injection wells were truly point sources since past EPA studies using dye tracers had shown it possible to trace the discharge from individual wells into the ocean. Reclaimed water, which can possess higher levels of bacteria and other microorganisms, that seeped into the ocean led to the spread of algal blooms near Maui's shores and could impact the health of coral reefs, aquatic and mammalian life, and humans that live near the shore, according to the environmental groups. The County disputed this with support of the EPA, stating that the wells were not a direct point source defined from the CWA. The suit was filed after the environmental groups plead with the county on civil grounds to seek an NPDES permit in the years prior.
In 2014 the United States District Court for the District of Hawaii found for the plaintiffs, agreeing that the facility needed NPDES permits for the injection wells and for the facility itself.
Appeal
The county appealed to the Ninth Circuit, which also ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in 2018. The Ninth Circuit's decision drew on Rapanos v. United States (2006), in which the plurality decision authored by Justice Antonin Scalia suggested that permits would be required even for point source pollutants that "do not emit 'directly into' covered waters, but pass 'through conveyances' in between." The court claimed that the plain language of the CWA supported the requirement that the discharge from the wastewater plant be subject to permit, held that the Clean Water Act required a permit when pollutants were "fairly traceable" to the original point source. This was a novel test for the CWA, rejecting two standards proposed by the County and the EPA. In the specific case of the Maui wastewater plant, the Ninth Circuit ruled that the pollutants from the wells to the ocean that resulted in pollution concentrations above de minimis levels was "fairly traceable" and thus would need a permit under the CWA. The Ninth Circuit concluded that "at bottom, this case is about preventing the county from doing indirectly that which it cannot do directly". The court declined to hear the case en banc.
During the early parts of the case, the EPA, under President Barack Obama's administration still had upheld the initial statements that there were no need for permits for these types of wells, but had been working with environmentalists to devise new standards. With the election of Donald Trump in 2016, the EPA took a stronger stance against the environmentalist position, and in April 2019, after the trial court and appellate court decisions, issued a new guidance document asserting that the CWA does not cover such discharges. This document is not binding on the Supreme Court.
Regardless of the outcome of the case, the County agreed to pay a  fee to the groups should they prevail in the challenge, and are working on developing more projects in Maui to use more of the reclaimed water produced by the plant for beneficial uses as to minimize any seeping to the ocean.
Supreme Court
The County filed its petition for writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court, arguing that the test proposed by the Ninth Circuit for defining a point source discharge conflicted with the Supreme Court's prior ruling in South Florida Water Management District v. Miccosukee Tribe (2004). and upheld in several subsequent cases. The County also raised concerns that this test would affect a significant portion of the other 650,000 Class V wells in operation, requiring these wells to also obtain NPDES permits. The County also referred to the Supreme Court's decision in Michigan v. EPA (2015), which stated the EPA failed to consider the costs necessary in what it considered a "necessary and appropriate" rule-making change to enforcement of the Clear Air Act that affected the nation's power plants.. The County believed that the new point source test from the Ninth Circuit would be a similar economic burden. The Supreme Court approved the petition in February 2019.
Oral arguments before the Supreme Court were held November 6, 2019. The Justices debated with the legal representatives on the impact of a ruling in either direction. A ruling that favored the county of Maui could potentially allow wastewater dischargers to simply modify how their wastewater is discharged with minimal cost to avoid EPA's regulations, while a ruling favoring the Wildlife Fund could leave many smaller property owners, including home owners, at fault for unintentional leaks of wastewater from their properties.
Decision
The Court issued its 6–3 decision on April 23, 2020, which vacated the Ninth Circuit's decision and remanded the case to the lower court.Cnty. of Maui v. Haw. Wildlife Fund, .
Majority opinion and concurrence
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the majority opinion, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Associate Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Sonia Sotomayor, Elena Kagan, and Brett Kavanaugh. In his opinion, Breyer wrote that the "fairly traceable" test that the Ninth Circuit had adopted would give the EPA greater authority on pollutant regulation than Congress had given at the time, as the Ninth Circuit's test could apply to a source of pollution that may have occurred a century before and hundreds of miles away due to the slow motion of groundwater. However, the decision also outright rejected the County of Maui's argument that the discharge in the present case did not need a permit, as the language of the CWA as intended by Congress would cover the types of discharge.
In the decision, Breyer asserted that a permit for discharge would be required for point sources, or for non-point sources, for "the functional equivalent of a direct discharge", which had been demonstrated in the present case. Breyer wrote as an example "Where a pipe ends a few feet from navigable waters and the pipe emits pollutants that travel those few feet through groundwater (or over the beach), the permitting requirement clearly applies. If the pipe ends 50 miles from navigable waters and the pipe emits pollutants that travel with groundwater, mix with much other material, and end up in navigable waters only many years later, the permitting requirements likely do not apply." Breyer's opinion included two major factors to be considered in evaluating whether non-point source discharge was functionally equivalent to direct discharge: the distance that the pollutant must travel from the point of discharge to the federal waterway, and the time that it would take. Other factors that can impact this included the ground material that the pollutant traveled through, how the pollutant changed or interacted with other chemicals within the ground, and how much of the pollutant made it to the waterway.
In his concurring opinion, Kavanaugh stressed that the majority opinion was consistent with Rapanos.
Dissenting opinions
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissent joined by Justice Neil Gorsuch. Thomas took the stance that the CWA was more restrictive and only required a permit from a true direct discharge source, and would have reversed the Ninth Circuit's decision in favor of the County of Maui. Justice Samuel Alito also wrote a dissent, more critical of the majority opinion setting a new standard for determining the need for a permit, but would have also reversed the Ninth's decision.
Impact
Breyer instructed the Ninth on remand to consider the "functional equivalent" test, in guidance with the EPA, to re-evaluate the discharge from the Lahaina Wastewater Reclamation Facility and for similar cases going forward, barring a change in the CWA statute from Congress. This would thus determine if the original case brought by the Hawaii Wildlife Fund could then proceed. The decision is also expected to lead the EPA to develop specific rules related to the "functional equivalent" test to be set in place after public review. Additionally, several pending cases filed by environmentalists against wastewater plants and oil processing companies related to their water discharge are expected to be re-evaluated in light of the majority decision.
The decision was generally seen as a favorable outcome for environmentalists, though the test proposed by Breyer was narrower than what environmentalists had proposed. The decision also rejected the attempt by the Trump administration to remove any type of permit requirements on these sites, as well as rejecting the EPA's attempts to bypass parts of the CWA statute. Other industry sectors such as the chemical and energy sectors feared that this will require a review of their waste discharge, which had previously determined the need for permitting under bright-line rule, with new, vague guidelines set by the Supreme Court.
In July 2021, following the Supreme Court decision, the Hawaii District Court determined that the Lahaina plant's groundwater injection of sewage was the "functional equivalent of a direct discharge" and required the plant to obtain an NPDES permit.Hawai'i Wildlife Fund et al v. County of Maui. Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motions for Summary Judgment; Order Denying Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. U.S. District Court for the District of Hawaii. July 15, 2021. Civ. No. 12-00198.
References
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Water law in the United States
Category:Water pollution in the United States
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:Maui County, Hawaii
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "County of Riverside v. McLaughlin" ==> """
County of Riverside v. McLaughlin, 500 U.S. 44 (1991), was a United States Supreme Court case which involved the question of within what period of time must a suspect arrested without a warrant (warrantless arrests) be brought into court to determine if there is probable cause for holding the suspect in custody.  The majority held that suspects must generally be granted a probable cause determination within 48 hours of arrest. The dissent believed that probable cause hearings should generally be provided much sooner, as soon as the police complete the administrative steps incident to arrest.
Overview
The County of Riverside v. McLaughlin (1991) case was a court case dealing with the interpretation of the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution in a probable cause case involving a warrantless arrest. In this instance, the Fourth Amendment is used by the plaintiff(s) to argue that the clause “warrants must be legally justified with probable cause” also applies to warrantless arrests because it was implied that it would be unreasonable, if not unconstitutional, for someone to be arrested without determining probable cause. This United States Supreme Court also used previous precedent derived from previous Supreme Court cases – such as the Gerstein v. Pugh (1975) case – to arrive at their final decision.
This lawsuit was filed in 1987 by the plaintiff – Donald Lee McLaughlin – against the County of Riverside in California. He asked the United States District Court for the Central District of California to issue an injunction ordering that the County stop its policies on warrantless arrests, arguing that the practice may be unconstitutional. Eventually, the County of Riverside appealed the case to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit after the District Court sided with the plaintiff; the Court of Appeals also agreed with the plaintiff's arguments. This case then went before the U.S. Supreme Court. In a 5–4 vote, the Supreme Court justices found that the County of Riverside's practices in regards to warrantless arrests were unconstitutional and ruled that suspects who are arrested without a warrant must be given probable cause hearings within 48 hours.  The dissenting justices objected to allowing 48 hours, believing the probable cause hearing should be held as soon as police complete the administrative steps incident to arrest.
Background
In 1987, the plaintiff – Donald Lee McLaughlin – filed a complaint in the United States District Court (Central District of California) against Riverside County. In it, the complaint alleged that he was jailed in the Riverside County Jail without prosecutors (or any law enforcement officials) explaining to him the reasons why he was held (probable cause). McLaughlin requested an order from the judge that would require that defendants and the County provide those who were arrested without warrants probable cause in a reasonable amount of time.
Riverside County responded to this lawsuit by saying that McLaughlin had no legal standing to bring suit against the County because, based on City of Los Angeles v. Lyons (1983), he failed to show that he was going to be subject to unconstitutional actions by the County, such as detention without probable cause. The County requested that the suit be dismissed. During this time, a second amended complaint was accepted (as individuals and class representatives), which added three more plaintiffs – Johnny E. James, Diana Ray Simon, and Michael Scott Hyde – who alleged that law enforcement officials arrested them without a warrant and were held without probable cause.
In 1989, the plaintiffs requested the District Court judge issue an injunction ordering the County of Riverside to give probable cause hearings to those who were detained more quickly. A delay of up to 48 hours was not generally permissible.  The judge granted the request based on the precedent set in the Gerstein case. Riverside County then appealed the case to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit; the Ninth Circuit combined the McLaughlin case together with McGregor v. County of San Bernardino (9th Cir. 1989) due to the similarities between the cases, and upheld the injunction on the basis that not providing a probable cause hearing as soon as the administrative steps after arrest were completed violated precedent set by the Gerstein case. The Ninth Circuit noted that the detainees were “in custody and suffering injury as a result of the defendants' allegedly unconstitutional action”. This case then went to the U.S. Supreme Court for review.
Opinion of the Court
In a 5–4 vote, the Court ruled that suspects who are arrested without a warrant must be provided a probable cause hearing within 48 hours of their arrest, but need not have their probable cause hearing as soon as police complete the administrative steps incident to arrest. Using the precedent set by the Gerstein case – in which the Supreme Court ruled that Florida's practice of keeping suspects for 30 days without probable cause was unconstitutional – and close interpretation of the Fourth Amendment, they found that the County of Riverside's practice of keeping suspects in lengthy custody without probable cause determination amounted to illegal detention (or held in custody without being charged). Illegal detention would unquestionably violate the unreasonable search and seizure clause of the Fourth Amendment. Withholding probable cause determinations from suspects for longer than 48 hours after arrest, absent exigent circumstances, would violate the Fourth Amendment.
Justice O'Connor, joined by Chief Justice Rehinquist and Justices White, Kennedy and Souter, wrote the opinion of the Court, and cautioned, however, that:
This is not to say that the probable cause determination in a particular case passes constitutional muster simply because it is provided within 48 hours. Such a hearing may nonetheless violate Gerstein if the arrested individual can prove that his or her probable cause determination was delayed unreasonably. Examples of unreasonable delay are delays for the purpose of gathering additional evidence to justify the arrest, a delay motivated by ill will against the arrested individual, or delay for delay's sake. In evaluating whether the delay in a particular case is unreasonable, however, courts must allow a substantial degree of flexibility. Courts cannot ignore the often unavoidable delays in transporting arrested persons from one facility to another, handling late-night bookings where no magistrate is readily available, obtaining the presence of an arresting officer who may be busy processing other suspects or securing the premises of an arrest, and other practical realities.
Where an arrested individual does not receive a probable cause determination within 48 hours, the calculus changes. In such a case, the arrested individual does not bear the burden of proving an unreasonable delay. Rather, the burden shifts to the government to demonstrate the existence of a bona fide emergency or other extraordinary circumstance. The fact that in a particular case it may take longer than 48 hours to consolidate pretrial proceedings does not qualify as an extraordinary circumstance. Nor, for that matter, do intervening weekends. A jurisdiction that chooses to offer combined proceedings must do so as soon as is reasonably feasible, but in no event later than 48 hours after arrest
Justice O’Connor rejected the County of Riverside's claims that “allege personal injury fairly traceable to the defendant's allegedly unlawful conduct and likely to be redressed by the requested relief.”; they argued the plaintiffs who were arrested and held without probable cause determination were suffering direct injury (emotional) because they were not given the reasons for their arrest. The ruling stated that any suspects that are arrested without a warrant by law enforcement have to know why they are being arrested (determination of probable cause) from a judge within 48 hours, except by emergency circumstances.
Dissent
Four justices dissented, in two separate dissenting opinions, objecting to the majority's allowing a 48-hour delay before probable cause is determined: Justice Scalia and Justice Marshall, joined by Justices Blackmun and Stevens. Justice Marshall argued:
In Gerstein v. Pugh, 420 U.S. 103 (1975), this Court held that an individual detained following a warrantless arrest is entitled to a "prompt" judicial determination of probable cause as a prerequisite to any further restraint on his liberty. See id., at 114-116, 125. I agree with Justice Scalia that a probable-cause hearing is sufficiently "prompt" under Gerstein only when provided immediately upon completion of the "administrative steps incident to arrest," id., at 114. See post, at 4-5. Because the Court of Appeals correctly held that the County of Riverside must provide probable cause hearings as soon as it completes the administrative steps incident to arrest, see 888 F. 2d 1276, 1278 (CA9 1989), I would affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals. Accordingly, I dissent 
Justice Marshall's opinion agreed with the Ninth Circuit's view that probable cause hearings must be provided as soon as administrative steps incident to arrest are completed, and should not generally be delayed for up to 48 hours.  
Justice Scalia offered a more detailed perspective in his dissent, stating:
Today, however, the Court discerns something quite different in Gerstein. It finds that the plain statements set forth above (not to mention the common-law tradition of liberty upon which they were based) were trumped by the implication of a later dictum in the case which, according to the Court, manifests a "recognition that the Fourth Amendment does not compel an immediate determination of probable cause upon completing the administrative steps incident to arrest." Ante, at 8 (emphasis added). Of course Gerstein did not say, nor do I contend, that an "immediate" determination is required. But what the Court today means by "not immediate" is that the delay can be attributable to something other than completing the administrative steps incident to arrest and arranging for the magistrate – namely, to the administrative convenience of combining the probable-cause determination with other state proceedings. The result, we learn later in the opinion, is that what Gerstein meant by "a brief period of detention to take the administrative steps incident to arrest" is two full days. I think it is clear that the case neither said nor meant any such thing….
<blockquote>…Of course even if the implication of the dictum in Gerstein were what the Court says, that would be poor reason for keeping a wrongfully arrested citizen in jail contrary to the clear dictates of the Fourth Amendment. What is most revealing of the frailty of today's opinion is that it relies upon nothing but that implication from a dictum, plus its own (quite irrefutable because entirely value laden) "balancing" of the competing demands of the individual and the State. With respect to the point at issue here, different times and different places – even highly liberal times and places – have struck that balance in different ways. Some Western democracies currently permit the Executive a period of detention without impartially adjudicated cause. In England, for example, the Prevention of Terrorism Act 1989, 14(4), 5, permits suspects to be held without presentation and without charge for seven days. 12 Halsbury's Stat. 1294 (4th ed. 1989). It was the purpose of the Fourth Amendment to put this matter beyond time, place and judicial predilection, incorporating the traditional common-law guarantees against unlawful arrest. The Court says not a word about these guarantees, and they are determinative. Gerstein'''s approval of a "brief period" of delay to accomplish "administrative steps incident to an arrest" is already a questionable extension of the traditional formulation, though it probably has little practical effect and can perhaps be justified on de minimis grounds. [n.2] To expand Gerstein, however, into an authorization for 48-hour detention related neither to the obtaining of a magistrate nor the administrative "completion" of the arrest seems to me utterly unjustified. Mr. McLaughlin was entitled to have a prompt impartial determination that there was reason to deprive him of his liberty – not according to a schedule that suits the State's convenience in piggybacking various proceedings, but as soon as his arrest was completed and the magistrate could be procured. </blockquote>
Justice Scalia argued that the Court thought the precedent established in the Gerstein case in regards to issues associated with warrantless arrests was more than enough in determining when probable cause is determined for suspects. He also argued that the court disregarded the guarantees the Fourth Amendment outlined in regards to holding people in custody. Finally, Justice Scalia argued that the Court's further interpretation of the Gerstein case to mandate that law enforcement must determine probable cause in a set amount of time was unnecessary; he felt that it was completely unrelated to clearing arrest-related administrative affairs or assigning a judge to the suspect's case. He also felt that the probable cause determination for suspects arrested without a warrant should be less strict.
Subsequent developments
The basis of County of Riverside v. McLaughlin was used in a dissenting opinion in Powell v. Nevada'' (1994). (Thomas, J., dissenting).
Notes
External links
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:Riverside County, California
Category:United States criminal procedure case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "County of Sacramento v. Lewis" ==> """
Sacramento v. Lewis, 523 U.S. 833 (1998), was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States involving police action in a high-speed car chase.
Background
This case concerned a high-speed chase between Sacramento County sheriff's deputies and two men on a motorcycle: Brian Willard driving and Phillip Lewis as a passenger. The chase wove in and out of moving traffic and reached speeds up to 100 miles an hour, ending when Willard lost control and the bike tipped over. One of the deputies could not stop in time and hit Lewis, killing him. Lewis’ parents sued the county's Sheriff's Department, accusing the deputy of depriving Lewis of his Fourteenth Amendment due process right to life through deliberate and reckless conduct. A district court ruled in favor of the deputy, the Ninth Circuit appeals court reversed, and then the Supreme Court ruled unanimously in the department's favor.
Decision
The question before the Court was: Does a police officer violate substantive due process by causing death through reckless indifference to life in a high-speed chase aimed at apprehending a suspected offender? The answer was a unanimous "no."
The majority opinion based this on an analysis of the 14th Amendment due process concept and an application of the "shocks the conscience" test. Prior cases have held that the “core” of due process concept is “protection of the individual against arbitrary action of government.” In dealing with executive action, only the “most egregious” conduct is “arbitrary in constitutional sense."
In determining what is "egregious" action, one should consider whether such action "shocks the conscience" (Rochin v. California, 1953). One must also consider culpability: in this case, we are dealing with "recklessness." Finally, the decision should not be made “mechanically” for one should consider the context.
In this case, the “deliberate indifference” accusation does not make sense, since in a high-speed chase there is no time for deliberation. Furthermore, one must remember that officers are under intense pressure in these situations, where they must “act decisively and show restraint at the same time." Thus the Court held: “High-speed chases with no intent to harm suspects physically or to worsen their legal plight do not give rise to liability under the Fourteenth Amendment”
In Kennedy's concurrence, he warned that the “shock the conscience” test should be treated with skepticism due to its subjective nature. However, he recognized it as a good starting point for comparing the “objective nature” of certain actions with precedent, history, and tradition. When considering the test, one need to take into the account the “necessities” of law enforcement: It 
would be counterproductive to suggest that “suspects may ignore a lawful command to stop and then sue for damages sustained in an ensuing chase”
Scalia's concurrence noted the irony in applying the “shocks the conscience” test in this case, since only last term the Court rejected it (Washington v. Glucksberg, 1997). He agreed with the Court, not because of the “shocks the conscience” test, but because the petitioners had presented no support for their “alleged due process right.”
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 523
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
The Oyez Project, Sacramento v. Lewis, 523 U.S. 833 (1998). Last viewed April 11, 2008.
O'Brien, David M. Constitutional Law and Politics. Vol. II: Civil Rights and Civil Liberties 6th ed. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2005. Pages 374-379.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:Hazardous motor vehicle activities
Category:United States due process case law
Category:Government of Sacramento County, California
"""

From "County of Washington v. Gunther" ==> """
County of Washington v. Gunther, 452 U.S. 161 (1981), is a United States labor law case concerning discrimination and the lower standards of protection for gender pay because of the Bennett Amendment in Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, §703(h).
Background
In 1974, four female county prison guards sued the County of Washington in Oregon for being paid less than male guards and argued that to be unlawful sexual discrimination. The county argued that male guards spent more time overseeing prisoners and clerical tasks. It also argued that under the Bennett Amendment, the women could claim unlawful pay discrimination unless they showed under the Fair Labor Standards Act that they were doing "equal work."
Judgment
District Court
The district court found that male guards were responsible for overseeing more prisoners and also that female guards spent some of their time in clerical tasks. However, it also found as a matter of law that a sex-based wage discrimination claim cannot be brought under Title VII unless it satisfies the equal work standard of the Equal Pay Act of 1963.Brennan.
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals
While not reviewing the first finding, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals held with respect to the latter that "claims for sex-based wage discrimination can also be brought under Title VII even though no member of the opposite sex holds an equal but higher paying job, provided that the challenged wage rate is not exempted under the Equal Pay Act's affirmative defenses as to wage differentials attributable to seniority, merit, quantity or quality of production, or any other factor other than sex." It interpreted the intention of the amendment as incorporating "into Title VII only the affirmative defenses of the Equal Pay Act, not its prohibitory language requiring equal pay for equal work."
Supreme Court
The US Supreme Court held that the women were not precluded from bringing a discrimination claim in principle, and they did not need to show they were doing strictly equal work. That left open the possibility to claim that work was of comparable value.McCann, 36 Justice Brennan, speaking for the Court, indicated in the majority opinion that the Bennett Amendment did not preclude comparison of differences in pay but only those attributable to those four specific factors:
Rehnquist J (joined by Burger, Stewart and Powell) dissented:
Significance
Gunther did not prove definitive.McCann, 37. The Court did not determine how jobs might be properly compared, and one of the primary opponents of the majority opinion was soon-to-be Chief Justice of the United States William Rehnquist. Rehnquist wrote explicitly against the comparable worth theory in his dissent (speaking as well for Warren E. Burger, Lewis F. Powell, Jr. and Potter Stewart), and Brennan countered that the majority opinion did not explicitly or implicitly support or refute the comparable worth doctrine. Gutman underscored that "the Gunther ruling did not validate comparable worth theory; it merely permitted plaintiffs to try to make the prima facie claim under Title VII rules." It added, "So far plaintiffs have been thwarted in every case."Gutman, 187.
See also
US labor law
References
External links
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Course v. Stead" ==> """
Course v. Stead, 4 U.S. (4 Dall.) 22 (1800), was an 1800 decision of the United States Supreme Court asserting that "A writ of error, tested in the vacation after the last term, is amendable. The omission of the name of the district in the address of the writ is not material if the indorsement and attestation show the district. If the value of the matter in dispute does not appear, it may be shown by affidavit. If a new party and subject-matter are brought before the court by a supplemental bill, it must show that the court has jurisdiction by reason of the citizenship of the parties to that bill."Reports of decisions in the Supreme Court of the United States: with notes and a digest, Volume 1 (Little, Brown, 1887), pg. 319 
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 4
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
Category:1800 in United States case law
"""

From "Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn" ==> """
Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn, 420 U.S. 469 (1975), was a United States Supreme Court case involving freedom of the press publishing public information.. The Court held that both a Georgia statute prohibiting the release of a rape victim's name and its common-law privacy action counterpart were unconstitutional. The case was argued on November 11, 1974 and decided on March 3, 1975.
 Background 
On August 18, 1971, a 17-year-old North Springs High School student was sexually assaulted at a party and later died in Sandy Springs, Georgia. Law enforcement officials initially believed her death was the result of alcohol poisoning or drug overdose. Upon finding vegetation in her clothing, the police began treating the case as a murder and rape case, and it was later revealed that she asphyxiated on her own vomit. Seven months later, six boys were charged with her rape and murder, although the trial judge later dropped the murder charge. Ultimately, five of the six defendants—Ronald Eugene Longo, Joe Adams Thompson, Bruce Fuson Howard, Peter Manchee, Bobby Ray King, and Craig Michael Wozniak Atlanta Constitution, 4 March 1972,1A and 15A —pleaded guilty to rape and attempt to rape while one pleaded not guilty. Due to the graphic nature of the crime, the media immediately jumped on the story and began following the proceedings. Thomas Wassell, a reporter for WSB-TV, approached the clerk in open court during a recess in the court proceedings in 1972 and asked for a copy of the indictment documents, which contained the name of the victim. He obtained the name and broadcast it later that night while reporting on the defendant's sentencing hearing.
 Procedural history 
Martin Cohn, the father of the victim, sued both WSB and its reporter for publishing his daughter's name. He claimed the publication violated both Georgia's shield law and his common-law right to privacy. The trial court granted summary judgement to Cohn on both claims while rejecting Cox's 1st Amendment defense.
On appeal, the Georgia Supreme Court dismissed Cohn's claim under the Shield Law, claiming it created only a criminal, not civil cause of action. However, it allowed Cohn's common-law privacy claim to stand. It rejected Cox's claims that the disclosure of the rape victim's name was protected by the First Amendment, and compared the activity to other unprotected activities such as fraud, perjury, libel, and slander. Upon rehearing, it also ruled that the Shield Law, and by implicit extension its interpretation of common-law right to privacy, was a "legitimate limitation on the right of freedom of expression contained in the First Amendment[]" and "[t]here simply is no public interest or general concern about the identity of the victim of such a crime as will make the right to disclose the identity of the victim rise to the level of First Amendment protection." It reversed the trial court's summary judgment on the right to privacy claim, and remanded the case back to the trial court to determine if Cox had intentionally invaded Cohn's privacy. Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn, 200 SE 2d 127 - Georgia Supreme Court 1973.
Before the case could proceed at the State trial court, the United States Supreme Court agreed to hear Cox's appeal. The Court reasoned it had jurisdiction since Georgia's Supreme Court's ruling satisfied the finality requirement as it related to Federal issues. Also, if unreviewed, the decision was likely to harm the freedom of the press regardless of the outcome of the state court trial. 
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court ruled 8−1 in favor of Cox Broadcasting, holding Georgia's Shield Law and its common-law counterpart violated the First Amendment. The majority held "[t]he freedom of the press to publish that information appears to us to be of critical importance to our type of government in which the citizenry is the final judge of the proper conduct of public business. In preserving that form of government the First and Fourteenth Amendments command nothing less than that the States may not impose sanctions on the publication of truthful information contained in official court records open to public inspection." Since Cox's reporter had legitimately obtained the name in a public document in open court, the court held that later publication of the name was an activity protected by the 1st Amendment.
 Dissent 
In his dissent, Justice Rehnquist argued the Court should not have heard the case because it lacked jurisdiction. Instead of waiting until the case finished in state court, "the Court construes § 1257 so that it may virtually rush out and meet the prospective constitutional litigant as he approaches our doors." He did not address the substantive First Amendment issues.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 420
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:Rape in the United States
Category:Sandy Springs, Georgia
Category:Cox Enterprises
Category:History of women in Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Cox v. Louisiana" ==> """
Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 536 (1965), is a United States Supreme Court case based on the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. It held that a state government cannot employ "breach of the peace" statutes against protesters engaging in peaceable demonstrations that may potentially incite violence.
Background
The case arose after the picketing of a segregated restaurant on December 14, 1961, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, led to the arrest of 23 student protesters from Southern University, a black college. The next day, B. Elton Cox, a minister, arranged a protest of 2,000 people at the courthouse where the students were being held. The police agreed to allow the protest as long as it was across the street from the courthouse.
Between 100 and 300 whites gathered on the other side of the street. The protesters proceeded in a peaceful orderly fashion, and began to sing songs and hymns causing the jailed students to respond by singing.
Cox then gave a speech exhorting the protesters that upon departure from the courthouse, to proceed into downtown to sit at the segregated lunch counters, This caused "muttering" and "grumbling" in the gathering white crowd across the street. The sheriff then ordered the protesters to disperse, but before they could, the police fired tear gas into the black group, injuring some, including minister Cox who was hit in the ankle by a tear gas cannister. No arrests were made then, but the next day Reverend Cox was arrested at a church and charged with four offenses under Louisiana law, criminal conspiracy, disturbing the peace, obstructing public passages, and picketing before a courthouse. This heavy raft of charges Cox held was a pretext to charge exorbitant bail with the design of draining the funds of the local civil rights movement, and silencing his leadership.B. Elton Cox, Oral history interview with B. Elton Cox by Eugene Pfaff. University of North Carolina, Greensboro Digital Archive. Retrieved 8/14/2020 from http://libcdm1.uncg.edu/cdm/ref/collection/CivilRights/id/817 Cox was later acquitted of criminal conspiracy but convicted of the other three offenses and sentenced to a total of one year and nine months jail time and fined $5,700. In two separate judgments the Louisiana Supreme Court affirmed all three convictions. Both judgments were appealed.State v. Cox, 244 La. 1087, 156 So. 2d 448 (1963). Retrieved 8/14/20 from www.cite.case.law/la/244/1087/3224233/
Social context
All courts adhere to the same judicial standards as the Supreme Court, but local and state courts are more immediately influenced by the political and social environments specific to their location and representative body (Vines 1965: 5). For example, during the 1950s and 1960s, the courts governing states and cities in the southern United States were more greatly influenced by the race struggles that they lived with and saw daily than courts in other areas of the country. In contrast to this, the "Supreme Court justices should have no constituency; they are appointed for life to sit as judges over all people." (Steel 1968) Largely for this reason, Southern African Americans much preferred arguing in front of federal courts, where they felt they had a greater chance of being judged fairly and according to the law. Studies during the 1950s and 1960s show that African Americans were correct in their favoring of the federal courts over state, as federal courts decided in favor of African American defendants 60% more often than cases in Southern state courts. (Vines 1965: 10) This caused much tension and strife within the respective Southern state or community and forced the Supreme Court to rule in response to the controversial issues of race and discrimination.
By late 1964, when the Supreme Court heard arguments in Cox v. Louisiana, demonstrations and protests marked a change in American society. In a 1965 New York Times editorial, James Reston spoke on protest and social change when he said "this rising protest in the nation is having its effect." (Reston 1965: 34) Reston also said "the new activist spirit of the church and the university in America, allied to the modern television and airplane, is now having a profound influence on law and politics in the United States." (Reston 1965) The large scale of demonstrations during this time period gained much public attention, with increased media attention and viewership. Nielsen ratings increased 46% more than average during coverage of a 1963 civil rights march in Washington DC. (see Adams, Val. "TV: Coverage of March". The New York Times August 29, 1963: p. 43.)
Court's decision
Justice Goldberg, writing for the court, overturned Cox's conviction.
A film of the protest was a key piece of evidence, countering the State's claim that the singing from the jail turned the peaceful assembly into a riotous one; the judges watched it with rapt attention. The film showed the protest was peaceful until the police joined in.
Labor unions were a factor in the Court's decision. Labor unions use picketing as a common tactic, so any case concerning public assembly is of great interest to labor groups. Justices Black and Clark made note of the obstruction charge as bad for labor picketing in their opinions, and even stated that the threat to labor picketing was their main reasoning for that decision. (Kalven 1965) In the words of one justice, Hugo L. Black, "Those who encourage minority groups to believe that the United States Constitution and Federal laws give them a right to patrol and picket in the streets whenever they choose, in order to advance what they think to be a just and noble end, do no service to those minority groups, their cause, or their country." (Graham, pg 2) Another link with labor groups is Associate Justice Goldberg, the Justice who delivered the opinion in Cox v. Louisiana, was formerly special counsel to the major labor group the AFL–CIO (The New York Times July 16, 1960 pg. 7).
Cox v. Louisiana did not provide the response and verdict that some critics believe it could have (Steel, pg. 2) Instead, the Court's response to the civil rights movement was more ambivalent and reflective of white attitudes that were against black protest. Of the three convictions of Cox, (breach of peace, picketing near the courthouse, and obstruction of a public passageway), the justices all agreed that the breach of peace conviction did not stand. The justices disagreed about the convictions of picketing near the courthouse and the obstruction of a public passageway. While the courts did upset the convictions, "the opinions … bristled with cautions and with a lack of sympathy for such forms of protest (Klaven pg. 8)."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 379
Brown v. Louisiana
Adderley v. Florida
Edwards v. South Carolina
References & further research
 Adams, Val.  “TV: Coverage of March.”  The New York Times August 29, 1963: p. 43.
 Katzenbach, Nicolas DeB.  “Protest, Politics, and the First Amendment.”  Tulane Law Review April 1970: p. 444.
 Kalven, Harry Jr.  “The Concept of the Public Forum: Cox v. Louisiana” Supreme Court Review Vol. 1965 (1965): p. 8. 9 Graham, p. 2.
 Kenneth C. Vines, “Southern State Supreme Courts and Race Relations,” Western Political Quarterly 18 (1965): p. 5.
 Lewis M. Steel, “A critic’s view of the Warren Court – Nine Men in Black Who Think White”, The New York Times (October 13, 1968).
 Reston, James.  “Washington : The Rising Spirit of Protest.”  The New York Times March 19, 1965: p. 34. 6 Ibid
 "Labor Endorsement of Ticket Expected.”  The New York Times July 16, 1960: p. 7
References
External links
First Amendment Library entry for Cox v. Louisiana
Oral History with B. Elton Cox 
Category:1965 in United States case law
Category:Freedom of assembly
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:History of Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Cox v. New Hampshire" ==> """
Cox v. New Hampshire, 312 U.S. 569 (1941), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that, although the government cannot regulate the contents of speech, it can place reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions on speech for the public safety.. Here, the Court held that government may require organizers of any parade or procession on public streets to have a license and pay a fee.
Sixty-eight Jehovah's Witnesses had assembled at their church and divided into smaller groups that marched along sidewalks, displaying signs, and handing out leaflets advertising a meeting. During the march, groups of 15 to 20 people marched in single file down sidewalks in the district, interfering with hard foot travel.
In 1941, all 68 Jehovah's Witnesses were convicted in a New Hampshire municipal court for violating a state statute which prohibited parades and processions on public streets without a license.  The defendants claimed that their First Amendment rights were violated including their rights to freedom of worship and freedom of assembly.
Decision of the Court
Does the New Hampshire state statute that prohibits unlicensed parades violate the First Amendment's guarantees of freedom of speech and assembly as applied to the states by the Fourteenth Amendment?
No. Chief Justice Charles E. Hughes delivered the opinion for the unanimous Court. The Court held that a municipality's ability to impose regulations that create order and safety for its populace does not infringe on the civil liberties of its people. Because the statute in question only grants a town selectman or licensing board the limited authority to ensure that a proposed parade will not interfere with the proper uses of streets, there is not opportunity for it to wield undue or arbitrary power that would infringe on constitutional rights. The Court also held that there was no evidence that the statute had been administered unfairly in this case.
Effects of the decision
Prior to the decision in Cox, the U.S. Supreme Court had struck down, under the First and Fourteenth Amendments, numerous ordinances imposing permit requirements on expressive activity in public places, such as streets and parks, because the ordinances gave government officials unlimited discretion whether to issue the permits. After Cox, local governments were allowed to regulate competing uses of public forums by using a permit scheme to impose reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions on those wishing to hold a march, parade, or rally.
The decision established the right of local governments to require a permit to conduct a parade or procession upon a public street. However, permit decisions had to be made according to uniform, nondiscriminatory standards based upon public convenience and safety to satisfy the Fourteenth Amendment. Because governments face greater costs in policing and overseeing parades, they are allowed to pass some expenses on to the groups conducting the events - and hence also have some regulatory power over the events.
Requiring licenses was thus found to be entirely consistent with also allowing time and place restrictions to prevent a public inconvenience.  Validating permit requirements for parades meant that local governments received advance notice of parades allowing them the opportunity to plan policing activities to minimize disorder and inconvenience to passersby.
In addition, Cox allowed local governments to give a different degree of protection under the First and Fourteenth Amendments to those who communicated ideas by patrolling, marching, and picketing on streets and highways and those who communicated ideas by pure speech. Permit systems were deemed constitutionally valid so long as the discretion of the issuing official was limited to questions of times, places, and manners, and was not based on the content of the message. The reasonable time, place and manner restriction of Cox was subsequently applied to government attempts to regulate a wide range of religious, social, economic, and political activity.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 312
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:1941 in United States case law
Category:Manchester, New Hampshire
Category:Legal history of New Hampshire
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Cox v. United States (1947)" ==> """
Cox v. United States, 332 U.S. 442 (1947), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States found that courts have only limited scope of review over a Selective Service Board's classification of a Jehovah's Witness as a conscientious objector rather than a minister.Cox v. United States, .
Justice Reed delivered the opinion. Justice Murphy, in dissent said "the mere fact that they spent less than full time in ministerial activities affords no reasonable basis for implying a non-ministerial status."
A rehearing was denied on February 12, 1948.
See also
 Conscientious objection in the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 332
 Mora v. McNamara
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:1947 in United States case law
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:1947 in religion
Category:Conscientious objection
Category:United States military case law
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Coyle v. Smith" ==> """
Coyle v. Smith, 221 U.S. 559 (1911), was a Supreme Court of the United States case that held that the newly created state of Oklahoma was permitted to move its capital city from Guthrie to Oklahoma City, notwithstanding the Enabling Act provision that prohibited it from being moved from Guthrie until after 1913.
Background
In 1907, Oklahoma was admitted as a U.S. state. The new state's capital was located in Guthrie. Section 497 of the Oklahoma Constitution stated that the terms of the U.S. Congress's enabling act of 1906—which allowed Oklahoma to create a state constitution and be admitted to the Union—were "accepted by ordinance irrevocable". Section 2 of the enabling act read:
The capital of said state shall temporarily be at the city of Guthrie ... and shall not be changed therefrom previous to Anno Domini nineteen hundred and thirteen; but said capital shall, after said year, be located by the electors of said state at an election to be provided for by the legislature; ...
On December 29, 1910, the state of Oklahoma enacted a statute which removed the state capital from Guthrie to Oklahoma City. W.H. Coyle, owner of large property interests in Guthrie, sued the state of Oklahoma, arguing that the move was performed in violation of the state constitution's acceptance of the terms of Congress's enabling act.
Holding
The Supreme Court held that preventing the state of Oklahoma the right to locate its own seat of government deprived it of powers which all other states of the Union enjoyed, and thus violated the traditional constitutional principle that all new states be admitted "on an equal footing with the original states". As a result, the provision of the enabling act which temporarily restricted Oklahoma's right to determine where its seat of government was no longer valid after Oklahoma was actually admitted. As stated by Justice Lurton:
Has Oklahoma been admitted upon an equal footing with the original states? If she has, she, by virtue of her jurisdictional sovereignty as such a state, may determine for her own people the proper location of the local seat of government. She is not equal in power to them if she cannot.At p. 579.
Quoting Chief Justice Chase's opinions regarding the indestructibility of the Union and the principle of federalism contained in Texas v. White and Lane County v. Oregon, the opinion concludes:
To this we may add that the constitutional equality of the States is essential to the harmonious operation of the scheme upon which the Republic was organized. When that equality disappears, we may remain a free people, but the Union will not be the Union of the Constitution. "
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 221
 Symmetric federalism
Notes
External links
Category:Legal history of Oklahoma
Category:History of Oklahoma
Category:History of Oklahoma City
Category:Equal footing doctrine
Category:1911 in United States case law
Category:1911 in Oklahoma
Category:Logan County, Oklahoma
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:Guthrie, Oklahoma
Category:Former state capitals in the United States
"""

From "Craig v. Boren" ==> """
Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 (1976), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court ruling that statutory or administrative sex classifications were subject to intermediate scrutiny under the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause..
 Background 
Oklahoma passed a statute prohibiting the sale of "nonintoxicating" 3.2% beer to males under the age of 21 but allowed females over the age of 18 to purchase it. The statute was challenged as a Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause violation by Curtis Craig, a male who was over 18 but under 21, and Carolyn Whitener, an Oklahoma vendor of alcohol.  The nominal defendant was David Boren, who was sued ex officio by virtue of his serving as Governor of Oklahoma at the time of the lawsuit. Ruth Bader Ginsburg, working as an attorney for the American Civil Liberties Union, advised the plaintiff's attorney, submitted an amicus brief, and was present at counsel table during oral argument before the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court was called upon to determine whether a statute that denied the sale of beer to individuals of the same age based on their gender violated the Equal Protection Clause. Also, the Supreme Court examined for jus tertii (third-party rights), in this case the vendor of the 3.2% beer.
 Decision 
Justice William J. Brennan delivered the opinion of the Court in which he was joined by justices White, Marshall, Powell and Stevens (Justice Blackmun joined all but one part of the opinion, and Blackmun, Powell, Stevens, and Stewart wrote concurrences).
Majority opinion
The Court held that the gender classifications made by the Oklahoma statute were unconstitutional because the statistics relied on by the state were insufficient to show a substantial relationship between the statute and the benefits intended to stem from it.
The Court instituted a standard, dubbed "intermediate scrutiny," under which the state must prove the existence of specific important governmental objectives, and the law must be substantially related to the achievement of those objectives.
As to third-party rights, the court, expanding on the doctrine of standing, held that the vendors of 3.2% beer would be economically affected by the restrictive nature of the sales to males between 18 and 20. To have standing, one must show a "nexus" of the injury to oneself and the constitutional violation of the statute. In this case, the statute directly affected Whitener only economically, but the Supreme Court explained that Whitener and other vendors have standing to assert concomitant rights of other parties, such as Craig.
The Court acknowledged that parties economically affected by regulations may challenge them "by acting as advocates of the rights of third parties who seek access to their market or function."
Concurring opinion
Justice Blackmun wrote a concurring opinion, agreeing that a higher standard of scrutiny was appropriate.
 Dissenting opinions 
Chief Justice Burger and Justice Rehnquist dissented.
Rehnquist dissented because he felt that the law needed to pass only "rational basis," as previous cases in the area, such as Stanton v. Stanton, had used only the "rational basis" test.
Burger was "in general agreement with Mr. Justice Rehnquist's dissent" but penned a separate dissent to emphasize that "a litigant may only assert his own constitutional rights or immunities." He felt that the indirect economic injury to Whitener and other vendors introduced "a new concept of constitutional standing to which I cannot subscribe."
 See also 
Frontiero v. Richardson
Gender equality
List of gender equality lawsuits
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 429
 Sources 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:Alcohol law in the United States
Category:United States civil rights case law
Category:Legal history of Oklahoma
Category:United States men's rights case law
Category:Ruth Bader Ginsburg
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Twenty-first Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1976 in Oklahoma
Category:Legal drinking age
"""

From "Craig v. Radford" ==> """
Craig et al. v. Radford, 16 U.S. (3 Wheat.) 594 (1818), is a United States Supreme Court decision delivered by Justice Bushrod Washington on March 12, 1818.  The dispute arose from a suit in chancery to establish a clear title to land in Kentucky located on the south bank of the Ohio River, 30 miles downriver from the mouth of the Scioto River.  A military land warrant for 1,000 acres had been issued by the Colony of Virginia on January 24, 1774, and duly patented by a French and Indian War veteran, William Sutherland.  Subsequently, treasury warrants were purchased from the Commonwealth of Virginia in 1780 by Craig et al. which they duly patented over parts of the same property.  A suit in the United States Circuit Court for the District of Kentucky awarded unconditional title to the original Sutherland patent.  An appeal was argued before the Supreme Court during the 1817 term but the verdict upheld the lower court's decision.  Non-citizen property rights established by this case have been cited and argued ever since.
Early owners of the property included William Clark, Admiral William Radford and General Stephen W. Kearny.
 Origin of the Dispute 
The Treaty of Paris in 1763 concluded the French and Indian War and distributed the lands of New France between Britain and Spain. King George then issued a royal proclamation.  In it, he instructed his Royal Governors to issue military land warrants to war veterans, awarding acreage based upon military rank.  Also, in recognition that the Cherokee from the south and the many Indian tribes north of the Ohio River hunted but did not reside in the area they called Kentucky, the king declared an Indian Reserve west of the Appalachian Divide by invalidating any land claims and ordering all settlers to vacate the reserve area.
The allure of uninhabited land, especially the Bluegrass Region, contributed to the colonist's disregard for the Indian Reserve.  Settlers already in-place believed they had established "cabin rights".  Newcomers, by building a cabin and farming the land, felt qualified under the homestead principle.  As a result, the 1763 boundary line continually crept westward as British agents negotiated new treaties, such as the Treaty of Fort Stanwix, Treaty of Hard Labour and Treaty of Lochaber.  Individuals also purchased land directly from tribes, such as for the Transylvania Colony.  These transactions involved either the Cherokee or tribes from Pennsylvania, but they mostly ignored the western tribes north of the Ohio River, such as the Shawnee and Miami.  The growing influx of settlers gave rise to deadly conflicts due to this oversight.
In 1772, the last Royal Governor for the Colony of Virginia, John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore (also known as Lord Dunmore) established Fincastle County, extending to the Mississippi River, the border with Spanish Louisiana.  He named William Preston as principal surveyor for the county.  In 1773, Lord Dunmore issued the overdue military land warrants to French and Indian War veterans and their scope encompassed land south of the Ohio River, between the Scioto River and the Falls of the Ohio.  In April 1774, teams departed to survey thousands of acres over the next months.  On May 4, 1774, surveyor Hancock Taylor (along with chainmen Abraham Hemptonstrall, James Strother and Willis Lee) conducted a 1,000 acre survey for William Sutherland, who had served as an Ensign for the 95th Regiment of Foot.  On July 27, 1774, close to present-day Carrollton, Indians attacked the survey party, killing Strother and wounding Taylor.  During the party's retreat home, Taylor died near Richmond. Hemptonstrall and Lee delivered Taylor's field notes to Preston's residence Smithfield.  Preston recorded all of Taylor's surveys.
The Virginia legislature abolished Fincastle County on December 31, 1774, due to its affiliation with loyalist Lord Dunmore.  The Sutherland property then came under the jurisdiction of Kentucky County, Virginia.  Upon the commencement of the American Revolutionary War, loyalist Sutherland permanently left Virginia for Orkney but still continued ownership of his Kentucky land.
John Craig, Lewis Craig and Simon Kenton purchased treasury warrants in 1780 and redeemed them for acreage which overlaid the Sutherland tract.  Their claims were surveyed during 1785 and land patents were issued on or prior to May 26, 1788.  The Commonwealth of Virginia did not patent the 1,000 acres to Sutherland until August 5, 1788.  Kentucky County was abolished on June 30, 1780, when it was divided into Fayette, Jefferson, and Lincoln Virginia counties.  These three counties were retained when the Commonwealth of Kentucky was created in 1792.  The disputed property came under jurisdiction of Fayette County, Kentucky.
Beginning August 19, 1796, William Sutherland began periodically advertising sale of his land, then under Mason County jurisdiction, through the Kentucky Court of Appeals.  On February 13, 1799, Speculator William Radford (Admiral William Radford was his grandson) purchased Sutherland's 1,000 acre deed for $3,000.  Radford, finding individuals who refused to relinquish their claims to his land, began a suit December 2, 1800 in chancery in United States District Court for the Eastern District of Kentucky.  Following William Radford's death in 1803, his heir John Radford continued the suit.  The court records announcing the final verdict are apparently lost; the last entry was dated November 24, 1806 while the case was still ongoing.  In 1808, John, with his wife Harriet and infant son William, relocated from Fincastle, Virginia to the disputed property finally situated in Lewis County, Kentucky.
 Objections 
Most of the background was admitted as fact by both parties in the suit.  Craig et al. disputed the following:
 Deputy surveyor Taylor did not hold the land warrant and so had no authority to execute his survey.
 There was no physical proof of Taylor's survey and, even if so, Hemptonstrall testified the survey was begun but not completed.
 Incomplete lines run by a deputy should not be sufficient for the principal surveyor to certify the plat and validate the grant.
 Sutherland, as a Tory, was an enemy alien and forfeited his colonial land warrant when Virginia joined the United States.
 Resolution 
The Supreme Court overruled all four objections.  There was no dissenting opinion identified in the resolution.
 The principal surveyor's certificate referencing the land warrant is sufficient authority for the survey.
 Incompetent or incomplete surveys do not invalidate the claim to the land.
 A deputy has the whole power of the principal surveyor and Taylor's survey was accepted by the principal as completed.
 No act of Virginia legislation had divested property from enemy alien owners before 1794 and the Jay Treaty ninth article protected defeasible estate from then on.
 Basis 
Traditional English law allowed aliens to purchase land but the crown retained interest to that land.  So, even though an alien could exercise dominion over his property as a tenant, he could not bequeath the land to heirs and had to surrender the title upon demand from the crown.  Upon declaration of war, enemy aliens automatically forfeited their title to the land.  That presumption from long standing law became a pleading for this case.
However, the Supreme Court held that land owned by British subjects, made aliens due to the Revolutionary War, was protected from confiscation per the Treaty of Paris. To reclaim land possessed by British subjects, each state had to pass applicable legislation and then complete escheat proceedings for individual cases.  Virginia did not enact such law.  As of 1794, under the protection afforded by the Jay Treaty, British subject Sutherland retained title to his 1,000 acres in question.
 Sidebar 
John Radford died, gored by a boar in a hunting accident in 1817, before the Supreme Court decision was delivered the following year.  Widow Harriet Kennerly Radford moved with her three children to Saint Louis, Missouri to live near her two brothers, James and George Kennerly, and ailing first cousin, Julia Hancock Clark.  Julia's husband was William Clark.  Julia passed in 1820 and Harriet became Clark's second wife in 1821.
William Preston wrote a letter May 27, 1774 to George Washington describing the escalated attacks his surveyors and residents in Kentucky were facing.  These deadly attacks were a prelude to Lord Dunmore's War and then the subsequent Illinois Campaign and Northwest Indian War.
There is argument that this case, by extending rights to non-citizen individuals per federal treaties, exceeded United States Constitutional authority.  New York lawyer Franklin Pierce contended in 1908 that land titles were domestic law and state statutes were wrongly overridden, specifying this case as an example.  In 1984, Judge Robert Bork wrote a concurring opinion for the Tel-Oren v. Libyan Arab Republican case in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit which argued the courts cannot apply treaty rights without explicit private right of action specified in the treaty.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States property case law
Category:1818 in United States case law
Category:Pre-statehood history of Kentucky
"""

From "Cramer v. United States" ==> """
Cramer v. United States, 325 U.S. 1 (1945), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States reviewed the conviction of Anthony Cramer, a German-born naturalized citizen, for treason.
Background
thumb|left|150px|Anthony Cramer in 1942
Anthony Cramer, a German-born mechanic, had associated with two Germans, Werner Thiel and Edward Kerling, one of whom he had prior business dealings with. The two were later found to be in the United States for the purpose of sabotage, as part of Operation Pastorius (see Ex parte Quirin). In the aftermath of the failure of that operation, Cramer was also arrested and, in 1942, convicted of treason on the basis of this association. Judge Henry W. Goddard sentenced him to 45 years in prison, along with a fine of $10,000.
Cramer appealed his conviction to the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, where his conviction was upheld.
Appealing to the court of last resort, the Supreme Court, Cramer was granted certiorari on November 8, 1943.
The case was originally argued on March 9, 1944; reargued on November 6, 1944; and finally decided on April 23, 1945.
Before the Supreme Court, Harold Medina, a future Federal judge, appeared for Cramer, while Solicitor General Charles Fahy defended the actions of the government.
Opinion 
The Court decided five-to-four to overturn the jury verdict. Writing for the majority, Justice Robert H. Jackson said that the Constitution is clear in its definition of treason, limited to the waging of war, or giving material assistance to an enemy. The prosecution and its witnesses could demonstrate only an association and not that Cramer had given "Aid and Comfort," as defined in Article Three. Jackson wrote that the jury had been given no evidence that Cramer had "even paid for their drinks." As such, the majority opinion held, the associations were insufficient to convict Cramer for treason, and the judgment of the Court of Appeals was reversed.
Writing in dissent, Justice William O. Douglas claimed that acts, though innocent by nature, may serve a treasonous plan. Chief Justice Harlan Fiske Stone concurred with the dissent.
 Aftermath 
Cramer later pleaded guilty to a lesser charge of trading with the enemy and was sentenced to six years in prison.
See also
 Ex parte Bollman: an earlier treason case before the Court.
References
External links
Category:1945 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Treason Clause case law
Category:United States home front during World War II
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
"""

From "Crandall v. Nevada" ==> """
Crandall v. Nevada, 73 U.S. (6 Wall.) 35 (1868), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court that affirmed that a state cannot inhibit people from leaving the state by taxing them..
The decision was written by Justice Miller. Chief Justice Chase and Justice Clifford concurred.
Background
In 1867, a Nevada statute imposed a $1 tax on every person leaving the state by railroad, stage coach, or other vehicles engaged or employed in the business of transporting passengers for hire.
Questions raised
Does the tax violate Article I, section 10, which prohibits state "Imposts or Duties on Imports or Exports?"
Is the tax allowed?
Majority opinion
thumb|alt=The Chase Court in 1868.|The Chase Court in 1868.
The Court reasoned that the right to travel is a fundamental right. The people of the United States constituting one nation, a State may not impose a tax on a person for the "privilege" of traveling from or for passing through it.  
The Court stated that a person traveling is different from the transportation of a good, which prevents imposts or duties on a person. The tax was not a prohibited impost, and precedent from Cooley v. Board of Wardens. was cited to show that a tax "does not itself institute any regulation of commerce of a national character...."
The Court also used precedent from McCulloch v. Maryland. to show it is the very presence of the tax that is unconstitutional, not how much of a burden it is:
"But if the government has these rights on her own account, the citizen also has correlative rights. He has the right to come to the seat of the government... this right is in its nature independent of the will of any State over whose soil he must pass in the exercise of it."
Concurring opinions
Chief Justice Chase and Justice Clifford concurred by basing their reasoning on the Commerce Clause of the Constitution. They claimed that the tax impeded interstate commerce.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 73
References
External links
Category:1868 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:Legal history of Nevada
Category:1868 in Nevada
"""

From "Crane v. Commissioner" ==> """
Crane v. Commissioner, 331 U.S. 1 (1947), was a case heard before the United States Supreme Court concerning the value, for tax purposes, of inherited property with a nonrecourse mortgage encumbering it. According to Boris I. Bittker, Crane "laid the foundation stone of most tax shelters."
Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson wrote the opinion.
Facts
Petitioner, Crane, was the sole beneficiary and executrix of her husband's estate. She inherited an apartment building and land, which secured a principal debt of $255,000 and interest in default of $7,042.  The property was for estate tax purposes at a value equal to the mortgage encumbrance.  Six years later, with foreclosure imminent, the property was sold for $3,000 subject to the mortgage and Crane incurred $500 in expenses to complete the sale.  Crane reported $2,500.00 of taxable gain from the sale of the apartment.
Issue 1
Did the original basis in the hands of Mrs. Crane include the full value of the property inherited, undiminished by the loan debt?
Issue 2
Should the amount of the debt assumed by the purchaser of the apartment building have been included in Mrs. Crane's calculation of the amount realized on the sale?
Arguments
Crane argued that the "property" she acquired upon her husband's death was simply the equity in the land and building, which was the excess of the value of the land and building over the then-existing mortgage (i.e. the equity was zero based on the facts).  As a result, she argued that the amount she realized on the sale of the building was her net cash received: $2,500.
The Commissioner of the IRS claimed that the property inherited by Crane was the building and land itself, not merely the equity in the building and land.  This position had the merit of comporting with the facts at hand: prior to selling the property, Mrs. Crane had been allowed depreciation deductions in excess of $25,000 on the building.  Correspondingly, the Commissioner argued that Crane, through the sale of the building and land, received an amount equal to the net of the cash received in addition to the amount of debt assumed by the purchaser.
Holding and rationale
The Court first sided with the Commissioner, agreeing with its construction of the relevant statutory provision that addresses the basis of "property" inherited.  The Court found no basis to think "equity" was a synonym for "property."  In addition, the Court was troubled by the administrative complications that would be caused by replacing "property" with "equity" when determining depreciation, and by turning over administrative rules that had existed for some time.
Second, the Court determined that the amount Mrs. Crane realized from the sale of the "property" should be driven by the conclusion on the first issue.  The Court sided with cases repudiating the claim that there must be an actual receipt of money or other property for a taxable gain to result from a transaction.  Finally, the Court determined that a mortgagor who transfers a property subject to the mortgage benefits as if the purchaser had paid the mortgage on the property.
"We are ... concerned with the reality that an owner of property, mortgaged at a figure less than that at which the property will sell, must and will treat the conditions of the mortgage exactly as if they were his personal obligations.  If he transfers subject to the mortgage, the benefit to him is as real and substantial as if the mortgage were discharged, or as if a personal debt in an equal amount had been assumed by another."
Importance
This case supports the doctrine of U.S. income tax law that a seller of property subject to a nonrecourse debt (as opposed to a recourse debt where the seller may remain liable for any unsatisfied balance remaining after the transfer) realizes an amount that includes the debt assumed by the purchaser.  This is an important concept because a large percentage of real property is held subject to a mortgage or other debt and, therefore, the debt must be dealt with as a part of the sale of such property.  As a result, when property encumbered by debt is sold, the tax consequences of the passing of the debt have a significant effect on the overall tax consequences of the sale.  For example, in this case, a taxpayer who sold an apartment building for $3,000 was forced to recognize taxable income of over $24,000.  Of course, the case also had the unintended collateral effect of legitimizing the idea that a taxpayer can purchase depreciable property with nonrecourse debt, a purchase the risk of which is largely borne by the lender, and (possibly) of realizing the interim tax benefit associated with increased depreciation and amortization deductions.
The result in Crane is specifically limited to situations where the property mortgage was less than the value of the property mortgaged.  See footnotes 37 and 42.  The reasoning cited, that the taxpayer will treat the property as his own in order to protect his equity investment, has been called the "Crane Economic Benefit Rule."  That reasoning was turned on its head 36 years later in the case Commissioner v. Tufts, 461 U.S. 300 (1983), which addressed the situation that Crane had left unresolved.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 331
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:1947 in United States case law
Category:Inheritance
Category:Internal Revenue Service
Category:United States property case law
"""

From "Crawford v. Marion County Election Board" ==> """
Crawford v. Marion County Election Board, 553 U.S. 181 (2008), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that an Indiana law requiring voters to provide photographic identification did not violate the United States Constitution.. 
Background
A 2005 Indiana law required all voters casting a ballot in person to present a United States or Indiana photo ID. Under the Indiana law, voters who do not have a photo ID may cast a provisional ballot. To have their votes counted, they must visit a designated government office within ten days and bring a photo ID or sign a statement saying they cannot afford one.Stohr, Greg."Voter-ID Law Draws Political Clash at Supreme Court", Bloomberg, January 8, 2008
At trial, the plaintiffs were unable to produce any witnesses who claimed they were unable to meet the law's requirements. The defendants were likewise unable to present any evidence that the corruption purportedly motivating the law actually existed.
In April 2006, U.S. District Judge Sarah Evans Barker granted summary judgment in favor of Indiana Secretary of State Todd Rokita. In January 2007, that judgment was affirmed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, where Judge Richard Posner was joined by Judge Diane S. Sykes, while Judge Terence T. Evans dissented.Recent Case: Seventh Circuit Upholds Voter ID Statute, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 1980 (2007). The circuit court was deeply divided, with the dissent characterizing the law as a thinly-veiled attempt to disenfranchise low-income Democratic Party voters. The lead plaintiff was William Crawford, who was a Democratic member of the Indiana House of Representatives from Indianapolis from 1972 to 2012. The defendant was the election board of Marion County, Indiana. Indianapolis, the state capital, is in Marion County.
Supreme Court
One hour of oral arguments were heard on January 9, 2008, in which Paul M. Smith appeared for the challengers, the Indiana Solicitor General appeared for the county, and U.S. Solicitor General Paul Clement appeared as a friend in support of the county.
On April 28, 2008, the Supreme Court delivered judgment in favor of Marion County, affirming the court below by a 6-3 vote. The Court failed to produce a majority opinion, with Justice John Paul Stevens, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Anthony Kennedy, announcing the judgment of the Court.The Supreme Court, 2007 Term — Leading Cases, 122 Harv. L. Rev. 355 (2008).
Justice Stevens upheld the constitutionality of the photo ID requirement, finding it closely related to Indiana's legitimate state interest in preventing voter fraud, modernizing elections, and safeguarding voter confidence. Justice Stevens, in the leading opinion, stated that the burdens placed on voters are limited to a small percentage of the population and were offset by the state's interest in reducing fraud. Stevens wrote in the leading opinion:
The relevant burdens here are those imposed on eligible voters who lack photo identification cards that comply with SEA 483.SEA 483 is the Indiana election law at issue in Crawford. Because Indiana's cards are free, the inconvenience of going to the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, gathering required documents, and posing for a photograph does not qualify as a substantial burden on most voters' right to vote, or represent a significant increase over the usual burdens of voting. The severity of the somewhat heavier burden that may be placed on a limited number of persons—e.g., elderly persons born out-of-state, who may have difficulty obtaining a birth certificate—is mitigated by the fact that eligible voters without photo identification may cast provisional ballots that will be counted if they execute the required affidavit at the circuit court clerk’s office. Even assuming that the burden may not be justified as to a few voters, that conclusion is by no means sufficient to establish petitioners’ right to the relief they seek.
Concurrence in the judgment
Justice Antonin Scalia, joined by Justice Samuel Alito and Clarence Thomas, concurred in the judgment only. Justice Scalia states in his concurring opinion that the Supreme Court should defer to state and local legislators and that the Supreme Court should not get involved in local election law cases, which would do nothing but encourage more litigation:
It is for state legislatures to weigh the costs and benefits of possible changes to their election codes, and their judgment must prevail unless it imposes a severe and unjustified overall burden upon the right to vote, or is intended to disadvantage a particular class.
Dissent
Justice David Souter, joined by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, filed a dissenting opinion, which would have declared the voter ID laws unconstitutional. Souter argued that Indiana had the burden of producing actual evidence of the existence of fraud, as opposed to relying on abstract harms, before imposing "an unreasonable and irrelevant burden on voters who are poor and old."
Justice Stephen Breyer also filed a dissenting opinion arguing that Indiana's law was unconstitutional. While he spoke approvingly of some voter ID laws, he found that Indiana's procedures for acquiring an ID were too burdensome and costly for some low income or elderly voters.
Impact
Following the ruling critics suggested the court's conservative majority has "become increasingly hostile to voters" by siding with Indiana's voter identification laws which tend to "disenfranchise large numbers of people without driver's licenses, especially poor and minority voters". Senator Al Franken criticized the ruling for "eroding individual rights".
After the Supreme Court affirmed Indiana's law, states have adopted voter identification laws at an increasing rate. It also spurred research focused on voter ID laws and voter advocacy. Some research is centered on the timing of states' adoption of voter ID laws, while other research is on the partisanship of such laws.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 553
Notes
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States elections case law
Category:Federal court cases involving Indiana
Category:Marion County, Indiana
Category:2008 in United States case law
"""

From "Crawford v. Nashville" ==> """
Crawford v. Nashville, 555 U.S. 271 (2009), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court unanimously ruled that Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 protects an employee who opposes unlawful sexual harassment, but does not report the harassment themself.
 Background 
The petitioner, Vicky Crawford, was a long-time worker for the Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County. In 2002, the department of human resources began an investigation into Dr. Gene Hughes, the newly hired employee relations director for the Metro School District. Several female employees had expressed concern about being sexually harassed by Hughes. Veronica Frazier, the assistant director for the county human resources department was assigned to investigate the allegations.
Frazier began by calling employees who had worked closely with Hughes, including Crawford. Crawford described to Frazier several incidents of sexual harassment.
According to Crawford, Hughes has requested on "numerous" occasions to see her breasts. Hughes also, in response to the question "What's up?" grabbed his crotch and replied "You know what's up." On several occasions, Crawford continued, Hughes had pressed his crotch against the window of her office. On one occasion, when Crawford asked Hughes what she could do for him, he grabbed her head and pulled it towards his crotch. Other allegations were made by two other women who worked with Hughes.
Frazier's report did not resolve the allegations, as Hughes denied the allegations and there were no witnesses. The report concluded that Hughes had acted inappropriately, but no disciplinary action was taken against him. (In fact even after information surfaced in March 2003 that he had made false statements on his resume, claiming untruthfully that he was an attorney, a professional football player with the Pittsburgh Steelers, and a Navy SEAL, Hughes was merely demoted from his $91,250 position to a $75,857 position, and then moved to the athletics department and given a $6,500 pay raise. Hughes resigned in August 2003 but was allowed to collect pay at home through October 2003.)
However, all three of the witnesses who had offered evidence of sexual harassment, including Crawford, were dismissed. Crawford had been employed by the district for over 30 years. Crawford had expressed reluctance to report the incidences earlier because Hughes headed the department, employee relations, where charges are reported. Hughes was tasked with investigating claims of sexual harassment. Hughes was also, Crawford noted, a good friend of the Director of the School District Pedro Garcia, and Crawford was worried that this would result in her losing her job. The Metro school board in January 2008 voted unanimously to end Garcia's tenure due to poor performance.
Following her termination, Crawford sued her former employer under Title VII, which protects employees who oppose unlawful employment actions from employment retaliation. The District Court concluded, and the Sixth Circuit Court affirmed, that Crawford was not protected by Title VII on two grounds. First, her statements to Frazier did not constitute "opposition" to illegal conduct, as Crawford did not initiate the investigation. Second, the court held that Crawford was not protected against retaliation because the investigation was an employer's internal investigation and a charge had not been filed with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Crawford only filed with the EEOC after she had been terminated, as required by Title VII.
Crawford appealed to the Supreme Court, who heard the case on October 8, 2008. The court ruled unanimously in her favor on January 26, 2009.
Decision
Writing for the majority, Justice Souter defines two activities Title VII protects, saying section 704(a) "makes it unlawful 'for an employer to discriminate against any... employe[e]' who (1) 'has opposed any practice made an unlawful employment practice by this subchapter' (opposition clause), or (2) 'has made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this subchapter' (participation clause)." The Sixth Circuit held, when it heard the case, that the opposition clause demanded "active, consistent" opposing, which it did not find Crawford had done, as she did not initiate her own complaint before to the investigation. It also held that since the internal investigation was not conducted pursuant to a charge pending with the EEOC, Crawford was not protected by the participation clause.
The court found that "oppose" is not defined by the statute, so a normal definition of it may be used, per Perrin v. United States. "Thus, a person can 'oppose' by responding to someone else’s questions just as surely as by provoking the discussion," further "we would call it 'opposition' if an employee took a stand against an employer’s discriminatory practices not by 'instigating' action, but by standing pat, say, by refusing to follow a supervisor’s order to fire a junior worker for discriminatory reasons." The court supposes there could be a hypothetical case in which an employee describes a "supervisor's racist joke as hilarious", but finds that these "will be eccentric cases, and this is not one of them."
It rejects Metro's argument that "employers will be less likely to raise questions about possible discrimination if a retaliation charge is easy to raise" because "[e]mployers... have a strong inducement to ferret out... discriminatory activity." This is because cases such as Burlington Industries, Inc. v. Ellerth and Faragher v. Boca Raton hold employers "vicariously liable" for actionable hostile working environments created by supervisors. (Such as Hughes "sexually obnoxious behavior".) Further, studies show that Ellerth and Faragher prompted employers to "adopt or strengthen procedures for investigating, preventing, and correcting discriminatory conduct." From the employees' perspective, agreeing with Nashville and the Sixth Circuit would mean the prudent employee may decide not answer questions regarding discrimination, as there would be no protection against retaliation. If employees choose not to participate in internal investigations, the employer would have a defense, should a Title VII lawsuit be filed, as Ellerth requires employees to reasonably "take advantage of... preventive or corrective opportunities provided by the employer," a situation described by the court as a "catch-22". The court, then, decided not to overturn the Ellerth-Faragher scheme. Having ruled on the "opposition" question, the court chose not to address the "participation" question.
Justice Alito wrote a concurrence joined by Justice Thomas, in which he agrees with the Court's primary reasoning, but separately emphasizes that, he believes, the Court's holding "does not and should not extend beyond employees who testify in internal investigations or engage in analogous purposive conduct." Alito disagrees with the Sixth Circuit that "opposition" must be consistent and initiated by the employee, but writes that the opposition must be "active and purposive". Alito finds the majority's definition of oppose could also "embrace silent opposition," and it is questionable whether that is protected. He worries that an "interpretation of the opposition clause that protects conduct that is not active and purposive" would "open the door to retaliation claims by employees who never expressed a word of opposition to their employers." As a hypothetical, he asks if an employee would be protected in a case where the opposition was expressed in an informal "water cooler" chat. A fired employee could claim that the termination was retaliatory if the employers became aware of the views the employee had expressed. He notes that EEOC retaliation charges doubled between 1992 and 2007 and fears that an "expansive interpretation of protected opposition conduct would likely cause this trend to accelerate."
While that is not the question of this case, Alito finds the answer "far from clear". For "present purposes", however, "it is enough to hold that the opposition clause does protect an employee" like Crawford.
See also
Chrapliwy v. Uniroyal
Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson
External links
 http://www.aclu.org/pdfs/scotus/crawford_v_nashville_acluamicus.pdf
 http://ohioemploymentlaw.blogspot.com/2008/01/supreme-court-to-hear-retaliation.html
 http://www.csmonitor.com/2008/1007/p02s01-usju.html
 https://www.reuters.com/article/domesticNews/idUSTRE50P4TG20090126
 http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/01/26/AR2009012601039.html
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:Government of Nashville, Tennessee
Category:Sexual harassment in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Harassment case law
Category:History of women in Tennessee
"""

From "Crawford v. Washington" ==> """
Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36 (2004), is a landmark United States Supreme Court decision that reformulated the standard for determining when the admission of hearsay statements in criminal cases is permitted under the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment. The Court held that prior testimonial statements of witnesses who have since become unavailable may not be admitted without cross-examination.
 Background
Michael Crawford and his wife Sylvia Crawford confronted Kenneth Lee over an allegation that Lee had attempted to rape Mrs. Crawford. Michael Crawford stabbed Lee in the torso. Crawford claimed he had acted in self-defense when he believed Lee had picked up a weapon. Lee denied doing anything that might make Crawford believe he was trying to attack him.Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36, 38 (2004).
Both Mr. and Mrs. Crawford were questioned by police after receiving a Miranda warning. Mr. Crawford said to the police that he was not sure if Mr. Lee had a weapon, but that Crawford believed at the time that Lee did. Mrs. Crawford, being interrogated separately, at first said that she had not seen the attack, but under further questioning said that she had seen the attack and that Lee was not holding a weapon.
 Trial proceeding 
At trial, Mrs. Crawford could not be compelled to testify by the state, since Washington's spousal privilege law states that a spouse cannot testify in court without the accused spouse's consent (except when a spouse is a complainant).Crawford, 541 U.S. at 40. The deputy prosecutor, Robert Lund, sought to introduce Mrs. Crawford's statement to the police as evidence that Mr. Crawford had no reasonable belief that he was in danger from Mr. Lee. Generally, out-of-court statements by persons other than the accused are excluded as hearsay. But Washington invoked a hearsay exception for statements against penal interest. 
The defense counsel objected to the admission of the wife's statement, on the ground that Mr. Crawford would be unable to confront (i.e., cross-examine) Mrs. Crawford on her statement without waiving spousal privilege, and that this would be a violation of the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment. The court allowed the statement to be admitted on the basis that the statement was reliable, as it was partially corroborated by Mr. Crawford's statement to police, amongst other things.
The statement was allowed into evidence at the trial, and the prosecution relied on it heavily in its closing argument, stating that it completely refuted the defendant's claim of self defense.Crawford, 541 U.S. at 41.
 Procedural history 
Michael Crawford was convicted at the trial level. However, the Washington Court of Appeals reversed that decision. After applying a nine-factor test to determine whether Sylvia's statement was reliable, and therefore admissible under the doctrine of Ohio v. Roberts, the court determined it was not, and gave several reasons why. Nonetheless, the Washington Supreme Court reinstated the conviction, ruling that the witness's statement was reliable under Roberts. In particular, the court noted that Michael and Sylvia Crawford's statements interlocked, and therefore concluded that Sylvia's statements were admissible.Crawford, 541 U.S. at 41–42. 
 Discussion 
The Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment (applicable to the States through the Fourteenth Amendment) provides: "In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right… to be confronted with the witnesses against him." This right has a very specific purpose. The focus of the Clause is on getting the truth out of a witness, and allowing a trier of fact to determine whether the witness indeed told the truth. Even given these important goals, this right is not absolute.
Admission of out-of-court statements, therefore, is and has been possible. For over 20 years prior to Crawford, the controlling standard for admitting statements that unavailable witnesses made to other persons was that of Ohio v. Roberts.  According to the Court in Roberts, if a witness is unavailable, that witness's testimony can be admitted through a third person if it bears "adequate indicia of reliability." This was true if a statement fell within a "firmly rooted hearsay exception" or had "particularized guarantees of trustworthiness."
When Michael Crawford was accused of stabbing Kenneth Lee on August 5, 1999, the Roberts standard was still controlling law. Crawford and his wife, Sylvia, were questioned separately by police regarding a stabbing incident that had taken place at Lee's home. The statements of the two were generally corroborating, but while Michael had claimed self-defense, Sylvia implied that Michael was not protecting himself when he stabbed Lee. At trial, the state moved to admit Sylvia's statement under Roberts. The trial court admitted the evidence, "noting several reasons why it was trustworthy."
 Supreme Court decision and rationale 
The United States Supreme Court held that the use of the spouse's recorded statement made during police interrogation violated the defendant's Sixth Amendment right to be confronted with the witnesses against the defendant where the spouse, because of the state law marital privilege, did not testify at the trial and so was unavailable.
Associate Justice Antonin Scalia, writing for the majority, expressed concern over the inconsistent results reached by courts under Ohio v. Roberts, the standard used by the Washington state courts. He thought the Crawford decisions of the various levels of Washington state courts epitomized this problem. Justice Scalia gave a thorough history of the Confrontation Clause, explaining how the Clause became part of the Constitution using famous English cases, such as that of Sir Walter Raleigh. He then described the context in which the Constitutional Framers drafted the clause,  and displayed how early American courts interpreted the clause.
This history, Scalia concluded, clearly shows that the Confrontation Clause was directed at keeping "ex parte" examinations out of the evidentiary record. Specifically, the Confrontation Clause applies to "witnesses" against the accused, meaning those who "bear testimony." Relying on this and the historical record, Scalia stated, "the Framers would not have allowed admission of testimonial statements of a witness who did not appear at trial unless he was unavailable to testify, and the defendant had had a prior opportunity for cross-examination." Scalia determined that a prior opportunity for cross-examination was mandatory, and dispositive of whether or not testimonial statements of an unavailable witness are admissible. Testimonial statements are formal declarations, i.e., those made to law enforcement or government personnel. "Dispensing with confrontation because testimony is obviously reliable is akin to dispensing with jury trial because a defendant is obviously guilty."
The Crawford Court determined that where non-testimonial statements are involved, the Confrontation Clause allows a court to use its discretion to determine the reliability of the statements. "Where testimonial evidence is at issue, however, the Sixth Amendment demands what the common law required: unavailability and a prior opportunity for cross-examination. . . . [T]he only indicium of reliability sufficient to satisfy constitutional demands is the one the Constitution actually prescribes: confrontation."
Concurrence
Chief Justice William Rehnquist concurred in the result, but would have decided the case on narrower grounds, within the older Roberts framework.  Rehnquist, joined by O'Connor, stated he would not have expanded the right of defendants to exclude out-of-court statements on the basis that they could not confront the witness.
 Subsequent developments 
This decision had an immediate, profound effect upon the ability of prosecutors to prove their cases through the use of evidence that had previously been admissible via various exceptions to the hearsay rule. Justice Scalia's opinion explicitly states that any out-of-court statement that is "testimonial" in nature is not admissible, unless the declarant is unavailable to testify in court, and the defendant has had a prior opportunity to cross-examine him or her. However, the opinion does not define "testimonial," which has allowed courts across the country to determine that issue for themselves.
Legal scholars' main criticism of the decision was the courts' failure to define "testimonial." One of the main areas in which lower courts struggled to resolve this issue was the use of 911 calls during the course of trial where the caller is not available to testify. This was the factual situation in Davis v. Washington, in which the Court laid out a definition of "testimonial." Other cases have dealt with the issue of the previously common practice of admitting certain types of certified documents under the business records or public records exception to the hearsay rule.
Crawford, and the decisions following it, also radically changed the handling of domestic violence cases by curtailing evidence-based prosecution, a common practice, which allows the accused to be prosecuted without the participation of their accusers in the criminal court process. Evidence-based prosecution relies heavily on admission of statements under hearsay exceptions to reproduce the evidentiary effect of a victim testifying in court. The Crawford Court's decision renders most of these statements inadmissible without the accuser coming to court and testifying against the person he or she is accusing.
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:Confrontation Clause case law
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Washington (state)
"""

From "Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC v. Billing" ==> """
Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC v. Billing, 551 U.S. 264 (2007), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States, which held that the securities markets were exempt from the scope of antitrust laws.
Facts
Judgment
The Supreme Court held that creation of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) implicitly exempted the regulated securities industry from antitrust lawsuits under other existing laws. Justice Thomas dissented, arguing that the laws creating the SEC explicitly mention that securities regulations are in addition to, not instead of, existing law.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 551
List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Credit Suisse First Boston (Europe) Ltd v Lister
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States securities case law
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:Credit Suisse
Category:U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC v. Simmonds" ==> """
Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC v. Simmonds, 566 U.S. 221 (2012), is a United States Supreme Court decision regarding the limitation period for insider trading claims.. The court ruled in an 8-0 unanimous opinion that the limitation period was subject to traditional equitable tolling. Chief Justice John Roberts recused himself from the case.
 Background 
In 2007, Vanessa Simmonds, a recent college graduate, simultaneously filed lawsuits against eleven investment banks involving fifty-five initial public offerings accusing them of abuses during the internet firm IPOs from 1999-2001 that eventually led to the dot com bust. Amongst her lawyers was her father David Simmonds who had earlier successfully argued a similar case against an internet start-up resulting in the largest judgment and recovery to date under Section 16(b) of the Security Exchange Act of 1934. The plaintiffs argued that the financial institutions violated Section 16(b) by not disclosing "short-swing" transactions as required under Section 16(a) of the Security Exchange Act, that is trades occurring over a period of less than six months. A federal district court consolidated the nearly identical cases and granted a motion to dismiss, stating that the two year limitation on the period on Section 16(b) had expired. On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed the decision, stating that the two-year period was tolled until the "insider" or party benefitting from the profit had disclosed the transaction.
Supreme Court
The Supreme Court, in a majority opinion written by Justice Scalia remanded and vacated the lower court's decision, ruling that the limitations period for Section 16(b) was subject to traditional equitable tolling.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 566
 References 
External links
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Insider trading
Category:Credit Suisse
"""

From "Crooker v. California" ==> """
Crooker v. California, 357 U.S. 433 (1958), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that limited criminal suspects' constitutional right to counsel before trial, refusing to overturn a subsequent conviction without a showing that the refusal of counsel had a coercive or prejudicial effect. This holding was later overturned by Escobedo v. Illinois and Miranda v. Arizona.
 Background 
In July 1955, John Russell Crooker was arrested for the murder of Norma McCauley. He was a law student at UCLA, and had been employed at Mrs. McCauley's home as a domestic worker. Crooker and McCauley were both in their early 30s, had both been divorced or separated from their former spouses, and apparently they had developed a romantic relationship. A week before the murder, McCauley had ended the relationship. McCauley was found stabbed and strangled on July 5, and Crooker was arrested later that day.
Crooker was interrogated in his home and at a west Los Angeles police station over the course of fourteen hours. He asked to be able to speak to an attorney repeated during this time, but was consistently refused. Around 2 AM on July 6, Crooker wrote a full confession. When he was asked to orally repeat the confession later in the morning, he refused, and asked again to speak with an attorney. This time, it was allowed, and he was represented by counsel from then on.
 History in lower courts 
At trial, whether Crooker's confession was voluntary was put to the jury as a question of fact (along with the rest of the murder case), and the jury found that it was voluntary.People v. Crooker, 303 P.2d 753 (1956) He was convicted of first degree murder, and was given the death penalty.
 Appeal to the Supreme Court of California 
Crooker appealed to the Supreme Court of California on seven different grounds. With the exception of a procedural issue with sentencing (which the Court rejected), and an argument that the jury had been given alcohol with dinner (to which the Court replied that they'd had all night to sleep it off before trial resumed the next day), all of these grounds surrounded the circumstances of his written confession, and the constitutionality of its use as evidence to convict him.
In a 6-1 ruling, the Court affirmed the verdict, rejecting all of Crooker's arguments. The testimony by officers during trial supported Crooker's assertions that he had asked to call an attorney, and had been refused, but the Court stated that it was "without merit" to call that a violation of due process of law. First, the Court said, whether a confession was voluntary was a factual question, taking into consideration the circumstances and any force used or inducements offered. The jury had deemed it voluntary, and the evidence was enough to support their finding, so the Court would not second-guess them. Second, although the due process clause did guarantee a right to counsel, a conviction would not be overturned unless the lack of representation "so fatally infected the regularity of his trial and conviction as to violate the fundamental aspects of fairness and result in a miscarriage of justice." Crooker's conviction hinged on the written conviction, and the jury had found that it was voluntary, therefore there was nothing unjust about the trial.
 Dissent by Justice Carter 
Justice Carter quoted in his dissent from the Supreme Court case Glasser v. United States that "The right to have the assistance of counsel is too fundamental and absolute to allow courts to indulge in nice calculations as to the amount of prejudice arising from its denial." He argued for a bright-line rule that suspects in Crooker's situation are entitled to counsel, and that denial of counsel should lead to the inadmissibility of evidence (such as Crooker's confession). Legal scholars have argued that Carter's dissent was a significant precursor to Miranda v. Arizona.
 Decision of the Supreme Court 
Crooker appealed to the US Supreme Court. This time, the legal discussion was focused only on whether the confession should have been inadmissible as evidence, either because it had been coerced, or because he'd been denied his right to counsel. It was established at the time that a conviction could be overturned for a violation of the right to counsel during trial, but how far the right to counsel extended before trial was not a settled question.
 Majority opinion 
In a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court of the United States affirmed California's ruling. In an opinion written by Justice Clark, the Court first noted that this case was the first time it had faced the question of whether a confession would be inadmissible because a suspect was denied counsel. The majority declined to impose a strict rule saying such a confession was always inadmissible, but said it might be inadmissible in certain conditions. In Crooker's case, it held that his education and maturity made it unlikely that he did not know his rights. The majority opinion focused its reasoning much more on whether the confession was really voluntary, and whether the advice of counsel would have prevented a coerced confession, rather than the right to counsel for its own sake:
Directly addressing whether Crooker had a right to speak to an attorney at the time that he'd asked, the Court said that the concept of due process was "less rigid and more fluid" than the rest of the Bill of Rights. The Court also reiterated the "prejudicial effect" test used by the California Supreme Court, namely that Crooker had to prove that the denial of counsel had "prejudiced" the subsequent trial, rendering it fundamentally unfair and unjust. Lacking such evidence, his conviction would be upheld.
 Dissent by Douglas 
Joined by three other justices in dissent, Justice Douglas wrote in favor of overturning Crooker's conviction, much as Justice Carter had done in the California Supreme Court.Crooker v. California, 357 U.S. 433 (1959) (Douglas, dissenting) He argued that adequately protecting the right to counsel required a simpler rule (much like the fruit of the poisonous tree), and he opposed the kind of analysis into circumstances that the majority had done:
 Subsequent development 
 Distinguished by Escobedo 
The 1964 case Escobedo v. Illinois involved a man who was arrested as a suspect during a murder investigation and was denied an opportunity to speak with a lawyer during the police interrogation. The Supreme Court overturned his conviction, noting distinctions in Illinois criminal law that he was clearly unaware of, and about which a lawyer could have given him advice. The state of Illinois argued that the Crooker decision supported their position, but the Court distinguished the two cases:
 Overturned by Miranda 
In 1966, the Supreme Court decided Miranda v. Arizona, holding that criminal suspects must be clearly told their constitutional rights, or else their statements during police interrogation would be inadmissible as evidence during their trials. The majority opinion cited Justice's Douglas's Crooker dissent, and stated simply in footnote 48 that "[i]n accordance with our holdings today and in Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U.S. 478, 492, Crooker v. California, 357 U.S. 433 (1958) and Cicenia v. Lagay, 357 U.S. 504 (1958), are not to be followed."
 Aftermath 
Crooker's date of execution was set for April 12, 1957 by the trial judge, Stanley Mosk, who would later serve as attorney general of California and as a member of the California Supreme Court. By the time Pat Brown was elected governor of California in 1958 (with Mosk being elected attorney general at the same time), he had not been executed, and Governor Brown commuted his sentence to life without parole. Brown said that a note from Mosk helped make up his mind on Crooker's case. Brown would reduce the sentence further to life with parole in 1966, and Crooker would be released on parole in 1972. Crooker would make a habit of sending Mosk yearly Christmas cards.
 See Also 
 Powell v. Alabama
 Betts v. Brady
 Gideon v. Wainright
 Escobedo v. Illinois
 Miranda v. Arizona
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:Law enforcement
Category:History of California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1958 in United States case law
Category:Law enforcement in the United States
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Fifth Amendment case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment case law
"""

From "Crosby v. National Foreign Trade Council" ==> """
Crosby v. National Foreign Trade Council, 530 U.S. 363 (2000), was a unanimous case in which the Supreme Court of the United States used the federal preemption doctrine to strike down the Massachusetts Burma Law, a law that effectively prohibited Massachusetts' governmental agencies from buying goods and services from companies conducting business with Myanmar (Burma), essentially a secondary boycott.Young, Ernest A. 2006. "Crosby v. National Foreign Trade Council." Federalism in America: An Encyclopedia. The Massachusetts Burma Law was modeled after similar legislation that had targeted the apartheid regime of South Africa.
The Court reasoned that since the United States Congress passed a law imposing sanctions on Myanmar, the Massachusetts law "undermines the intended purpose and 'natural effect' of at least three provisions of the federal Act, that is, its delegation of effective discretion to the President to control economic sanctions against Burma, its limitation of sanctions solely to United States persons and new investment, and its directive to the President to proceed diplomatically in developing a comprehensive, multilateral strategy towards Burma.".
See also
 Doe v. Unocal
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 530
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States federal preemption law
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Massachusetts
Category:Myanmar–United States relations
"""

From "Cross v. United States (1871)" ==> """
Cross v. United States, 81 U.S. (14 Wall.) 479 (1871), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the principle of res judicata did not apply to Congressional reference cases. This was because Congress' intent in referring the case to the Court of Claims was to waive the defense of time bar for the entire controversy and that such intent could not be interpreted narrowly to prevent full recovery.
 Background 
In 1851, Daniel Saffarans leased a warehouse in San Francisco to the United States government for ten years. As part of the construction of the warehouse, Alexander Cross, purchased the property and the lease contract with the government. After occupying the warehouse for three years, the Secretary of the Treasury terminated the lease, citing the informal nature of the assignment of the contract by Saffarans to Cross.. In 1856, Cross sued the United States in the Court of Claims for the delinquent installment payments, however the government prevailed by showing that the informal nature of the assignment of the lease was defective and therefore insufficient for Cross to maintain a claim.  The decision of the court was sent to Congress, which in 1864 passed 13 Stat. 591. This law permitted Cross to re-file his claim against the government and waived the defense of improper assignment as a bar to recovery.
Cross refiled the suit and prevailed against the government. However, he had only sued for three of the additional years of rents, so two years after prevailing against the government, he filed a new suit for the remaining $69,515 of the claim. The government cited that the waiver of defense by Congress was only effective for the first refiling and that as the amount was known to him at that time, he should be prevented from filing the additional suit. This bar is commonly known as res judicata in that it prevents the plaintiff from refiling on a claim if he could have brought the claim in an earlier suit.
 Opinion of the Court 
In its decision, the Court stated that Congress' intent in passing the 1864 Act was to permit him to recover for the entire controversy.  As there was no limiting language in the act that would prohibit him from refiling, the Court would not read the statute to permit only partial recovery.  Therefore, the Court reversed the dismissal by the Court of Claims and remanded the case to them with instructions to enter a judgment for the remaining $69,515.Cross v. United States,  81 U.S. at 484.
 Subsequent developments 
This opinion established the principle that Congressional statutes providing remedial action should be construed liberally toward the aim of Congress' intent in passing the statute.Hubbell v. U.S., 15 Ct.Cl. 546 (1879).  It also articulated the principle that if an installment payment was not overdue at the time a suit was commenced, it was not time barred from being brought in a later suit.Goodwin v. Cabot Amusement Co., 149 A. 574, 579, 129 Me. 36 (1930)Luce v. Minard, 88 A. 728, 728, 87 Vt. 177 (1913).  However, while such statutes are construed liberally, in Hartiens v. U.S., the Court of Claims narrowed the meaning of Cross, by limiting its action of re-reference to looking at false or fraudulent information from the first trial and not re-hearing the entire controversy.Hartiens v. U.S., 42 Ct.Cl. 42, 1906 WL 888 (1906).  Further, in the later Paul v. U.S. matter, the court confirmed that the principles of res judicata and stare decisis do not apply in Congressional reference cases.Paul v. United States,  20 Cl.Ct. 236, 266 (1990).
 References 
External links
Category:1871 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:Government procurement in the United States
"""

From "Cross v. United States (1916)" ==> """
Cross v. United States, 242 U.S. 4 (1916), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding remuneration for clerks of the court for the copying and docketing of naturalization claims..
Prior History
Appellant Cross, a federal court clerk, filed a claim against the United States to be paid fees for making triplicate copies of original declarations of intention for naturalization and attaching the seal of the court to the same. The United States Court of Claims (then simply the Court of Claims) denied his claim. The clerk appealed. 
Holding
Justice White wrote the opinion of the court:
A charge by a clerk of a Federal district court of fees for making, on the direction of the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization, triplicate copies of original declarations of intention for naturalization, and attaching the seal of the court, is not authorized by the general provisions of U. S. Rev. Stat. 828, since if the duty to render such services was expressly commanded by the Naturalization Act of June 29, 1906, the right to charge therefore would be clearly forbidden by the prohibitory provision of §21, such services not having been included in the enumeration of fees in §13. 
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 242
References
External links
Category:1916 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "Crowell v. Benson" ==> """
Crowell v. Benson, 285 U.S. 22 (1932) is the landmark United States Supreme Court administrative law decision that outlined the adjudicatory authority of administrative agencies under Article III of the Constitution. The Court held that the United States Employees' Compensation Commission satisfied Fifth Amendment Due Process and the requirements of Article III with its court-like procedures and because it invests the final power of decision in Article III courts.
Background
The Deputy Commissioner of the United States Employees' Compensation Commission found that Knudsen was injured while in Benson's employ and while performing services on the navigable waters of the United States. He made an award to Knudsen under the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act. 
Benson brought suit in the District Court to enjoin enforcement of the award. The District Court affirmed the award.
Decision of the Court
Writing for the Court, Chief Justice Hughes reaffirmed the lower court holding.
Due process analysis
The Court first addressed the plaintiff's argument that the enforcement of the award against him unconstitutionally deprived him of property without due process of law, therefore violating the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Specifically, Benson argued that the process by which an administrative agency was empowered to make findings of fact was insufficient.
The Court held that the statute did not violate the due process clause because the administrative procedure provided notice, an opportunity to be heard, findings based on record evidence, and judicial review of all questions of law.
Separation of powers analysis
Next, the Court turned to whether the statute unconstitutionally bestowed judicial power upon a non-judicial authority in violation of the vesting clause of Article III of the United States Constitution, that is, "whether Congress may substitute for constitutional courts, in which the judicial power of the United States is vested, an administrative agency... for the final determination of the facts upon which the enforcement of the constitutional rights of the citizen depend." 
Public vs. private rights
The Court makes a distinction between "cases of private right and those which arise between the Government and persons subject to its authority in connection with the performance of the constitutional functions of the executive or legislative departments." The latter cases "Congress may or may not bring within the cognizance of the [Article III] courts... as it may deem proper," because they involve "public rights." Congress may instead establish so-called "'legislative' courts... to examine and determine various matters... which from their nature do not require judicial determination and yet are susceptible of it."
The Court then determined that Benson's case did not fall within the "public right" categories, because it concerned "the liability of one individual to another under the law as defined." Nonetheless, it was possible for Congress to task an administrative agency with making determinations of fact. By way of analogy, Hughes refers to the common law practice of fact-finding in cases of admiralty law and courts of equity, where reports of "masters and commissioners or assessors" are relied upon to "take and state an account or to find the amount of damages." Likewise, Congress had not exceeded its constitutional authority in establishing an administrative agency to determine the "circumstances, nature, extent and consequences of the injuries".
"Jurisdictional" or fundamental facts
Finally, the Court addressed whether Congress could establish an agency with the power to determine facts of a "fundamental or 'jurisdictional'" nature, that is, "facts upon which the enforcement of the constitutional rights of the citizen depend." It held that such final determinations could not be left to administrative agencies, because that would leave agency discretion unlimited and "establish a government of a bureaucratic character alien to our system, wherever fundamental rights depend... upon the facts, and finality as to facts becomes in effect finality in law".
Although the statute required the agency to determine whether the injury occurred on navigable waters and that a master-servant relationship existed, the Court construed the statute to allow federal courts to determine the existence of these fundamental facts for themselves upon appeal, and therefore held the statute constitutional.
Brandeis dissent
Justice Brandeis dissented, arguing that findings of fact could be left entirely to administrative agencies, at Congress's discretion. Brandeis argued that "[t]o permit a contest de novo in the district court of an issue tried, or triable, before the deputy commission will . . . gravely hamper the effective administration" of an Act and noted that the purpose of administrative tribunals was to withdraw certain cases from the courts that would be more effectively handled by a special and expert tribunal.
Even with regard to so-called "jurisdictional" facts in determination of constitutional rights, there was nothing in the Constitution requiring de novo review, and the Court should not construe Congress's intention as requiring it given its hindrance upon the Act's "effective administration." If any constitutional restriction on agency determination existed, "it is not because of any prohibition against the diminution of the jurisdiction of the federal district courts as such, but because, under certain circumstances, the constitutional requirement of due process is a requirement of judicial process."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 285
 External links 
References
Category:1932 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States due process case law
Category:Good Behavior Clause case law
Category:Employee compensation in the United States
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "CRST Van Expedited, Inc. v. EEOC" ==> """
CRST Van Expedited, Inc. v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding whether a prevailing party must succeed on the merits to seek attorney's fees. In a unanimous decision authored by Associate Justice Anthony Kennedy, the Court held that a defendant need not succeed on the merits in order to be the prevailing party for the purposes of seeking attorney fees.
Following the Supreme Court's decision in CRST's favor, the matter was remanded to the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals and back to the United States District Court for the Northern District of Iowa for further proceedings. In December 2017, the District Court ordered the EEOC to pay CRST $3,317,289.67 in attorney fees., The EEOC appealed this order to the Eighth Circuit. The Eighth Circuit affirmed the fee award to CRST, which the EEOC paid in 2020.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
"""

From "Cruz v. Arizona" ==> """
Cruz v. Arizona, 598 U.S. 17 (2023), was a United States Supreme Court case related to habeas corpus.
 Background 
In 2003, John Montenegro Cruz shot Tucson, Arizona police officer Patrick Hardesty to death. He was convicted of first-degree murder and sentenced to death in state court in 2005. In the penalty phase of the trial, Cruz was unable to inform the jury that Arizona had previously abolished parole for felons, so he would either be sentenced to life in prison without parole, or death, nullifying the state's evidence of any future danger he posed to the public. This procedural protection was recognized in the 1994 Simmons v. South Carolina decision. On appeal, the Arizona Supreme Court upheld Cruz's conviction, and rejected his argument that his trial violated Simmons. His first state petition for post-conviction relief was denied, as was his federal habeas corpus petition. In 2016, the Supreme Court of the United States rejected the Arizona Supreme Court's reasoning in Lynch v. Arizona, holding Simmons did require juries be offered such instructions in the state. Cruz filed a second state post-conviction petition soon after, and it was rejected in 2021.
Cruz filed a petition for a writ of certiorari, asking whether Lynch applies to cases pending on collateral review.
 Supreme Court of the United States
The Supreme Court granted certiorari on March 28, 2022, limited to the question of whether the judgment of the Arizona Supreme Court rested on an adequate and independent state-law ground. On February 22, 2023, the Court reversed the Arizona Supreme Court.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
"""

From "Cruz v. Beto" ==> """
Cruz v. Beto, 405 U.S. 319 (1972), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court upheld a Free Exercise claim based on the allegations that the state of Texas had discriminated against a Buddhist prisoner by "denying him a reasonable opportunity to pursue his Buddhist faith comparable to that offered other prisoners adhering to conventional religious precepts."
Background
Fred Arispe Cruz, a Mexican-American born in San Antonio, Texas in 1939, was often in trouble with the police in his teenage years and became addicted to heroin. In 1960, at 21, Cruz was arrested and convicted of “robbery by assault”. He was sentenced to 50 years in a state prison in 1961.
Cruz denied taking part in the robberies. Wanting to appeal his conviction but unable to afford a lawyer, Cruz began to read all of the law books that he could find in the prison library. Despite only having an 8th-grade education, Cruz filed his first pro se appeal to the robbery charge in 1962. Fed up with the harsh field labor, brutal corporal punishments, and arbitrary disciplinary hearings experienced by prisoners, Cruz used his newfound knowledge to write a lawsuit against the prison system.
Because of his “legal activities” Cruz was classified as an agitator and transferred to the “Ellis Unit” in 1963. At the Ellis Unit, Cruz was pushed to drop his lawsuit by enduring many hours of solitary confinement. In 1967 Cruz wrote to Reverend Hogen Fujimoto, minister in the Shin Buddhist Churches of America (BCA) to request information on Buddhism. Cruz shared the information he received with other inmates which landed him back in solitary, which at the time meant a bread and water diet with a small meal served every third day.
Despite the abusive conditions, Cruz succeeded in filing his own lawsuit as well as those of other inmates. One of the suits Cruz assisted with is that of a Muslim at the facility who argued that his civil rights were being violated. Warden McAdams punished two inmates for the incident and kept Muslim prisoners at work in the fields six days a week instead of the five days assigned to other inmates. Within days a riot broke out in the Muslim cell block.
This 1968 riot was the first at Ellis Unit and helped build solidarity among prisoners and gain the attention of outsiders. One of these outsiders was Frances Jalet (later Frances Jalet-Cruz, as Cruz and Jalet were married after his prison release), an attorney whom Cruz had contacted in 1967 after reading about her in a newspaper. Jalet, along with attorney William Bennett Turner, would assist Cruz in his watershed case, Cruz v. Beto.
Case
Cruz, a Buddhist, complained that he was not allowed to use the prison chapel, that he was prohibited from writing to his religious advisor, and that he was placed in solitary confinement for sharing his religious material with other prisoners. Cruz filed the lawsuit using his own toilet paper ration. The Federal District Court initially denied relief without a hearing or findings, holding the complaint to be in an area that should be left "to the sound discretion of prison administration."
An amended complaint argued that: 
 "While prisoners who are members of other religious sects are allowed to use the prison chapel, Cruz is not. He shared his Buddhist religious material with other prisoners and, according to the allegations, in retaliation was placed in solitary confinement on a diet of bread and water for two weeks, without access to newspapers, magazines, or other sources of news. He also alleged that he was prohibited from corresponding with his religious advisor in the Buddhist sect."
and contrasted that with the fact that the prison: 
"...encourages inmates to participate in other religious programs, providing at state expense chaplains of the Catholic, Jewish, and Protestant faiths; providing also at state expense copies of the Jewish and Christian Bibles, and conducting weekly Sunday school classes and religious services. According to the allegations, points of good merit are given to prisoners as a reward for attending orthodox religious services, those points enhancing a prisoner's eligibility for desirable job assignments and early parole consideration"
so: 
"...plaintiff and the members of the class he represents are being subjected to an arbitrary and unreasonable exclusion without any lawful justification which invidiously discriminates against them in violation of their constitutional right of religious freedom and denies them equal protection of the laws."
Outcome
The court found that: 
"Texas has discriminated against petitioner by denying him a reasonable opportunity to pursue his Buddhist faith comparable to that offered other prisoners adhering to conventional religious precepts...".
Concurrence
Chief Justice Warren Burger concurred in the result: "I concur in the result reached even though the allegations of the complaint are on the borderline necessary to compel an evidentiary hearing. Some of the claims alleged are frivolous; others do not present justiciable issues. There cannot possibly be any constitutional or legal requirement that the government provides materials for every religion and sect practiced in this diverse country. At most, Buddhist materials cannot be denied to prisoners if someone offers to supply them".
Dissenting opinion
Justice William Rehnquist offered a dissenting view of the decision. That dissent is summarized below:Unlike the Court, I am not persuaded that the petitioner's complaint states a claim under the First Amendment, or that if the opinion of the Court of Appeals is vacated the trial court must necessarily conduct a trial upon the complaint.Petitioner alleges that voluntary services are made available at prison facilities so that Protestants, Catholics, and Jews may attend church services of their choice. None of our prior holdings [405 U.S. 319, 324] indicates that such a program on the part of prison officials amounts to the establishment of a religion.Petitioner is a prisoner serving 15 years for robbery in a Texas penitentiary. He is understandably not as free to practice his religion as if he were outside the prison walls. But there is no intimation in his pleadings that he is being punished for his religious views, as was the case in Cooper v. Pate, 378 U.S. 546 (1964)None of our holdings under the First Amendment requires that, in addition to being allowed freedom of religious belief, prisoners be allowed freely to evangelize their views among other prisoners.Presumably prison officials are not obligated to provide facilities for any particular denominational services within a prison, although once they undertake to provide them for some they must make only such reasonable distinctions as may survive analysis under the Equal Protection Clause. [405 U.S. 319, 325]A long line of decisions by this Court has recognized that the "equal protection of the laws" guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment is not to be applied in a precisely equivalent way in the multitudinous fact situations 405 U.S. 319, 326   that may confront the courts. On the one hand, we have held that racial classifications are "invidious" and "suspect." I think it is quite consistent with the intent of the framers of the Fourteenth Amendment, many of whom would doubtless be surprised to know that convicts came within its ambit, to treat prisoner claims at the other end of the spectrum from claims of racial discrimination. Absent a complaint alleging facts showing that the difference in treatment between the petitioner and his fellow Buddhists and practitioners of denominations with more numerous adherents could not reasonably be justified under any rational hypothesis, I would leave the matter in the hands of the prison officials.It has been assumed that the dismissal by the trial court must be treated as proper only if the standard of Conley v. Gibson, 355 U.S. 41 (1957), would permit the grant of a motion under Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 12 (b). I would not require the district court to inflexibly apply this general principle to the complaint of every inmate, who is in many respects in a different litigating posture than persons who are unconfined. The inmate stands to [405 U.S. 319, 327] gain something and loses nothing from a complaint stating facts that he is ultimately unable to prove. Though he may be denied legal relief, he will nonetheless have obtained a short sabbatical in the nearest federal courthouse. To expand the availability of such courtroom appearances by requiring the district court to construe [405 U.S. 319, 328] every inmate's complaint under the liberal rule of Conley v. Gibson deprives those courts of the latitude necessary to process this ever-increasing species of complaint.In addition, the trial court had before it the dismissal of another of petitioner's cases filed shortly before the instant action, where the trial judge had been exposed to myriad previous actions and found them to be "voluminous, repetitious, duplicitous and in many instances deceitful." Whatever might be the posture of this constitutional claim if the petitioner had never flooded the courts with repetitive and duplicitous claims, and if it had not recently been adjudicated in an identical proceeding, I believe it could be dismissed as frivolous in the case before us.
A film chronicling the life of Fred Cruz was produced and directed by Susanne Mason. The film, Writ Writer, was broadcast/presented by PBS TV Broadcast on Independent Lens on Thursday, June 8, 2008.
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:Buddhism in the United States
Category:Penal system in Texas
Category:Legal history of Texas
Category:1972 in religion
"""

From "Cruz v. New York" ==> """
Cruz v. New York, 481 U.S. 186 (1987), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held, 5–4, that the Confrontation Clause of the Constitution's Sixth Amendment barred the admission, in a joint trial, of a non-testifying codefendant's confession incriminating the defendant, even if the defendant's own confession was admitted against him.
Background of the Case
At 5:15 AM on November 29, 1981, Police Officers Dennis Fitzpatrick and Ronald Zuba responded to a radio report of an incident at the Gaseteria service station in Bronx County, New York. Upon arriving at the gas station, the officers found attendant Victoriano Agostini lying on the floor of the office bleeding from the back of his head. Agostini was taken to a hospital where he was pronounced dead. It was determined that he had sustained two bullet wounds to the head. At 8:00 AM, Detective Patrick Cirincione of the Crime Scene Unit arrived at the gas station where he photographed the scene. He recovered no firearms or spent shells..
The following day, an associate medical examiner performed an autopsy on the deceased, which confirmed that two gunshot wounds were the cause of death.  Specifically, one bullet entered the decedent's head above the right ear from a distance of three to six inches and the second bullet entered the left front region of the head. The paths of both bullets were backward, downward, and toward the right. The deceased showed further evidence of blunt force trauma to the bridge of the nose, area around the eyes, right cheek, and left shoulder. The bullet fragments recovered indicated that the bullets had been .38 caliber projectiles and could have been fired from a .357 magnum handgun.
Five months later, while police were investigating a separate homicide of Jerry Cruz (no relation to petitioner), Jerry Cruz's brother, Norberto Cruz, told police that five months prior, on November 29, 1981, Eulogio Cruz and Eulogio's brother, Benjamin Cruz, told him that they had killed a gas station attendant during an attempted robbery. On May 3, 1982, Benjamin Cruz voluntarily entered a police station after a detective left a card at his residence, requesting that he contact him in connection with the murder of Jerry Cruz. During questioning, Benjamin Cruz spontaneously confessed to the Agostini murder. Later that day, an assistant district attorney took a detailed, videotaped confession of Benjamin Cruz in which Benjamin implicated Eulogio and the deceased Jerry Cruz in Agostini's death.  Eulogio, however, made no statement when he was subsequently arrested.
A grand jury sitting in New York Supreme Court, Bronx County, indicted Eulogio and Benjamin Cruz for felony murder and lesser offenses in connection with the homicide. On the People's motion, their cases were consolidated for trial. Eulogio entered a pretrial motion to sever the cases based on Bruton v. United States, 391 U.S. 123, which was denied. At the trial, there were no eyewitnesses. The only direct incriminating evidence against either brother was their alleged confession to Norberto Cruz, and the videotaped confession of Benjamin Cruz. The videotaped confession was entered over the objections of Euologio, but with an accompanying jury instruction that it be used only against him.  Both men were found guilty of felony murder. Eulogio was sentenced to a prison term of fifteen years to life. He appealed, but the New York Court Supreme Court, Appellate Division, affirmed the lower court's ruling.
Majority opinion
Writing for the Court, Justice Scalia referenced Bruton v. United States, 391 U.S. 123 (1968), in laying out the question presented in the instant case. In Bruton, the Court held that a defendant was deprived of his rights under the Confrontation Clause if a confession by his codefendant was introduced in their joint trial, regardless of whether the jury received instructions only to consider it against the confessor. Similarly, the question in Cruz concerned whether a codefendant's confession is barred if the defendant's confession is substantially the same as the codefendant's.
Under the Court's analysis, the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment provides for defendants to confront witnesses that testify against them. This guarantee, which is extended to defendants in state courts through the Fourteenth Amendment, includes the right to cross-examine witnesses. In a joint trial, the confession of one defendant that implicates a codefendant is not admissible against the codefendant unless the confessor waives his Fifth Amendment rights in order to submit to cross-examination.
In Bruton, the Court held that jury instructions to ignore nontestifying codefendants' confessions, implicating the defendant, were insufficient:
Fearing that juries would find it impossible to discount an implicating confession against a codefendant who stood alongside the confessor, the Court discounted such instructions. In a subsequent case, Parker, the Court was split on the same issue where each defendant had made his own confession.Parker v. Randolph, 442 U.S. 62 (1979). Writing in concurrence, Justice Blackmun argued that introduction of a codefendant's own interlocking confession could cause a harmless violation of the Confrontation Clause (he found such an example in that case), but that there were other foreseeable cases in which it could lead to a more harmful violation.
Here, the Court adopted Blackmun's argument from Parker, finding that there were many imaginable inculpatory statements that could cause a corroborating statement to be "devastating" to a defense.  The Court argued that the content and existence of Cruz's own confession was open to question because it depended on the acceptance of Norberto's testimony, which his codefendant's confession was actually video-recorded.
The Court went on to find an inverse relationship in the extent to which two confessions "interlock":
Justice Scalia described the Court's holding as being that the Confrontation Clause barred the admission, in a joint trial, of a nontestifying codefendant's confession incriminating the defendant, even if the defendant's own confession is admitted against him. Justice Scalia concluded by pointing out that where a codefendant was unavailable, a defendant's confession could be considered at trial to assess whether a codefendant's own statements were supported by sufficient "indicia of reliability" to be admissible against him, despite the lack of opportunity for cross-examination.
Dissent
Justice White wrote a dissent, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices Powell and O'Connor. Turning to Bruton, Justice White pointed out that Bruton had not confessed whereas Cruz's own confession was at issue. Justice White placed great significance on the importance and evidentiary weight of a defendant's own confession. Under Justice White's rationale, while a codefendant's out-of-court statements implicating the defendant were both treated as hearsay and inherently suspect, the defendant himself had confessed. Justice White rejected the notion that interlocking confessions would have the effect of "devastating" the other defendant's defense as outlined in Bruton.
Justice White placed great importance on the difference between Bruton and the instant case:
Justice White went on to argue, on public policy grounds, that the Court's holding would negatively impact the justice system. His concern was that prosecutors would cease to seek joint trials in cases of interlocking confessions, while judges would not admit codefendant's confessions as a prophylactic measure, even where no harmful error would likely result. This would overburden the state, inconvenience police and witnesses, cause delays in the trial system, and possibly lead to inconsistent verdicts, he continued.
Justice White concluded by pointing to other case law that suggests that a codefendant's interlocking confession will often be admissible against the defendant, negating the Confrontation Clause issue of Bruton. Thus, in the case of Cruz, since the codefendant's confession "carries numerous indicia of reliability," Justice White suggested that the state court should not be precluded from considering the admissibility of that confession against Cruz.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 481
References
Further reading
 Alfredo Garcia. "The Winding Path of Bruton v. United States: A Case of Doctrinal Inconsistency." American Criminal Law Review (1988), 26: 401-406.
 Aviva Jezer. "The Right to Confrontation in Codefendant Confession Cases: Richardson v. Marsh and Cruz v. New York. Cornell Law Review (1989), 74: 712-715.
 Brian Spitser. "The Case for the Retroactive Application of Crawford v. Washington.  Brooklyn Law Review (2006), 71: 1631-1632.
External links
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Confrontation Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health" ==> """
Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health, 497 U.S. 261 (1990), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States involving a young adult incompetent. The first "right to die" case ever heard by the Court, Cruzan was argued on December 6, 1989, and decided on June 25, 1990. In a 5–4 decision, the Court affirmed the earlier ruling of the Supreme Court of Missouri and ruled in favor of the State of Missouri, finding it was acceptable to require "clear and convincing evidence" of a patient's wishes for removal of life support. A significant outcome of the case was the creation of advance health directives.
 Background 
On January 11, 1983, then-25-year-old Nancy Cruzan (born July 20, 1957) lost control of her car while driving at nighttime near Carthage, Missouri. She was thrown from the vehicle and landed face-down in a water-filled ditch.Cruzan v. Harmon, 760 S.W.2d 408, 430–433 (Mo. 1988) (en banc) (Higgins, J., dissenting). Paramedics found her with no vital signs, but they resuscitated her. After three weeks in a coma, she was diagnosed as being in a persistent vegetative state (PVS). Surgeons inserted a feeding tube for her long-term care.
In 1988, Cruzan's parents asked her doctors to remove her feeding tube. The hospital refused to do so without a court order, since removal of the tube would cause Cruzan's death.
The Cruzans filed for and received a court order for the feeding tube to be removed.Estate of Cruzan, Estate No. CV384-9P (P. Div. Cir. Ct., Jasper County, Mo., July 27, 1988). The trial court ruled that constitutionally, there is a "fundamental natural right ... to refuse or direct the withholding or withdrawal of artificial life-prolonging procedures when the person has no more cognitive brain function ... and there is no hope of further recovery."Cruzan v. Harmon, 760 S.W.2d 408, 434 (Mo. 1988) (en banc) (Higgins, J., dissenting) (quoting the lower trial court) The court ruled that Cruzan had effectively 'directed' the withdrawal of life support by telling a friend earlier that year that if she were sick or injured, "she would not wish to continue her life unless she could live at least halfway normally."
The state of Missouri and Cruzan's guardian ad litem both appealed this decision. In a 4–3 decision, the Supreme Court of Missouri reversed the trial court's decision. It ruled that no one may refuse treatment for another person, absent an adequate living will "or the clear and convincing, inherently reliable evidence absent here."Cruzan v. Harmon, 760 S.W.2d 408, 425 (Mo. 1988) (en banc). The Cruzans appealed, and in 1989 the Supreme Court of the United States agreed to hear the case.
 Issues 
The legal question was whether the State of Missouri had the right to require "clear and convincing evidence" for the Cruzans to remove their daughter from life support. Specifically, the Supreme Court considered whether Missouri was violating the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment by refusing to remove Nancy's feeding tube. The Due Process Clause provides: "[N]or shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law[.]"
The Cruzans' lawyer summarized the constitutional basis for his appeal thusly:
 Decision 
Cruzan was the first "right to die" case the Supreme Court had ever heard, and it proved divisive for the Court.p. 27 In a 5–4 decision, the Court found in favor of the Missouri Department of Health and ruled that nothing in the Constitution prevents the state of Missouri from requiring "clear and convincing evidence" before terminating life-supporting treatment,Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Dept. of Health, 110 S. Ct. 2841 (1990). upholding the ruling of the Missouri Supreme Court. Reflecting the controversiality of the "end of life" issue, five Justices wrote separate opinions about the case.
In a majority opinion by Chief Justice Rehnquist, the Court ruled that competent individuals have the right to refuse medical treatment under the Due Process Clause. However, with incompetent individuals, the Court upheld the state of Missouri's higher standard for evidence of what the person would want if they were able to make their own decisions. This higher evidentiary standard was constitutional, the Court ruled, because family members might not always make decisions that the incompetent person would have agreed with, and those decisions might lead to actions (like withdrawing life support) that would be irreversible.
Right to die vs. suicide
In court cases, like the Karen Ann Quinlan caseIn re Quinlan, 70 N.J. 10, 25 (1976). and the Elizabeth BouviaRobert Sternbrook and Bernard Lo, “The Case of Elizabeth Bouvia: Starvation, Suicide, or Problem Patient?” 146 Archives of Internal Medicine 161 (1986). . cases, the courts had highlighted the differences between dying from refusing treatment, and dying from suicide. However, in his concurring opinion in Cruzan, Justice Scalia noted that this distinction could be "merely verbal" if death is sought "by starvation instead of a drug."Cruzan v. Missouri, 497 U.S. 261, 297 (1990) (Scalia, J., concurring).
Justice Scalia argued that refusing medical treatment, if doing so would cause a patient's death, was equivalent to the right to commit suicide. The right to commit suicide, he added, was not a due process right protected in the Constitution. As legal scholar Susan Stefan writes: "[Justice Scalia] argued that states had the right to 'prevent, by force if necessary,' people from committing suicide, including refusing treatment when that refusal would cause the patient to die."p. 28
Justice Scalia's opinion raised important questions about the legal differences between refusal of treatment, suicide, assisted suicide, physician-assisted suicide, and "letting die," and the state's responsibility in preventing these, which would prove crucial issues in right to die and right to life cases to come.pp. 31–33
 Aftermath 
The Cruzans
After the Supreme Court's decision, the Cruzans gathered additional evidence that Cruzan would have wanted her life support terminated. The State of Missouri withdrew from the case in September 1990 since its law had been upheld and it had won the larger constitutional issue being considered.p. 29 With the Cruzans facing no opposition, Jasper County Probate Judge Charles Teel ruled that the Cruzans had met the evidentiary burden of "clear and convincing evidence." He issued a court order to remove Cruzan's feeding tube. On December 14, 1990, the feeding tube was removed, and Cruzan died on December 26, 1990.
Cruzan's case had attracted national interest, and right-to-life activists and organizations filed seven separate petitions with the court asking to resume feeding, but were found to have no legal standing for intervention.
At Cruzan's funeral, her father told reporters, "I would prefer to have my daughter back and let someone else be this trailblazer."p. 29 Six years later, on August 17, 1996, he killed himself.
Significance
The Cruzan case set several important precedents:pp. 27–28
 It established that the right to die was not a right guaranteed by the Constitution.
 It set out rules for what was required for a third party to refuse treatment on behalf of an incompetent person.
 It established that absent a living will or clear and convincing evidence of what the incompetent person would have wanted, the state's interests in preserving life outweigh the individual's rights to refuse treatment.
 It left it to the states to determine their own right-to-die standards, rather than creating a uniform national standard.
It also generated a great deal of interest in living wills and advance directives. For example, just one month after the Supreme Court ruling in Cruzan, the Society for the Right to Die had received some 300,000 requests for advance directive forms.
According to an article in The New York Times, the Cruzan case also helped increase support for the federal Patient Self-Determination Act, which became effective just under a year after Nancy Cruzan's death. The Act required hospitals and nursing homes that received federal funding to give patients advance-directive information and explain right-to-die options that are available under the laws of their states.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 497
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Terri Schiavo case
References
External links
 Summary of the Cruzan case with links to information about Missouri's health care laws
 Frontline: The Death of Nancy Cruzan (Transcript)
 Living Wills and Advance Directives for Medical Decisions (from the Mayo Clinic)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Missouri
Category:Medical controversies in the United States
Category:Euthanasia in the United States
Category:Medical lawsuits
Category:People with disorders of consciousness
"""

From "Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education" ==> """
Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education, 175 U.S. 528 (1899), ("Richmond") was a class action suit decided by the Supreme Court of the United States..  It is a landmark case, in that it sanctioned de jure segregation of races in American schools. The decision was overruled by Brown v. Board of Education (1954)..
About the case
The plaintiffs, "Cumming, Harper and Ladeveze, citizens of Georgia and persons of color suing on behalf of themselves and all others in like case joining with them," originally filed suit by petition against the Board of Education of Richmond County (the "Board") and one "Charles S. Bohler, tax collector" in the Superior Court of Richmond County, claiming, among other causes of action, that a $45,000 tax levied against the county for primary, intermediate, grammar, and high schools was illegal insofar as the high schools of the county were exclusively for white students and seeking an injunction barring the collection of so much of the total amount as was earmarked for the white only high school system.
County was reversed upon the ground that it erred in granting an injunction against the Board of Education. In accordance with that decision, the Superior Court upon the return of the cause from the Supreme Court of the State, refused the relief asked by the plaintiffs, and dismissed their petition. Thereafter, the plaintiffs appealed that order to the US Supreme Court as being in derogation of their rights under the US Constitution.
Decision
The Supreme Court affirmed on economic arguments, among others. It claimed that there are many more colored children than white children in the area and that the Board could not afford to supply everyone with education. The court reasoned that there was a choice between educating 60 white children and educating no one.
The Supreme Court denied that it had any jurisdiction to interfere in the decisions of the state courts. The decision states in pertinent part:
The final remark says:
Justice John Marshall Harlan, who was the lone dissenter in Plessy v. Ferguson, wrote the opinion for a unanimous court.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 175
References
Sources
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:School segregation in the United States
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:1899 in United States case law
Category:History of Augusta, Georgia
Category:1899 in education
Category:1899 in Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:Education in Richmond County, Georgia
Category:African-American history between emancipation and the civil rights movement
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:African-American history of Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Cummings v. Premier Rehab Keller, P.L.L.C." ==> """
Cummings v. Premier Rehab Keller, P.L.L.C., 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Affordable Care Act.
 Background 
Jane Cummings is deaf and legally blind. American Sign Language is her primary method of communication. In 2018, she sued Premier Rehab Keller, a company that offers physical therapy, under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Affordable Care Act for not providing her an ASL interpreter. She sought damages for emotional distress. The United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas dismissed her complaint, holding neither law allows people to recover damages for emotional distress. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed. Cummings filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on July 2, 2021. Oral arguments were held on November 30, 2021. On April 28, 2022, the Supreme Court affirmed the Fifth Circuit in a 6–3 decision, with Chief Justice John Roberts writing the majority, and Justice Stephen Breyer writing the dissent. Because the structure of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 is similar to the Rehabilitation Act and the ACA, this decision means people cannot recover emotional distress damages under that statute, either.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States disability case law
"""

From "Cunningham v. California" ==> """
Cunningham v. California, 549 U.S. 270 (2007), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held, 6–3, that the sentencing standard set forward in Apprendi v. New Jersey (2000) applies to California's determinate sentencing law. 
In California, a judge may choose one of three sentences for a crime—a low, middle, or high term. There must exist specific aggravating factors about the crime before a judge may impose the high term. Under the Apprendi rule, as explained in Blakely v. Washington, any fact that increases the punishment above that which the judge may impose without that fact must be found by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt. In People v. Black, the California Supreme Court rejected the argument that under Blakely, the jury must find the additional facts necessary for the judge to impose the high term under the DSL. In Cunningham, the U.S. Supreme Court overruled Black, ruling that Blakely applies to California's determinate sentencing scheme.
Background
After a jury trial, Cunningham was convicted of continuous sexual abuse of a child in Contra Costa County Superior Court, California. Under California's Determinate Sentencing Law (DSL), the authorized sentences for this crime are either 6, 12, or 16 years. Under the DSL, the judge must conclude first, that there are aggravating facts, and second, that the aggravating facts outweigh any mitigating factors, before imposing the high term. In this case, at a post-trial hearing, the judge found by a preponderance of the evidence that Cunningham's victim was particularly vulnerable and that his conduct was violent, making him a danger to the community. The judge then concluded that this aggravating evidence outweighed the fact that Cunningham had no criminal history, and sentenced Cunningham to the high term of 16 years. The California Court of Appeal affirmed. The California Supreme Court denied review because it had recently held, in People v. Black, that the DSL was constitutional under Blakely v. Washington. Cunningham asked the U.S. Supreme Court to hear the case, and it agreed to do so.
 California's Determinate Sentencing Law 
The primary development in sentencing law that gave rise to this case was the shift away from indeterminate sentencing and toward determinate sentencing. Under an indeterminate sentencing scheme, statutory law provides for a wide range of authorized sentences, such as "five years to life" for burglary. The power to determine the length of time a criminal actually spends in prison rests with a parole board or other prison officials, rather than with the courts. In the 1970s, California replaced its indeterminate sentencing system with a determinate sentencing scheme. In a determinate sentencing scheme, statutory law fixes authorized sentences of discrete lengths, and requires courts rather than prison officials to justify which of those discrete sentences is appropriate in any given case.
California enacted its Determinate Sentencing Law (DSL) in 1977, in the hopes of achieving greater uniformity in sentencing and ensuring that punishment was proportional to crimes. For most crimes, the DSL specifies three authorized sentences—a low term, a middle term, and a high term. The trial judge was required to impose the middle term unless there were aggravating or mitigating circumstances—facts found by the trial judge to exist by a preponderance of the evidence and which must be placed on the record in open court. A group of California judges had come up with a nonexhaustive list of aggravating and mitigating factors; judges were also free to rely on any fact reasonably related to the crime. The DSL also forbade judges to rely on any fact that was already an element of the crime in order to impose the high term.
Opinion of the Court
In Apprendi v. New Jersey, the Court ruled that any fact that increases a defendant's punishment above the statutory maximum punishment must be submitted to a jury and proved beyond a reasonable doubt. In Blakely v. Washington, the Court ruled that, for purposes of the Apprendi rule, the "statutory maximum" is the greatest sentence the judge may impose based solely on the facts found by the jury. Blakely and United States v. Booker, for example, involved sentencing schemes in which the judge was required to impose a sentence within a range determined both by the crime of conviction and additional facts. In those schemes, if the judge chose a sentence above that range, or chose one from a higher range, the facts that allowed the judge to do so had to be submitted to a jury and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
Under California's DSL, the middle term is the "statutory maximum" sentence for Blakely purposes. The DSL required judges to impose the middle term unless aggravating factors were found to exist, and those aggravating factors by definition did not include any element of the crime. Thus, the maximum sentence the judge could impose based solely on the jury's findings was the middle term, not the high term.  
Nevertheless, in People v. Black, the California Supreme Court held that the DSL survived Blakely intact because the DSL merely set forth a sentencing range within which the judge was allowed to exercise his traditional discretion to impose an appropriate sentence. The Black court concluded that the DSL was merely a legislative attempt to provide guidance to trial courts in selecting appropriate aggravating factors on which to base a high-term sentence. But this does not justify "shield[ing] a sentencing system from the force of" Blakely. The Black court also reasoned that the DSL did not violate Blakely because, overall, it reduced sentences vis-à-vis the indeterminate sentencing scheme. Furthermore, the Black court noted that under California law, sentencing enhancement, which are distinct from aggravating factors, did have to be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. These two differences, it reasoned, meant that the DSL survived Blakely. But Apprendi set forth a bright-line rule that did not tolerate "trivial" incursions in the name of preserving the "basic" jury-trial right of the criminal defendant.
Nor could the DSL survive because it was functionally indistinguishable from the post-Booker sentencing scheme in place for federal crimes. Just as federal judges have discretion to impose a "reasonable" sentence by referring to a set of broad criteria, the Black court reasoned, California trial judges have broad discretion to impose a sentence within a predetermined range. But this characterization of the DSL was not accurate, for California had adopted "sentencing triads, three fixed sentences with no ranges between them. Cunningham's sentencing judge had no discretion to select a sentence within the range of 6 to 16 years. Her instruction was to select 12 years, nothing less and nothing more, unless she found facts allowing the imposition of a sentence of 6 or 16 years. Factfinding to elevate a sentence from 12 to 16 years, our decisions make plain, falls within the province of the jury employing a beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard, not the bailiwick of a judge determining where the preponderance of the evidence lies." The "reasonableness" standard operates within the Sixth Amendment constraint, not as a substitute for it.  
It was up to California to tailor its sentencing scheme to conform with the Court's decision, just as other states had conformed their sentencing schemes to conform with Apprendi and Blakely. Some states allow the jury to make the necessary findings during trial; others do so in a post-trial sentencing hearing; still others "have chosen to permit judges genuinely to exercise broad discretion within a statutory range, which, everyone agrees, encounters no Sixth Amendment shoal."
Dissenting opinion
Justice Samuel Alito saw no difference between the DSL and the post-Booker sentencing scheme in place for the federal courts. "Both sentencing schemes grant trial judges considerable discretion in sentencing; both subject the exercise of that discretion to appellate review for "reasonableness;" and both—the California law explicitly, and the federal scheme implicitly—require a sentencing judge to find some factor to justify a sentence above the minimum that could be imposed based solely on the jury's verdict." If the post-Booker scheme had won the approval of a majority of the Court, why should the DSL not also garner such a majority?
Alito pointed out that all members of the Court agreed that the indeterminate sentencing scheme in place for federal crimes would satisfy the Blakely rule, and that a purely advisory Guidelines system would do so as well. The characteristic that persuaded a majority of the Court to approve the current federal sentencing scheme, consisting of sentencing guidelines ranges from which trial judges were permitted to depart, was the fact that all sentences were subject to appellate review for "reasonableness." All of these systems require trial judges to make factual findings on some level of generality. Under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, these findings were somewhat specific; under the indeterminate sentencing scheme, they were not. Yet in both schemes the judge makes findings that allow them to impose an appropriate sentence.  
Similarly, the DSL afforded California trial judges sentencing discretion with respect to the "general objectives of sentencing," which included protecting society, punishment, encouraging the defendant to lead a law-abiding life, deterring the defendant from committing other crimes and deterring others from committing crimes at all, incapacitating the defendant during his incarceration, providing restitution to victims, and promoting uniformity in overall sentences. The sentencing decisions of California trial judges, just as those of federal trial judges, were subject to review for "reasonableness."  
In light of these similarities, Alito concluded that the majority's reasoning was flawed. A California trial judge's decision to impose a high-term sentence was not necessarily a fact-based decision; it could be entirely policy-based, and policy-based decisions have always been left to judges. Because the decision to impose a high-term sentence was not based on facts, the Apprendi rule did not apply to it. Even if they were, Alito felt that "reasonableness" review was a sufficient constraint on the power of trial judges to choose sentences within prescribed ranges. Some sentences, after all, will be found to be unreasonable, and hence unconstitutional, because they will not be sufficiently supported by appropriate facts. If the remedial majority in Booker approved this scheme for the federal system, it should also pass constitutional muster when used in California.
 Effect of the decision 
Seventh Circuit Chief Judge Frank H. Easterbrook noted in an opinion that an argument that since Cunningham'''s decision, "district judges no longer may find facts that affect federal
sentences ... has become popular." The Seventh Circuit rejected that argument:Cunningham holds that California’s determinate sentencing law violates the sixth amendment, as understood in [Apprendi, Blakely and Booker], by granting the judge rather than the jury the power to find facts that raise the maximum lawful sentence. [It is] contend[ed] that Cunningham applies to the federal Sentencing Guidelines as well as to California’s system. ... [However,] Booker solved th[e] [federal sentencing guidelines'] constitutional problem by making the Guidelines advisory. Given that adjustment, findings of fact under the Guidelines no longer determine statutory maximum sentences. Cunningham therefore has no effect on post-Booker federal practice[,] [insofar as] District judges remain free, as the remedial portion of Booker instructs, to make findings of fact that influence sentences, provided that the sentence is constrained by the maximum set by statute for each crime. United States v. Roti'' (7th Cir. 2007), Slip op. at 5-6.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 549
List of United States Supreme Court cases
External links
  Transcript of oral argument
  Merits brief of the State of California
  Amicus brief of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers
  New York Times article on Cunningham decision
  California Supreme Court press release regarding Cunningham cases
  Information from the First District Appellate Project about applying Cunningham
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment sentencing case law
Category:2007 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Cuomo v. Clearing House Ass'n, L.L.C." ==> """
Cuomo v. Clearing House Association, L.L.C., 557 U.S. 519 (2009), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court.. In a 5–4 decision, the court determined that a federal banking regulation did not pre-empt the ability of states to enforce their own fair-lending laws. The Court determined that the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency is the sole regulator of national banks but it does not have the authority under the National Bank Act to pre-empt state law enforcement against national banks.
The case came out of an interpretation of the US Treasury Department's Office of the Comptroller of the Currency which had blocked an investigation by New York into lending practices. The OCC claimed that the 1864 National Bank Act bars states from enforcing their own laws against national banks.
Justice Scalia stated in the opinion that while the OCC has "visitorial powers," the right to examine the affairs of a corporation, that does not mean that it has the exclusive right to enforcement. "A sovereign's 'visitorial powers' and its power to enforce the law are two different things. Contrary to what the [OCC's] regulation says, the National Bank Act pre-empts only the former." Scalia noted that states "have always enforced their general laws against national banks—and have enforced their banking-related laws against national banks for at least 85 years."
The case is notable for the justices composing the 5-4 majority, which included the liberal justices (John Paul Stevens, David Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Stephen Breyer) along with the conservative Scalia, who authored the opinion. Justice Clarence Thomas, joined by Justices Samuel Alito, Anthony Kennedy, and Chief Justice John Roberts, wrote a dissent.
The case is further notable for the suggested relationship of this OCC decision to the financial crisis of 2007–2010.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 557
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 The Clearing House
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Department of the Treasury
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
"""

From "Cupp v. Murphy" ==> """
Cupp v. Murphy, 412 U.S. 291 (1973), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld a murder conviction notwithstanding a challenge that the evidence upon which guilt was based was obtained in violation of the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution. The court held that in view of the station-house detention upon probable cause, the very limited intrusion of scraping the defendant's fingernails for blood and other material, undertaken to preserve highly evanescent evidence, did not violate the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments.
Justice Stewart wrote for the majority. Based on this decision, it is permissible for police officers to conduct a limited search on a defendant when they believe that the defendant is likely to destroy evidence, provided that the search is limited to vindicating the purpose of preserving evidence.
Facts
Doris Murphy died of strangulation in her home in the city of Portland, Oregon.  Investigators found abrasions and lacerations on her throat.  There was no sign of a break-in or robbery.  Upon receiving word of his ex-wife's murder, Daniel Murphy (then living with his new wife) promptly telephoned the Portland police and voluntarily came into Portland for questioning.
Shortly after arrival at the station house where he was represented by counsel, the investigating police noticed a dark spot on the respondent's finger.  Suspecting that the spot might be dried blood and knowing that evidence of strangulation is often found under the assailant's fingernails, the police asked Murphy if they could take a sample of scrapings from his fingernails.The Trial Court, the Oregon Court of Appeals, and the United States District Court found and/or assumed that the police had probable cause to arrest Murphy when he showed up at the police station for questioning: "At the time the detectives took these scrapings they knew:
[1.] The bedroom in which the wife was found dead showed no signs of disturbance, which fact tended to indicate a killer known to the victim rather than to a burglar or other stranger.
[2.] The decedent's son, the only other person in the house that night, did not have fingernails which could have made the lacerations observed on the victim's throat.  "The defendant and his deceased wife had had a stormy marriage and did not get along well.
[3]. The defendant had, in fact, been at his home on the night of the murder. He left and drove back to central Oregon claiming that he did not enter the house or see his wife. He volunteered a great deal of information without being asked, yet expressed no concern or curiosity about his wife's fate."  State v. Murphy, 465 P.2d 900, 904 (Or. 1970).  It is worthy of note that the 9th Circuit's decision was not based upon an assumption that there was probable cause to arrest Murphy at the police station.  The decision reversing the District Court did not discuss the issue. He refused. Under protest and without a warrant, the police proceeded to take the samples, which turned out to contain traces of skin and blood cells, and fabric from the victim's nightgown. This incriminating evidence was admitted at the trial.
Daniel Murphy was convicted by a jury in an Oregon court of the second-degree murder of his wife.
Procedural history
The procedural history of the case is rather complex. At trial, Murphy objected to the use of the fingernail evidence against him, arguing the evidence was obtained in violation of his rights under the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments. The trial court denied Murphy's motion, and he was convicted. The Oregon Court of Appeals affirmed the conviction.
Having exhausted his rights on direct appeal, Murphy sought a writ of habeas corpus from the Federal District Court in Oregon. The District Court denied the writ without issuing an opinion. On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed the District Court, explaining "that there were no such exigent circumstances existing at the time of the search which would require that it immediately be conducted without the procurement of a warrant...."  See Murphy v. Cupp,  461 F.2d 1006, 1007 (9th Cir. 1972). 
Holding
When police have probable cause to believe a crime has been committed, the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendment permit the limited search of a suspect during a brief detention in a stationhouse when there exists a risk that the suspect may destroy readily destructible evidence and the scope of the search is limited to vindicating this interest.
Majority opinion
Noting first that there existed probable cause to believe that Murphy had committed the murder, Justice Stewart first dismissed arguments based on the illegality of the brief seizure which occurred at the stationhouse. Justice Stewart next turned to the search.
Unlike fingerprinting, voice exemplars, or handwriting exemplars, the court explained that the search of the respondent's fingernails went beyond mere "physical characteristics . . . constantly exposed to the public" constituting a "severe, though brief, intrusion upon cherished personal security" that is subject to constitutional scrutiny.  Citing Chimel v. California, Justice Stewart reasoned that the search of Murphy's person was justified under an exception to the warrant requirement, the search incident to arrest. The basis for that exception is that when an arrest is made, the arrestee may attempt use any weapons he has and/or attempt to destroy any incriminating evidence in his possession. Of course, a warrantless search may not be so expansive so as to dwarf the rationale that excepts the search from the warrant requirement.
The Court declined to hold that a full Chimel search of Murphy would have been appropriate, as there had been no warrant for the search and no formal arrest. Given the circumstances of the case, Murphy was less likely to be hostile to the police and less likely to take conspicuous, immediate steps to destroy incriminating evidence on his person. Nonetheless, the court noted that the search which took place was appropriately limited in light of the absence of a formal arrest:
"At the time Murphy was being detained at the station house, he was obviously aware of the detectives' suspicions. Though he did not have the full warning of official suspicion that a formal arrest provides, Murphy was sufficiently apprised of his suspected role in the crime to motivate him to attempt to destroy what evidence he could without attracting further attention. Testimony at trial indicated that after he refused to consent to the taking of fingernail samples, he put his hands behind his back and appeared to rub them together. He then put his hands in his pockets, and a "metallic sound, such as keys or change rattling" was heard. The rationale of Chimel, in these circumstances, justified the police in subjecting him to the very limited search necessary to preserve the highly evanescent evidence they found under his fingernails."cf. Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757
Impact/weight of the opinion today
The practical effect of this decision is rather limited. The case presented a rather attenuated set of circumstances. However, the reasoning continues to be reaffirmed. See, e.g., Knowles v. Iowa, 525 U.S. 113 (1998).  In Knowles, the Supreme Court held that the search of an automobile violated the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments where, following the issuance of a traffic citation, and notwithstanding the permissibility of effecting a full custodial arrest for the infraction at issue, police did not arrest the suspect.  According to the court, once the citation was issued, no further evidence of the offense was needed to prosecute.  Thus, the need for a Cupp detention and search was not present.
Marshall's concurrence
Justice Marshall's concurring opinion emphasized that the detention and subsequent limited search of Murphy were justified by the extremely strange circumstances presented. According to Justice Marshall, when the officers noticed the possible evidence on Murphy's hands, "there was no way to preserve the status quo while a warrant was sought, and there was good reason to believe that Murphy might attempt to alter the status quo unless he were prevented from doing so."  He emphasized the importance of (1) the narrow scope of the search and (2) that the scope was tied to the reasons justifying the brief detention.
Blackmun's concurrence
Justice Blackmun was concerned that the scope of the Chimel search was being narrowed. He emphasized that this holding should be confined to situations such as the one presented (where a formal arrest could have been, but was not, effected).  He urged that the Chimel-search-incident-to-arrest framework continue to be applied when a full custodial arrest is made.
Powell's concurrence
Justice Powell agreed with the reasoning of the majority.  He wrote separately to address a tangential issue based on his opinion in Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, i.e. that a claim such as Murphy's is properly available in federal habeas corpus only to the extent of ascertaining whether he was afforded a fair opportunity to raise and have adjudicated the question in state courts.
Douglas's dissent
Justice Douglas was skeptical that probable cause existed for Murphy's arrest. As such, he did not think the court should have decided the question raised. He thought this was evidenced by the decision of the police officers not to arrest Murphy at the station. He likewise challenged the extension of Chimel, explaining that this case was not covered by Chimel and that the court was misguided in so relying. He urged that Oregon should not have been able to use the evidence against Murphy.
Brennan's dissent
Justice Brennan argued that the issue of probable cause had not been decided. He thought that the case should be remanded to the Court of Appeals for such a determination.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 412
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "Curtis Publishing Co. v. Butts" ==> """
Curtis Publishing Co. v. Butts, 388 U.S. 130 (1967), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court establishing the standard of First Amendment protection against defamation claims brought by private individuals.
Background
The case involved a libel lawsuit filed by the former Georgia Bulldogs football coach Wally Butts against The Saturday Evening Post. The lawsuit arose from an article in the magazine, which alleged that Butts, still Georgia's athletic director following his resignation as coach after the 1960 season, and the Alabama head coach Bear Bryant had conspired to fix games. The Butts suit was consolidated with another case, Associated Press v. Walker, and both cases were decided in one opinion.
In finding for Butts but against Walker, the Supreme Court gave some indications of when a "public figure" could sue for libel.
Decision
In a plurality opinion, written by Justice John Marshall Harlan II, the Supreme Court held that news organizations were protected from liability when they print allegations about public officials. However, New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964), the Supreme Court decided that news organizations are still liable to public figures if the information that they publish has been recklessly gathered or is deliberately false.
The Court ultimately ruled in favor of Butts, and The Saturday Evening Post was ordered to pay $3.06 million to Butts in damages, which was later reduced on appeal to $460,000.
The settlement was seen as a contributing factor in the demise of The Saturday Evening Post and its parent corporation, the Curtis Publishing Company, two years later. Butts and Bryant had sued for $10 million each. Bryant settled for $300,000.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 388
References
External links
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:Alabama Crimson Tide football
Category:Georgia Bulldogs football
Category:The Saturday Evening Post
Category:United States defamation case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Cutter v. Wilkinson" ==> """
Cutter v. Wilkinson, 544 U.S. 709 (2005), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that, under the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act (RLUIPA), facilities that accept federal funds cannot deny prisoners accommodations that are necessary to engage in activities for the practice of their own religious beliefs.
RLUIPA prohibited the federal government from imposing a substantial burden on prisoners' freedom of religion. Five residents of an Ohio prison, which included two adherents of Asatru,  a minister of the white supremacist Church of Jesus Christ Christian,  a Wiccan and a Satanist filed suit.Johnson, M. Alex (May 31, 2005). "Court upholds prisoners' religious rights". NBC News. Retrieved December 21, 2011. The men stated in federal district court that prison officials violated RLUIPA by failing to accommodate the inmates' exercise of their "nonmainstream" religions. Prison officials argued that the act "improperly advanced religion and thus violated the First Amendment's establishment clause which prohibited government from making laws "respecting an establishment of religion." The district court had originally rejected that argument and ruled for the inmates. The Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals had reversed the decision.
Question presented
Did a federal law prohibiting government from burdening prisoners' religious exercise violate the First Amendment's establishment clause?
Decision of the Court
The Court returned a unanimous opinion, written by Justice Ginsburg, with a concurring opinion by Justice Thomas. Ruling in favor of the inmates, the Court held that, on its face, RLUIPA made an accommodation allowed by the First Amendment. The Court noted that constitutional problems could arise if RLUIPA were "enforced improperly and religious prisoners received favored treatment, or if religious exercise and security concerns were not properly balanced."
See also
 Religion in United States prisons
References
External links
 Duke Law School page on Cutter v. Wilkinson
Category:2005 in religion
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:Ásatrú in the United States
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:Minority rights
Category:Penal system in the United States
Category:Satanism in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:White supremacy in the United States
Category:Wicca in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2000s in modern paganism
"""

From "Cyan, Inc. v. Beaver County Employees Retirement Fund" ==> """
Cyan, Inc. v. Beaver County Employees Retirement Fund, 583 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the Securities Litigation Uniform Standards Act of 1998 did not strip state courts of jurisdiction to adjudicate class actions alleging only 1933 Securities Act violations; nor did it authorize removing such suits from state to federal court..
The suit was initially filed by a group of public entities, including Beaver County against Cyan Inc alleging losses on securities attributable to shortcoming in disclosures by Cyan.
The Second Circuit (which includes New York) put 1933 Act cases in federal court, while the Ninth Circuit (which includes California) allowed '33 Act cases in state court. This circuit split was decided in favor of the Ninth Circuit's interpretation.
 References 
External links
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States class action case law
Category:United States securities case law
Category:Beaver County, Pennsylvania
Category:Ciena
"""

From "Dada v. Mukasey" ==> """
Dada v. Mukasey, 554 U.S. 1 (2008), was a United States Supreme Court case involving deportation procedures.
Background
Samson T. Dada was a citizen of Nigeria who had married an American citizen. When immigration officials tried to deport him for overstaying his visa, he appealed, claiming his marriage entitled him to remain in the United States. The Court ruled, in a 5–4 decision, that complying with a deportation order did not strip an immigrant of the right to appeal that deportation order.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote the majority opinion, joined by Justices John Paul Stevens, David Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Stephen Breyer. Justice Antonin Scalia was joined by Justices John Roberts and Clarence Thomas in his dissent. Justice Samuel Alito wrote a separate dissent..
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 554
2007 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States
Further reading
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:2008 in United States case law
"""

From "Daimler AG v. Bauman" ==> """
Daimler AG v. Bauman, 571 U.S. 117 (2014), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court answered whether an American court may exercise jurisdiction over a foreign company based on the fact that a subsidiary of the company acts on its behalf in the jurisdictional state.. The court held that an American company cannot be sued for conduct occurring outside the United States and American courts do not have jurisdiction of such a claim.
Background
Daimler Aktiengesellschaft is an automotive manufacturer based in Stuttgart, Germany, that owns Mercedes-Benz and its subsidiaries around the world, including in the United States and Argentina. During the Dirty War in Argentina, a labor dispute developed at the Mercedes-Benz plant in González Catán. Mercedes-Benz reported the labor leaders as "subversives" to the right-wing military junta, had junta forces stationed within the factory, and allowed the junta to conduct raids on workers.Brief for Respondents, http://sblog.s3.amazonaws.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/11-965-bs.pdf During the dispute, twenty-two labor leaders were kidnapped, tortured, and murdered. Afterwards, the police chief responsible for the "disappearances" was hired as Mercedes-Benz Argentina's chief of security and the company provided his legal defense against human rights abuse accusations.
Twenty years later, Mercedes-Benz's role in Argentina's Dirty War came to the attention of the German media. DaimlerChrysler AG responded to the accusations against its subsidiary by hiring Professor Christian Tomuschat to conduct an investigation.  His exculpatory findings were criticized by Amnesty International.
In 2004, the survivors sued DaimlerChrysler AG in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California alleging that its subsidiary's activities during Argentina's Dirty War gave rise to claims under the Alien Tort Statute, the Torture Victim Protection Act, and California state tort law.The Supreme Court Term — Leading Cases, 128 Harv. L. Rev. 311 (2014). District Judge Ronald M. Whyte dismissed the suit for lack of personal jurisdiction, finding that, under the law of agency, DaimlerChrysler's wholly owned subsidiary Mercedes-Benz USA is not an agent of its owner, and that it would be unreasonable to exercise jurisdiction directly over DaimlerChrysler. Plaintiffs appealed.
Before the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, Senior Circuit Judge Dorothy Wright Nelson, joined by Circuit Judge Mary M. Schroeder, affirmed, with Judge Stephen Reinhardt dissenting. Plaintiffs petitioned for a rehearing and, nine months later, the court granted the rehearing, vacated its earlier opinion and scheduled the case for reargument.Bauman v. DaimlerChrysler Corp., No. 07-15386 (9th Cir. May 6, 2010).
However, the court then cancelled the reargument and instead released a new opinion, authored by Judge Reinhardt, that came to the opposite of its earlier conclusion. The three-judge panel unanimously reversed the district court, finding that Mercedes-Benz USA was indeed an agent of DaimlerChrysler and that the exercise of personal jurisdiction over DaimlerChrysler was reasonable "under the circumstances of this case". The Ninth Circuit then denied DaimlerChrysler's petition for a rehearing en banc, with Judge Diarmuid O'Scannlain authoring a dissent joined by seven other judges.
DaimlerChrysler (by then renamed Daimler AG) petitioned for a writ of certiorari from the United States Supreme Court and the petition was granted. The case was argued on October 15, 2013, with Deputy Solicitor General Edwin Kneedler appearing as a friend in support of Daimler.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court unanimously reversed, with Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg writing for the Court, "Exercises of personal jurisdiction so exorbitant, we hold, are barred by due process constraints."Daimler AG v. Bauman, 134 S. Ct. 746 at 751 (2014).  Justice Ginsburg, in an opinion joined by seven other justices, begins by tracing the jurisprudential history of in personam jurisdiction, beginning with the rigid territorial limits of Pennoyer v. Neff (1878). The Court saw International Shoe Co. v. Washington (1945) as later recognizing the distinction between specific jurisdiction, which includes only the specific conduct that connects the defendant to the territory, and general jurisdiction, which includes all the defendant's acts anywhere, and Ginsburg ends the history with her recent admonition to exercise general jurisdiction only when the defendant is “essentially at home” in the forum in Goodyear Dunlop Tires Operations, S.A. v. Brown (2011).
The Court finds that "in no event" can Reinhardt's agency theory be sustained. Noting that even the plaintiffs' brief had distanced itself from Reinhardt's logic, the Court largely adopts the criticisms of the Ninth Circuit judges dissenting from the denial of an en banc rehearing. The Court even goes so far as to emphasize that Reinhardt's formulation "stacks the deck" and would always have the same result of exercising jurisdiction.
The Court then goes further, writing, "Even if we were to assume that MBUSA is at home in California, and further to assume MBUSA's contacts are imputable to Daimler, there would still be no basis to subject Daimler to general jurisdiction in California."Daimler, 134 S. Ct. at 760. Daimler could not be subject to general jurisdiction in California because its agent's activity in California would merely establish specific jurisdiction in California.  Justice Ginsburg rejects Justice Sotomayor's assertion that the Court had chosen to decide an issue not argued below, writing, "the question fairly encompasses an inquiry" into the agency relationship.Daimler, 134 S. Ct. at 760 n.16.  The Court then implies that a corporation can only be "at home" and subject to general jurisdiction where it is incorporated or where it has its principal place of business.
Lastly, the Court notes that recent cases have rendered federal claims for human rights violations "infirm".Daimler, 134 S. Ct. at 763 citing Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum, 133 S.Ct. 1659 (2013) and Mohamad v. Palestinian Authority, 132 S.Ct. 1702 (2012). Furthermore, the Court gives weight to the Solicitor General's suggestion that "international rapport" may be damaged when U.S. courts hear foreign corporations' foreign misdeeds.
Concurrence in the judgment
Justice Sonia Sotomayor concurred in judgment only.  Sotomayor agreed that Reinhardt's opinion is clearly in error, and suggests that personal jurisdiction is simply unreasonable because Germany has a far greater interest in resolving the dispute.  Sotomayor considered the Court's opinion wrong in “both process and substance.”  Procedurally, Sotomayor argued that Ginsburg strayed beyond the question briefed by assuming Mercedes Benz USA's agency relationship in the absence of an adequate factual record below.  Substantively, Sotomayor argued that effectively limiting general jurisdiction to the principal place of business inherently favors larger businesses, making multinational corporations “too big for general jurisdiction”.
This, in her view, created manifold injustices.  It is unjust by using the Constitution to limit the states' sovereign prerogative over the exercise of their courts’ jurisdiction. It is unjust to small businesses in that they will be subject to instate general jurisdiction while their multinational competitors will not.  It is unjust to individuals because when visiting a state a natural person can be served with process and become subject to general jurisdiction while a fictional person cannot, even if that fictional person is a multinational corporation who has permanent employees in the state.  Finally, Sotomayor views the Court's singular approach unjust because the result of limiting general jurisdiction is to shut the courthouse door, inevitably benefiting wrongdoers at the cost of those they have wronged.
Reaction
During an interview Linda Greenhouse asked Justice Sotomayor about her concurrence in the judgment, noting that "you did not pull your punches", to which the justice replied "bad facts make bad law" and that she felt she needed to bring attention to "the dangers of the path the Court is on."Justice Sonia Sotomayor & Linda Greenhouse, "A Conversation with Justice Sotomayor", 123 Yale L.J. F. 375 (2014).
Scholars concluded that the Court's opinion "constitutes a radical departure from settled law,"Judy M. Cornett & Michael H. Hoffheimer, Good-Bye Significant Contacts: General Personal Jurisdiction after Daimler AG v. Bauman, 76 Ohio St. L.J. 101 (2015). and that "the Court has severely constrained the reach of general jurisdiction in a way that would have been surprising just four years ago."Alan M. Trammell, A Tale of Two Jurisdictions, 68 Vand. L. Rev. 5 (2015).  At a symposium on the case,Philip Thoennes, Personal Jurisdiction Symposium: An Introduction, 19 Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 593 (2015). academics pronounced the "end of an era,"Linda J. Silberman, The End of Another Era: Reflections on Daimler and Its Implications for Judicial Jurisdiction in the United States, 19 Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 675 (2015). encouraged a return to the International Shoe standard,Cassandra Burke Robertson and Charles W. “Rocky” Rhodes, Shifting Equilibrium: Personal Jurisdiction, Transnational Litigation, and the Problem of Nonparties, 19 Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 643 (2015). or identified the need for new legislation.John T. Parry, Rethinking Personal Jurisdiction after Bauman and Walden, 19 Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 607 (2015).
In its 2017 decisions in BNSF Railway Co. v. Tyrrell and Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. v. Superior Court, the Supreme Court reaffirmed its adherence to the jurisdictional limitations recognized in Daimler.
References
External links
 SCOTUSblog case page
 Vanderbilt Law Review En Banc Roundtable case preview
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
Category:Mercedes-Benz Group
"""

From "DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno" ==> """
DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno, 547 U.S. 332 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court case involving the standing of taxpayers to challenge state tax laws in federal court.  The Court unanimously ruled that state taxpayers did not have standing under Article III of the United States Constitution to challenge state tax or spending decisions simply by virtue of their status as taxpayers.This decision will not affect whether such challenges may be brought in state courts, which would be purely an issue of whether state law permitted it.  Chief Justice John Roberts delivered the majority opinion (his fifth on the Court), which was joined by all of the justices except for Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who concurred separately.
 Background 
 Tax incentives and taxpayer lawsuit 
On November 12, 1998, the city of Toledo, Ohio entered into a development agreement with auto manufacturer DaimlerChrysler, for it to construct a new Jeep assembly plant near its existing facility in exchange for various tax incentives.  DaimlerChrysler was to receive approximately $280,000,000 in tax benefits, in the form of a ten-year exemption from certain property taxes and a credit applied against its state corporate franchise tax for certain investments.  The Toledo Public and Washington Local school districts, in which the facilities were located, consented to the exemption.
Eighteen taxpayers subsequently filed suit in Lucas County Court of Common Pleas against DaimlerChrysler, the city and school districts, and other State of Ohio defendants, claiming that the state statutes that permitted the property tax exemptionOhio Rev. Code §§ 5709.62(C)(1), 5709.631. and the investment tax creditOhio Rev. Code § 5733.33. violated the Commerce Clause in Article One of the United States Constitution and provisions of the Ohio Constitution by granting preferential treatment to in-state investment and activity.See Dormant Commerce Clause.  The plaintiffs claimed that their personal injury resulted from the tax breaks diminishing the funds available to the city and State, which imposed a "disproportionate burden" on the plaintiffs.
 Federal court proceedings 
The case was then removed to the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Ohio by the defendants on the basis of the federal question raised by the Commerce Clause claims.Judge David A. Katz presided.  The plaintiffs filed a motion to remand the case back to state court, in part because of concerns that they could not meet the standing requirements of federal court.  The District Court denied the motion, finding that at a minimum the taxpayer plaintiffs could proceed under the "municipal taxpayer standing" rule articulated in Massachusetts v. Mellon, 262 U.S. 447 (1923)..
The District Court then granted the defendants' motions to dismiss.Cuno v. DaimlerChrysler, Inc., 154 F. Supp. 2d 1196 (N.D. Ohio 2001).  The claims against the State defendants were barred by their Eleventh Amendment immunity, but were dismissed without prejudice so the plaintiffs could refile the claims in state court.  The District Court ruled that the remaining claims all failed to establish that the tax statutes violated either the Ohio or U.S. Constitutions, and were accordingly dismissed with prejudice.
On appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, the dismissal was affirmed in part, and reversed as to the claims regarding the investment tax credit.Cuno v. Daimler Chrysler, Inc., 386 F.3d 738 (6th Cir. 2004).  This is an amended decision; the original was reported at 383 F.3d 379 and then withdrawn.  Judges Eugene Edward Siler, Jr., Martha Craig Daughtrey, and R. Guy Cole, Jr. participated, with Judge Daughtrey writing the court's opinion.  The court ruled that the tax credit violated the Commerce Clause and enjoined its enforcement, because it coerced businesses that were already subject to Ohio's franchise tax to expand locally rather than out-of-state, at the expense of interstate commerce.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court granted certiorari to review the Sixth Circuit's decision, and additionally directed the parties to brief and argue on the issue of whether the plaintiff had the standing to challenge the investment tax credit in federal court.DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno, 126 S. Ct. 36 (2005); Wilkins v. Cuno, 126 S. Ct. 36 (2005).  The Court unanimously vacated the Sixth Circuit in part, ruling that it had improperly reached the merits of the case without first determining the issue of standing.  In a decision delivered by Chief Justice John Roberts and joined by seven justices, the Court held that the status of an individual as a state taxpayer does not establish the standing required by Article III of the United States Constitution for a challenge to state tax laws to be heard in federal court.  Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg filed a separate concurring opinion.
 Roberts' majority opinion 
The Court stated that the power of federal courts to engage in judicial review was limited by the requirement that the case be an actual case or controversy under Article III.  "If a dispute is not a proper case or controversy, the courts have no business deciding it, or expounding the law in the course of doing so."  Despite the plaintiffs' previous position regarding standing and the propriety of the federal court forum for their case, the Court furthermore stated that because the plaintiffs were now asserting standing, the burden was on them to establish it.
 Injury as taxpayers 
The plaintiffs had principally claimed that they had standing by virtue of their status as Ohio taxpayers, alleging that the investment tax credit injured them by "deplet[ing] the funds of the State of Ohio to which the Plaintiffs contribute through their tax payments" and thus "diminish[ing] the total funds available for lawful uses and impos[ing] disproportionate burdens on" them.  The Court had in several prior cases denied federal taxpayers standing under Article III to object to a particular expenditure of federal funds simply because they are taxpayers.  The Court believed that the rationales for rejecting federal taxpayer standing applied with equal force to state taxpayers, as a prior case had indicated..  The municipal taxpayer standing established by Mellon was not available in claims that did not involve municipal action, where the plaintiffs challenged a state law and state tax credit.
The Court also observed that there was no standing where the alleged injury was not "concrete and particularized," but was instead suffered "in some indefinite way in common with people generally."; Mellon,  262 U.S. at 488.  In addition, there is also no standing where the injury is not "actual or imminent," but is instead "conjectural or hypothetical."Lujan, 504 U.S. at 560.  The court believed that the plaintiffs' alleged injury was "conjectural or hypothetical," because it required speculation that state legislators would respond to a reduction in revenue caused by the credit (a consequence the Court also found speculative, and unlikely) by increasing the plaintiffs' taxes.  Establishing that this injury is redressable would furthermore require speculation that legislators would pass along the increase in revenue resulting from the abolition of the tax credit in the form of tax reductions to the plaintiffs.  "Neither sort of speculation suffices to support standing."
 Analogy to Establishment Clause challenges 
The Court rejected the argument that an exception for Commerce Clause challenges to state tax or spending decisions should exist, as an analogy to the Establishment Clause taxation challenge the Court had permitted in Flast v. Cohen, 392 U.S. 83 (1968), because both constitutional clauses operate as a specific limit on the Taxing and Spending Clause.See . The Taxing and Spending Clause is at U.S. Const. art. I, § 8.  The Court explained that the right not to contribute money for the support of a religious establishment was "fundamentally unlike" whatever rights the plaintiffs may have under the Commerce Clause, and the comparison the plaintiffs attempted was "at such a high level of generality that almost any constitutional constraint on government power would 'specifically limit' a State's taxing and spending power for Flast purposes."  The injury alleged in Flast was instead the specific extraction of money from the plaintiff to spend in aid of a religion, an injury that could be redressed by an injunction, in contrast to that alleged in this case.
 Ginsburg's concurrence 
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg filed a separate concurring opinion, in which she concurred in the Court's judgment, which she believed to be based on longstanding precedent, and in the balance of its opinion.  However, she wrote separately to express a "large reservation" to the further limitations on standing that the Court had adopted in decisions dating from the late 1970s through the early 1990s,See, e.g., ; ; ; . which she believed were not necessary to support the Court's ruling.
 Footnotes 
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States standing case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Mercedes-Benz Group
Category:History of Toledo, Ohio
"""

From "Dakota County v. Glidden" ==> """
Dakota County v. Glidden, 113 U.S. 222 (1885), was a motion to dismiss a suit issued in aid of a railroad. Judgment for the plaintiff. The defendant brought a writ of error to reverse it. Subsequently, to the judgment, Dakota County, Nebraska settled with the plaintiff and other bondholders, by giving them new bonds bearing a less rate of interest, and the old bonds, which were the cause of action in this suit, were surrendered and destroyed. These facts were brought before this Court by affidavits and transcripts from the county records, accompanied by a motion to dismiss the writ of error..
While payment of the sum recovered in submission to the judgment is no bar to the right of reversal of the judgment when brought here by writ of error, a compromise and settlement of the demand in suit, whereby a new agreement is substituted in place of the old one, extinguishes the cause of action, and leaves nothing for the exercise of the jurisdiction of this Court.
Evidence of facts outside of the record, affecting the proceeding of the court in a case on error or appeal, will be received and considered, when deemed necessary by the court, for the purpose of determining its action.
The court saw no reason to impeach the transaction by which the new bonds were substituted for the old, and the writ of error was accordingly dismissed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Dakota County, Nebraska
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Dallas v. Stanglin" ==> """
City of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 19 (1989), was a United States Supreme Court decision considering the First Amendment associational rights of teenagers at a dance hall. The Court upheld an ordinance imposing age limits on teen dance halls, ruling that gathering for recreational dancing is not an "expressive association" under the First Amendment..
 Background 
In 1985, the City of Dallas passed an ordinance allowing licensed businesses to open dance halls for teenagers. The ordinance created a new category of dance halls ("Class E" dance halls) where only youths age 14 to 18 could dance. The Twilight Skating Rink, operated by Charles M. Stanglin, opened a Class E dance hall. Stanglin divided the floor of the skating rink into two sections: a dance floor for youths ages 14 to 18, and a roller skating rink open to all ages.
Stanglin wished to broaden the clientele of his dance floor by opening it to all ages. He brought a lawsuit against the City of Dallas claiming that the age restriction violated the association rights of minors under the First Amendment. The Texas Court of Appeals sided with Stanglin, striking down the age limit.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a unanimous decision, the Supreme Court reversed the Texas Court of Appeals and upheld the age restrictions. Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote the majority opinion.
The Court analyzed the case under the framework of Roberts v. United States Jaycees.. In Jaycees, the Court had identified two types of associations that receive constitutional protection: "intimate associations" and "expressive associations." Stanglin argued that the dance hall patrons came together to form an expressive association.
The Court rejected this, writing that the dance hall patrons are "not members of any organized association"; indeed, "most are strangers to one another," and there is "no suggestion that these patrons take positions on public questions."Stanglin, 490 U.S. at 24–25. In addition, the Court ruled that recreational dancing is not inherently expressive activity protected by the First Amendment. While gathering together to dance does contain a "kernel of expression," "such a kernel is not sufficient to bring the activity within the protection the First Amendment."Stanglin, 490 U.S. at 25.
Because the Dallas ordinance impinges on "no constitutionally protected right," the only question is whether the age classification passes rational basis review under the Equal Protection Clause. The Court held that the City's interest in separating minors from the potential "corrupting influences" of "alcohol, illegal drugs, and promiscuous sex" justified imposing limits on dance-hall contacts between juveniles and adults.Stanglin, 490 U.S. at 26-27.
Justice John Paul Stevens concurred. He would have evaluated the case under the framework of substantive due process rather than the First Amendment, writing, "the opportunity to make friends and enjoy the company of other people — in a dance hall or elsewhere — is an aspect of liberty protected by the Fourteenth Amendment."Stanglin, 490 U.S. at 28 (Stevens, J., concurring). Nonetheless, Stevens agreed the ordinance was constitutional.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 490
 References 
External links
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Dalton v. Specter" ==> """
Dalton v. Specter, 511 U.S. 462 (1994), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that an Executive Order to shut down the Philadelphia Naval Base was not subject to judicial review.. In an opinion written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, the Court held that the decision to close the base was not subject to review under the Administrative Procedure Act because the decision to close the base did not constitute the final action of an agency.Dalton, 511 U.S. at 476. Additionally, the Court held that the decision to close the base, which was made pursuant to the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990,Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (1990 Act or Act), 104 Stat. 1808, as amended, note following 10 U.S.C. § 2687 (1988 ed., Supp. IV). was not subject to judicial review because the 1990 Act "commits decisionmaking to the discretion of the President".Dalton, 511 U.S. at 477.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 511
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Dames & Moore v. Regan" ==> """
Dames & Moore v. Regan, 453 U.S. 654 (1981), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with President Jimmy Carter's Executive Order 12170, which froze Iranian assets in the United States on November 14, 1979, in response to the Iran hostage crisis, which began on November 4, 1979.
Background
After the inauguration of Ronald Reagan on January 20, 1981, the Reagan administration agreed with Iran to terminate legal proceedings in US courts involving claims by US nationals against Iran, to nullify attachments against Iranian property entered by US courts to secure any judgments against Iran, and to transfer such claims from US courts to a new arbitration tribunal. The agreements were implemented by executive orders.
Holding
In an 8–1 decision, the opinion of the court was delivered by Justice William H. Rehnquist, which upheld the actions by the Carter administration and "dismissed a $3 million lawsuit from private firm Dames & Moore against Treasury Secretary Don Regan, filed to recover a debt incurred by the Shah of Iran's government."Wohlsetter, John (2011-03-02) Hostage Hell is a Civilized Country's Dilemma, Human Events. The Court found that the administration's actions were authorized by law by the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA). The Supreme Court also approved the suspension of claims filed in US courts even though no specific statutory provision authorized that step. In so doing, the Court relied on inferences drawn from related legislation, a history of congressional acquiescence in executive claims settlement practices, and past decisions recognizing broad executive authority. The Court also "substantially refined the applicable test" of the seminal 1952 case of Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. SawyerMcCarthy, Andrew (2010-02-04) ‘Merely Organized to Convict’, National Review. and cemented Justice Robert H. Jackson's concurring opinion in that case as "canonical".Griffin, Stephen (2008-10-10) A "Domestic" Case? Mysteries of Youngstown, Balkinization.
Rehnquist wrote the opinion in this "highly complex and historic case" in eight days.Denniston, Lyle (2009-12-10) WHR enters Court’s pantheon, SCOTUSblog.
Reaction
This decision has been criticized for taking "an exceptionally deferential view of executive power,"Liptak, Adam and Purdum, Todd (2005-07-31) As Clerk for Rehnquist, Nominee Stood Out for Conservative Rigor, The New York Times. particularly by relying on inferences from statutes that do not directly deal with certain subjects at hand and especially on legislative acquiescence in executive activity.
After Rehnquist's death, Justice John Paul Stevens cited Dames & Moore as one of his two favorite Rehnquist opinions, along with Leo Sheep Co. v. U.S.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 453
References
Further reading
External links
 Case Brief for Dames & Moore v. Regan at LawSchoolCaseBriefs.net
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:Executive orders of Ronald Reagan
Category:Sanctions against Iran
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Iran–United States relations
Category:United States sanctions
"""

From "Dan's City Used Cars, Inc. v. Pelkey" ==> """
Dan's City Used Cars, Inc. v. Pelkey, 569 U.S. 251 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that federal laws deregulating the transportation industry do not invalidate corresponding state provisions that regulate the seizure, storage, and sale of cars by towing companies.. Robert Pelkey sued Dan's City Used Cars under New Hampshire law for unlawfully selling his vehicle. A lower court raised doubts as to whether the New Hampshire statute was valid at all, as Dan's City argued it was pre-empted by federal deregulation law, specifically, the Federal Aviation Administration Authorization Act, and the case eventually arrived before the Supreme Court. Agreeing with Pelkey, the justices named several conditions necessary for federal law to override state transportation regulations and narrowed the range of state transport laws subject to pre-emption.
 See also 
2012 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
"""

From "Dandridge v. Williams" ==> """
Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471 (1970), was a United States Supreme Court case based on the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. It held that a state can cap welfare based on the Aid to Families with Dependent Children at $250.00 per month regardless of the family's size or need.. The plaintiffs were attempting to make the amount variable based on size.
Background of the case
Appellees, large-family recipients of benefits under the Aid to Families With Dependent Children (AFDC) program, brought this suit to enjoin the application of Maryland's maximum grant regulation as contravening the Social Security Act of 1935 and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Under the program, which is jointly financed by the Federal and State Governments, a State computes the "standard of need" of eligible family units. Under the Maryland regulation, though most families are provided aid in accordance with the standard of need, a ceiling of about $250 per month is imposed on an AFDC grant regardless of the size of the family and its actual need. The United States District Court for the District of Maryland held the regulation "invalid on its face for overreaching," and thus violative of the Equal Protection Clause.
The court's decision
The Supreme Court reversed the district court's ruling of the regulation being prohibited by the Social Security Act and its violating of the Equal Protection Clause. The standard of, "shall be furnished with reasonable promptness to all eligible individuals," laid out in the Social Security Act was not found to penalize large families, but instead to reduce all family grants, no matter the size. The Court also cited King v. Smith. as an example of how a state can appropriate funds, saying they recognize that Maryland is doing all they can in order to provide as much welfare as they can, therefore they are not violating the Social Security Act of 1935. In terms of the Equal Protection Clause, the Court found that the district court's ruling of "overreaching" was not relative to social and economic factors a state handles. The "overreaching" (or 'overbreadth' as the opinions called it) was only applicable in First Amendment related cases.Dandridge, 397 U.S. at 484-85.
Concurrences
In his concurrence, Justice Hugo Black added the point that as long as the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare recognizes that a state is doing all that it can in allocation, then that state can not be held liable for such low appropriations.Dandridge, 397 U.S. at 489 (Black, J., concurring). Also in concurrence, Justice John Harlan argued that a state's social and economic policies are not affected by such racial policies outlined in the Equal Protection Clause.Dandridge, 397 U.S. at 489 (Harlan, J., concurring).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 397
Shapiro v. Thompson, 
Katzenbach v. Morgan, 
King v. Smith, 
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1970 in United States case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Federal assistance in the United States
"""

From "Daniels v. United States" ==> """
Daniels v. United States, 531 U.S. 374 (2001), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving the Armed Career Criminal Act.  The Court ruled, in a 5–4 decision, that a defendant sentenced under that Act could not challenge previous convictions on appeal that were used to increase his new sentence.
Background and lower court proceedings
In 1994, Earthy D. Daniels, Jr., was convicted of being a felon in possession of a firearm. Under the Armed Career Criminal Act of 1984, which imposes a mandatory minimum 15-year sentence on anyone convicted of being a felon in possession of a firearm and who has three previous convictions for a violent felony, Daniels' sentence was enhanced.. After an unsuccessful appeal, Daniels filed a motion to vacate, set aside, or correct his federal sentence. Daniels argued that his sentence violated the Constitution because it was based in part on two prior convictions that were themselves unconstitutional. The District Court denied the motion. The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the decision, reasoning that they could only review those prior convictions if a Gideon violation was alleged.532 U.S. at 378. Daniels sought review in the Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the case.
The Court's decision
In an opinion delivered by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, the Supreme Court affirmed the lower courts' dismissal of Daniels' claim.  The Court stated that the nonexistent or unsuccessful pursuit of available challenges to the constitutionality of prior state convictions, which were used to enhance a federal sentence, precluded such challenge to collaterally attack a federal sentence. "[Daniels] could have pursued his claims while he was in custody on those convictions,"532 U.S. at 384. wrote Justice O'Connor for the majority. "As his counsel conceded at oral argument, there is no indication that [Daniels] did so or that he was prevented from doing so by some external force." Three other Justices agreed with the decision in full while Justice Antonin Scalia agreed with the understanding that Daniels, under different circumstances, could receive special review of prior convictions.532 U.S. at 386 (Scalia, J., concurring).
Dissent
Justice David H. Souter wrote a dissenting opinion, disagreeing with the majority's usage of the text of the Act in question.  Justice Stephen Breyer also filed a dissent, writing that the silence of a Congressional statute to discuss the implications of an enhanced sentence would allow for challenges to that enhanced sentence.
See also
 Criminal law
 Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution
 Lackawanna County District Attorney v. Coss (2001)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Armed Career Criminal Act case law
"""

From "Dann v. Johnston" ==> """
Dann v. Johnston, 425 U.S. 219 (1976), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court on the patentability of a claim for a business method patent..
Background
The claimed invention
The business method at issue in Johnston was claimed as a "machine system for automatic record-keeping of bank checks and deposits." Although the advance was claimed as a system, the invention was a method of creating records of bank checks for expenditures in different categories, such as rent, wages, cost of materials, etc. so that income taxes could more readily be calculated. The system involved such steps as imprinting machine-readable numbers on the individual checks, corresponding to the categories into which the expenditures fell; then the computer would periodically provide a check tabulation, broken down by each category. However, the claims were written in the form of a series of means for performing the steps of the method (in functional language). Accordingly, the claimed subject matter could be argued to be a "machine."See 
The Patent Office did not accept that argument and rejected the patent application. It said that Johnston wanted the Office to "grant a monopoly ... on a method of conducting the banking business."In re Johnston, 502 F.2d at 769. Johnston then appealed the rejection to the United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals (CCPA).
CCPA decision
The CCPA reversed the ruling of the Patent Office (3-2). The majority said that Johnston was claiming a machine, not a process, so that there would be no monopoly on the banking business if other banks used a different machine. The majority also held the Supreme Court's decision in Gottschalk v. Benson. inapplicable because that case involved a process patent while this case involved a machine.In re Johnston, 502 F.2d at 771.
Judge Giles Rich dissented on the ground that the Benson case had held a computer program patent ineligible and the machine format was immaterial: " 'Every competent patent draftsman' can draft claims to computer programs either as a process or a machine system."In re Johnston, 502 F.2d at 773. Another dissenting judge found the claimed invention obvious.
The CCPA reversed the Patent Office and the government sought review by the Supreme Court,
Proceedings in the Supreme Court
The government sought review on two questions: Whether the claimed business method was ineligible for patent protection, and whether the subject matter was obvious. The Court granted certiorari on both questions.
The great majority of the government's brief discussed reasons why the claimed invention was not patent eligible. A small portion addressed the obviousness issue.See Brief for the United States, Dann v. Johnston, 425 U.S. 219 (1976).
Justice Thurgood Marshall delivered the unanimous opinion of the seven-member Court.Justices Blackman and Stevens took no part in the decision. 425 U.S. at 230. The Court took notice of the prevalence, indeed ubiquity, of computers in the banking industry. That made computerization an obvious approach to the banking activities involved here. More important, the Dirks patent (claiming a computer-operated system for tracking expenses by category within each department of a business
organization) was too close in concept to Johnston's system.425 U.S. at 228-29. The Court explained:
[T]he mere existence of differences between the prior art and an invention does not establish the invention's nonobviousness. The gap between the prior art and respondent's system is simply not so great as to render the system nonobvious to one reasonably skilled in the art.425 U.S. at 230.
Subsequent developments
Until Bilski v. Kappos. and Alice Corp. v. CLS Bank International. about four decades later, Johnston was the only business-method patent case that the Supreme Court had so far decided. But the decision turns on obviousness rather than patent eligibility. Despite the fact that most of the pages of the government's brief on the merits were devoted to a discussion of why advances of the type claimed are not eligible to be considered for patentability, the Court declined to reach that question and instead simply found unanimously that the claimed system was obvious.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:United States Patent and Trademark Office
Category:Banking technology
"""

From "Darby v. Cisneros" ==> """
Darby v. Cisneros, 509 U.S. 137 (1993), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that federal courts cannot require that a plaintiff exhaust his administrative remedies before seeking judicial review when exhaustion of remedies is not required by either administrative rules or statute.
Facts of the case
R. Gordon Darby, a real estate developer in South Carolina, was banned from participating in Department of Housing and Urban Development programs for 18 months. He and others filed in federal court even though they had not exhausted the internal HUD review process. Henry Cisneros, as HUD Secretary, was the respondent.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 509
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
"""

From "Dart Cherokee Basin Operating Co. v. Owens" ==> """
Dart Cherokee Basin Operating Co. v. Owens, 574 U.S. 81 (2015), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States clarified procedures for removing a class action lawsuit from state court to federal court. The case involved a dispute about revenue from oil and gas leases in which the defendant filed a motion to remove the case from a state court in Kansas to the United States District Court for the District of Kansas. However, the plaintiff argued that the defendant's motion was defective because the defendant's notice of removal did not include evidence demonstrating that the amount in controversy satisfied the jurisdictional threshold. The United States District Court for the District of Kansas ultimately ruled the case should be returned to the state court, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit declined to review the district court's decision.
Writing for a majority of the Court, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg held that the defendant's notice of removal did not need to contain evidence of the amount in controversy because congress intended for courts to "apply the same liberal rules [to removal allegations] that are applied to other matters of pleading".Dart Cherokee Basin Operating Co. v. Owens, no. 13-719, 574 U.S. 81, slip op. at 4-5, 7 (2015) (citing H. R. Rep. No. 100–889, p. 71 (1988) (internal quotations omitted) (alteration in original). Justice Ginsburg also held that the Tenth Circuit abused its discretion by declining to review the district court's ruling.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 7-14. Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued the Court should dismiss the case as improvidently granted because the Court had "no basis" to determine whether the Tenth Circuit denied review for an impermissible reason.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 1, 7-8 (Scalia, J., dissenting). Justice Clarence Thomas also filed a separate dissenting opinion in which he argued the Supreme Court lacked jurisdiction to review the Tenth Circuit's ruling because the decision to deny review was not a "case".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 1-2 (Thomas, J., dissenting) (citing 28 U.S.C. § 1254). Although some commentators expressed concern that the Court's ruling would cause "damage to the law of review",Ronald Mann, Opinion analysis: Court stretches to correct anachronistic Tenth Circuit pleading rule,  (Dec. 16, 2014, 9:24 AM). others described it as a victory for attorneys who defend against class actions.Patrick H. Sims, Feature: Removing Diversity Cases: The Thrill Is Gone, 76  166, 169 (2015).
Background
Removal jurisdiction in federal courts
Title 28 of the United States Code outlines procedures for transferring a case from state court to federal court.28 U.S.C. § 1446. When a defendant files a motion to remove a case from a state court to a federal court, the defendant must file a notice of removal that contains "a short and plain statement of the grounds for removal".28 U.S.C. § 1446(a). If a defendant wishes to remove a case on the basis of diversity jurisdiction, the amount in controversy must be in excess of $5 million for class actions or $75,000 for all other cases.28 U.S.C. § 1332. Additionally, the Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 (CAFA) allows litigants in a class action "to remove to federal court any sizable class action involving minimal diversity of citizenship" in accordance with the provisions set forth in 28 U.S.C. § 1446.Smith v. Bayer Corp., 131 S. Ct. 2368, 2382 (2011). If the plaintiff's complaint specifies monetary damages, those damages are "deemed to be the amount in controversy", as long as they are asserted in good faith.28 U.S.C. § 1446(c)(2). If the complaint does not specify monetary damages, then the defendant may specify the amount in controversy in their notice of removal.28 U.S.C. § 1446(c)(2)(A).
Initial lawsuit
Brandon W. Owens filed a class action in the district court for Wilson County, Kansas to recover royalties that he claimed were owed to members of the class by Dart Cherokee Basin Operating Company, LLC, and Cherokee Basin Pipeline, LLC for oil and gas leases.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 2. Although he did not specify damages in his complaint, Owens requested "a fair and reasonable amount" to compensate the class for the alleged underpayments.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 2; Pet. for Cert., Dart Cherokee Basin Operating Co. v. Owens, No. 13-719 (Dec. 13, 2013) at 12-13. The defendants then filed a motion to remove the case to federal district court, in which they stated the "purported underpayments to putative class members totaled more than $8.2 million". In response, Owens filed a motion to return the case to the Kansas state court on the grounds that the defendants produced "no evidence" to prove the amount in controversy was actually over the $5 million threshold.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 2 (internal quotations omitted). To support their motion, the defendants submitted a deceleration by one of their executive officers that indicated the amount in controversy was over $11 million, but Owens argued this declaration came too late and that deficient notice of removal "could not be cured by post-removal evidence about the amount in controversy".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 3 (internal quotations omitted). The United States District Court for the District of Kansas ruled the case should be returned to the state court, citing circuit precedent that held "factual allegations or evidence outside of the petition and notice of removal is not permitted to determine the amount in controversy".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 3.
Appeal to the Tenth Circuit
Although orders returning cases to state courts usually cannot be reviewed on appeal,28 U.S.C. § 1447(d). federal circuit courts of appeals may consider appeals involving the Class Action Fairness Act.28 U.S.C. § 1453(c)(1). Dart Cherokee filed a petition for review pursuant to this exception in United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit, but the Tenth Circuit denied their petition. Dart Cherokee then filed a petition for en banc review, but a divided panel of Tenth Circuit judges denied Dart Cherokee's petition.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 3-4 (citing Dart Cherokee Basin Operating Co., LLC v. Owens, 730 F.3d 1234 (10th Cir. 2013)). Judge Harris Hartz filed an opinion dissenting from denial of review en banc, in which he argued the Tenth Circuit's requirements for notices of removal were "even more onerous than the code pleading requirements that I had thought the federal courts abandoned long ago".Dart Cherokee, 730 F.3d  at 1234. Judge Hartz concluded the Tenth Circuit had an "obligation" to grant review en banc "to provide clarity in this important area of the law".Dart Cherokee, 730 F.3d at 1238. After the Tenth Circuit denied review en banc, Dart Cherokee filed a petition for certiorari in the Supreme Court of the United States, which was granted on April 7, 2014.Dart Cherokee Basin Operating Co., LLC v. Owens, 134 S. Ct. 1788 (2014) (granting writ of certiorari). The Supreme Court later stated that the Court granted certiorari to resolve a circuit split.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 4 (citing Ellenburg v. Spartan Motors Chassis, Inc., 519 F.3d 192, 200 (4th Cir. 2008); Laughlin v. Kmart Corp., 50 F.3d 871, 873 (10th Cir. 1995)).
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|upright=1.0|In her majority opinion, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg (pictured) held that evidence of the amount in controversy only needs to be included in a defendant's notice of removal when the plaintiff or the court challenges the defendant's allegations.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 7.
Writing for a majority of the Court, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg held that a "short and plain" statement in a notice of removal need not contain evidentiary submissions.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 1-2, 14. Justice Ginsburg stated that the notice requirements in 28 U.S.C. § 1446 are modeled after the general pleading requirements in Rule 8(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, and that congress intended for courts to "apply the same liberal rules [to removal allegations] that are applied to other matters of pleading".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 4-5 (citing H. R. Rep. No. 100–889, p. 71 (1988) (internal quotations omitted) (alteration in original). Because a plaintiff's "amount-in-controversy allegation is accepted if made in good faith," Justice Ginsburg argued that "when a defendant seeks federal-court adjudication, the defendant’s amount-in-controversy allegation should be accepted when not contested by the plaintiff or questioned by the court".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 5. Justice Ginsburg also noted that 28 U.S.C. § 1446 includes procedures for resolving disputes about amounts in controversy, but those procedures are only available "after the defendant files a notice of removal".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 6-7 (emphasis in original). Although Justice Ginsburg declined to consider whether a "presumption" against removal is proper in "mine-run diversity cases", Justice Ginsburg observed that "no antiremoval presumption attends cases invoking CAFA, which Congress enacted to facilitate adjudication of certain class actions in federal court".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 7 (citing S. Rep. No. 109–14, p. 43 (2005)). Therefore, Justice Ginsburg Concluded that evidence of the amount in controversy only needs to be included in a defendant's notice of removal when the plaintiff or the court challenges the defendant's allegations.
Justice Ginsburg also responded to an amicus brief filed by Public Citizen, Inc., which argued that the Tenth Circuit acted within its discretion when it decided to decline review because 28 U.S.C. § 1453(c)(1) states that "a court of appeals may accept an appeal from an order of a district court granting or denying a motion to remand a class action to the State court from which it was removed".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 7-8 (quoting 28 U.S.C. § 1453(c)(1)) (internal quotation marks omitted) (emphasis in Justice Ginsburg's opinion). She concluded that there was "no jurisdictional barrier to our settlement of the question presented".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 8. Justice Ginsburg emphasized that Tenth Circuit's decision to deny Dart Cherokee's petition to review the remand order "was infected by legal error".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 11. Because the Tenth Circuit "froze the governing rule in the Circuit for this case and future CAFA removal notices" and denied Dart Cherokee the opportunity to "resist making the evidentiary submission", Justice Ginsburg held the Tenth Circuit's abused its decision by denying review.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 12-13. Justice Ginsburg concluded by stating that the Supreme Court "no doubt [has] authority to review for abuse of discretion the Tenth Circuit’s denial of Dart’s appeal from the District Court’s remand order".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 13-14.
Justice Scalia's dissenting opinion
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion in which he was joined by Justice Anthony Kennedy and Justice Elena Kagan.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 1 (Scalia, J., dissenting). Justice Clarence Thomas also joined all but the last sentence of the opinion. Although Justice Scalia recognized that the Supreme Court granted certiorari to decide whether notices of removal must contain evidentiary support, he argued the Court should dismiss the case as improvidently granted in light of the fact that the issue the Court granted certiorari to review was not properly before the Court.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 1-2 (Scalia, J., dissenting). Because the Court was reviewing the Tenth Circuit's decision to deny review, Justice Scalia explained that "the only question before us is whether the Tenth Circuit abused its discretion in denying Dart permission to appeal the District Court’s remand order".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 2 (Scalia, J., dissenting). Justice Scalia argued that the majority impermissibly concluded the Tenth Circuit denied review because it agreed with the District Court's legal analysis. Instead, Justice Scalia suggested the Tenth Circuit may have denied review for a legally permissible reason, and it would be inappropriate to assume that a court adopted a party's erroneous reasoning.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 2-3, 4-5 (Scalia, J., dissenting) (citing Sprint/United Management Co. v. Mendelsohn, . In the final sentence of his opinion, Justice Scalia argued that because the Court failed to dismiss the case as improvidently granted, it should have affirmed the Tenth Circuit's decision to deny review "since we have absolutely no basis for concluding that it abused its discretion".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 7-8 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
Justice Thomas' dissenting opinion
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a separate dissenting opinion in which he argued that the Supreme Court lacks jurisdiction "to review even the Court of Appeals' denial of permission to appeal".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 1 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Justice Thomas noted that federal statutory law permits the Supreme Court to review "[c]ases in the courts of appeals",See 28 U.S.C. § 1254. but he argued an application for permission to appeal a remand order is not a "case" because "it does not assert a grievance against anyone, does not seek remedy or redress for any legal injury, and does not even require a 'party' on the other side".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 1 (Thomas, J., dissenting) (internal quotations and citations omitted). He concluded that no "osmosis could transform an application for permission to appeal a remand order into a case".Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 2 (Thomas, J., dissenting) (internal quotations omitted). Additionally, Justice Thomas also criticized the majority opinion for extending precedent that held certificates of appealability in federal habeas corpus cases should be considered "cases" for the purpose of appellate jurisdiction.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 1-2 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Because the Tenth Circuit did not decide a "case", Justice Thomas concluded that the Court should dismiss the case for lack of jurisdiction.Dart Cherokee, slip op. at 2 (Thomas, J., dissenting).
Commentary and analysis
Commentators have described the Court's ruling in Dart Cherokee as a victory for attorneys who defend against class actions.See, e.g., Patrick H. Sims, Feature: Removing Diversity Cases: The Thrill Is Gone, 76  166, 169 (2015). Patrick H. Sims described the case as a "stress reliever" and noted that it "contains language that is rhapsodic to a prospective removing defendant's lawyer, both specifically as to the issue of jurisdictional amount and as to removal notices in general". Mark Moller suggested that "[t]he Court's affirmance in Dart that CAFA's findings section overcomes any 'antiremoval presumption with respect to CAFA' may presage a significant narrowing of some [CAFA] loopholes".Mark Moller, The Class Action After a Decade of Roberts Court Decisions: The New Class Action Federalism, 48  861, 871-72 (2015). Jessica K. Pruitt also observed that the Court's ruling in Dart Cherokee "effectively expands" the Court's 2013 ruling in Standard Fire Insurance Co. v. Knowles,Standard Fire Ins. Co. v. Knowles, 133 S. Ct. 1345 (2013). a case in which the Supreme Court held that plaintiffs in a class action could not avoid federal court jurisdiction by stipulating that damages would be less than the $5 million threshold set by CAFA.Jessica K. Pruitt, "CAFA-nated": A Jittery Interpretation of Forum Selection in Standard Fire Insurance Co. v. Knowles, 68  511, 529 (2015). However, Ronald Mann wrote that the decision in Dart Cherokee may actually force the Court to spend "several years repairing the damage to the law of review, steadily limiting the broad review of discretion applied here".
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 574
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2014 in United States case law
"""

From "Dartmouth College v. Woodward" ==> """
Trustees of Dartmouth College v. Woodward, 17 U.S. (4 Wheat.) 518 (1819), was a landmark decision in United States corporate law from the United States Supreme Court dealing with the application of the Contracts Clause of the United States Constitution to private corporations. The case arose when the president of Dartmouth College was deposed by its trustees, leading to the New Hampshire legislature attempting to force the college to become a public institution and thereby place the ability to appoint trustees in the hands of the governor of New Hampshire. The Supreme Court upheld the sanctity of the original charter of the college, which pre-dated the creation of the State..
The decision settled the nature of public versus private charters and resulted in the rise of the American business corporation and the  American free enterprise system.
Background
In 1770 King George III of  Great Britain granted a charter to Dartmouth College. This document spelled out the purpose of the school, set up the structure to govern it, and gave land to the college. In 1816, over thirty years after the conclusion of the American Revolution, the legislature of New Hampshire altered Dartmouth's charter in order to reinstate the College's deposed president, place the ability to appoint positions in the hands of the governor, add new members to the board of trustees, and create a state board of visitors with veto power over trustee decisions. This effectively converted the school from a private to a public institution. The College's book of records, corporate seal, and other corporate property were removed. The trustees of the College objected and sought to have the actions of the legislature declared unconstitutional.
The trustees retained Dartmouth alumnus Daniel Webster, a New Hampshire native who would later become a U.S. Senator for Massachusetts and Secretary of State under President Millard Fillmore. Webster argued the college's case against William H. Woodward, the state-approved secretary of the new board of trustees. Webster's speech in support of Dartmouth (which he described as "a small college," adding, "and yet there are those who love it") was so moving that it apparently helped convince Chief Justice John Marshall.
Judgment
The decision, handed down on February 2, 1819, ruled in favor of the college and invalidated the act of the New Hampshire Legislature, which in turn allowed Dartmouth to continue as a private institution and take back its buildings, seal, and charter. The majority opinion of the court was written by John Marshall. The opinion reaffirmed Marshall's belief in the sanctity of a contract (also seen in Fletcher v. Peck) as necessary to the functioning of a republic (in the absence of royal rule, contracts rule).
The Court ruled that the college's corporate charter qualified as a contract between private parties, the King and the trustees, with which the legislature could not interfere. Even though the United States were no longer royal colonies, the contract was still valid because the Constitution said that a state could not pass laws to impair a contract. The fact that the government had commissioned the charter did not transform the school into a civil institution. Chief Justice Marshall's opinion emphasized that the term "contract" referred to transactions involving individual property rights, not to "the political relations between the government and its citizens."The Oyez Project, "Dartmouth College v. Woodward", 17 U.S. 518 (1819)]
Significance
The decision was not without precedent, earlier the Court had invalidated a state act in Fletcher v. Peck (1810),. concluding that contracts, no matter how they were procured (in that case, a land contract had been illegally obtained), cannot be invalidated by state legislation. Fletcher was not a popular decision at the time, and a public outcry ensued. Thomas Jefferson's earlier commiseration with New Hampshire Governor William Plumer stated essentially that the earth belongs to the living. Popular opinion influenced some state courts and legislatures to declare that state governments had an absolute right to amend or repeal a corporate charter. The courts, however, have imposed limitations to this.
After the Dartmouth decision, many states wanted more control so they passed laws or constitutional amendments giving themselves the general right to alter or revoke at will, which the courts found to be a valid reservation... The courts had established, however, that the alteration or revocation of private charters or laws authorizing private charters must be reasonable and cannot cause harm to the members (founders, stockholders, and the like)....
The traditional view holds that this case is one of the most important Supreme Court rulings, strengthening the Contracts Clause and limiting the power of the States to interfere with private charters, including those of commercial enterprises.
 See also 
 United States corporate law
 Dartmouth College
 John Marshall
 Contract Clause
 Special district (United States)
 Pennsylvania College Cases 80 U.S. 190 (1871)
 Case of Sutton's Hospital (1612) 77 Eng Rep 960
Phillips v Bury, 1 Ld Raym 5; 2 TR 346, Lord Holt
Attorney-General v Pearce, 2 Atk 87, Lord Hardwicke
John Wheelock
 Notes 
 External links 
v. Woodward
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States corporate case law
Category:1819 in United States case law
Category:Contract Clause case law
Category:Legal history of New Hampshire
Category:Corporate personhood
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Dastar Corp. v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp." ==> """
Dastar Corp. v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., 539 U.S. 23 (2003), was a copyright and trademark case of the Supreme Court of the United States involving the applicability of the Lanham Act to a work in the public domain.. 
In 1948, Fox obtained exclusive rights to create a TV series, Crusade in Europe, based on a book of the same name by Dwight Eisenhower. The show entered the public domain in 1977. In 1995, Dastar copied the original TV series, edited them, and sold them as World War II Campaigns in Europe without mentioning the original book or producers. Fox sued for copyright infringement and reverse passing off under the Lanham Act. The district court ruled in favor of Fox, but the Court of Appeals reversed the copyright claim and upheld the reverse passing off ruling.
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled 8-0 in favor of Dastar, stating that claims about authorship cannot be used to circumvent the time limit on exclusive ownership of a copyright or patent. Justice Scalia argued that allowing restrictions on public domain works would create a "species of perpetual patent and copyright." The case was seen as a reassurance that works outside of copyright were free to use. On remand, the district court dismissed Fox's Lanham Act claims but determined that Dastar had infringed on the copyright of Eisenhower's book.
Background
In 1948, Fox obtained the exclusive rights to create a television series, Crusade in Europe, based on a 1948 book Crusade in Europe, written by Dwight Eisenhower and published by Doubleday.  The 26-episode series showed World War II film footage from the US military and other sources, with a voice soundtrack based on a narration of the book. In 1975, Doubleday renewed the copyright on the book. Fox, however, did not renew the copyright on the TV series and so the show entered the public domain in 1977.
In 1988, Fox reacquired the television rights to the book and licensed it to other companies the right to distribute Crusade in Europe on video. In 1995, Dastar purchased Betacam videotapes of the original TV series, copied the tapes, edited them to about half the original length, created new packaging, and sold the TV series as World War II Campaigns in Europe. The new videotapes and advertising mentioned Dastar and its employees as the producer but did not mention the original Crusade in Europe book, TV series, or producers.
Fox sued in 1998 by claiming that Dastar had infringed the copyright to the Crusade in Europe book and that under the Lanham Act, it had illegally done a "reverse passing off" by passing off the work of others as its own work. The district court found for Fox and awarded it double the profits that Dastar had made. The Court of Appeals reversed the copyright claim and sent it back to the district court on remand, but it upheld the "reverse passing off" Lanham Act ruling and affirmed the award of double the profits.
Decision
The U.S. Supreme Court, ruling only on the "reverse passing off" claim, reversed the decisions of the appeals court and district court, ruling 8–0 in favor of Dastar. The Court reasoned that although the Lanham Act forbids a reverse passing off, the rule regarding the misuse of trademarks is trumped by the fact that once a copyrighted work (or even a patented invention) enters into the public domain, anyone in the public may do anything with the work, with or without attribution to the author.
Justice Antonin Scalia, writing in the decision, noted that the Court in the past has held that the Lanham Act "does not exist to reward manufacturers for their innovation in creating a particular device; that is the purpose of the patent law and its period of exclusivity." Therefore, claims about authorship cannot be used as an end-run around the underlying philosophy of a time limit on exclusive ownership of a copyright or patent. Allowing such restrictions on a public domain work would serve, Scalia wrote, "to create a species of mutant copyright law that limits the public's 'federal right to "copy and to use"' expired copyrights," and that would effectively create "a species of perpetual patent and copyright, which Congress may not do," according to Article I of the US Constitution.
Scalia noted that if Dastar had instead purchased the post-1988 videotapes and copied them, that would have been a clear copyright infringement.
Analysis
In reconciling this case with the earlier Eldred v. Ashcroft, Kurt M. Saunders considered Dastar a reassurance from the Supreme Court that, although Eldred said Congress was free to extend copyright durations, a work outside of copyright was free to use.
Subsequent history
On remand, the district court, after the Supreme Court's ruling, dismissed Twentieth Century Fox's Lanham Act claims as well as analogous California state law unfair competition claims. The only remaining issue was whether the plaintiffs had a copyright in the underlying work, Eisenhower's book Crusade in Europe. The district court held a bench trial and determined that the plaintiffs owned a valid copyright in the book and that Dastar had infringed that copyright by including portions of the book's narrative in its film version.  Dastar appealed, but the Ninth Circuit affirmed.Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. v. Entertainment Distributing, 429 F.3d at 876.
See also
List of leading legal cases in copyright law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 539
List of United States Supreme Court cases
 (also had legal issues relating to an out-of-copyright adaptation of a work still under copyright)
 References 
External links
Category:United States trademark case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:20th Century Fox litigation
Category:Public domain in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc." ==> """
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993), is a United States Supreme Court case determining the standard for admitting expert testimony in federal courts. In Daubert, the Court held that the enactment of the Federal Rules of Evidence implicitly overturned the Frye standard; the standard that the Court articulated is referred to as the Daubert standard.
Facts
Jason Daubert and Eric Schuller were born with serious birth defects. They and their parents sued Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc., a subsidiary of Dow Chemical Company, in a California District Court, claiming that the drug Bendectin had caused the birth defects. Merrell Dow moved the case to federal court, and then moved for summary judgment because their expert submitted documents showing that no published scientific study demonstrated a link between Bendectin and birth defects in humans. Daubert and Schuller submitted expert evidence of their own that suggested that Bendectin could cause birth defects. Daubert and Schuller's evidence, however, was based on in vitro and in vivo animal studies, pharmacological studies, and reanalysis of other published studies, and these methodologies had not yet gained acceptance within the general scientific community.
The district court granted summary judgment for Merrell Dow, and Daubert and Schuller appealed to the Ninth Circuit. The Ninth Circuit found the district court correctly granted summary judgment because the plaintiffs' proffered evidence had not yet been accepted as a reliable technique by scientists who had had an opportunity to scrutinize and verify the methods used by those scientists. Furthermore, the Ninth Circuit was skeptical of the fact that the plaintiffs' evidence appeared to be generated in preparation for litigation. Without their proffered evidence, the Ninth Circuit doubted that the plaintiffs could prove at a trial that the Bendectin had caused their birth defects.
Majority opinion
Prior law
In a 1923 case, Frye v. United States, 293 F. 1013 (D.C. Cir. 1923), the D.C. Circuit held that evidence could be admitted in court only if "the thing from which the deduction is made" is "sufficiently established to have gained general acceptance in the particular field in which it belongs." Frye dealt with a systolic blood pressure deception test, a "crude precursor" to the polygraph. In 1923, this blood pressure test was not widely accepted among scientists, and so the Frye court ruled it could not be used in court. Over the years, scholars disputed the proper scope and application of the Frye test.
The plaintiffs successfully argued that after Congress adopted the Federal Rules of Evidence in 1975, Frye was no longer the governing standard for admitting scientific evidence in trials held in federal court. The Supreme Court agreed and had already ruled that where common law rules conflicted with provisions of the Rules, the enactment of the Rules had the effect of supplanting the common law. Frye had remained part of the federal common law of evidence because it was decided almost 50 years before the Rules were enacted, but the text of the Rules did not suggest a congressional intent to keep the Frye rule, so the Court reasoned that Frye was no longer the rule.
Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence provides (in part):
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education, may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise...
The text of Rule 702 did not make admissibility of expert testimony depend on general acceptance, and there was no evidence that Congress intended to incorporate a general acceptance standard into Rule 702. "Given the Rules' permissive backdrop and their inclusion of a specific rule on expert testimony that does not mention 'general acceptance,' the assertion that the Rules somehow assimilated Frye is unconvincing. Frye made 'general acceptance' the exclusive test for admitting expert testimony. That austere standard, absent from, and incompatible with, the Federal Rules of Evidence, should not be applied in federal trials.".
The standard governing expert testimony
Three key provisions of the Rules governed admission of expert testimony in court. First, scientific knowledge, meaning that the testimony must be scientific in nature and must be grounded in "knowledge." Since science cannot claim absolute certainty, instead representing "a process for proposing and refining theoretical explanations about the world that are subject to further testing and refinement," Rule 702 defines "scientific knowledge" as arising from the scientific method.
Second, the scientific knowledge must assist the trier of fact in understanding the evidence or determining a fact in issue in the case. The trier of fact is often either a jury or a judge; but other fact finders may exist within the contemplation of the federal rules of evidence.See, in pertinent part, Federal Rule of Evidence 101 (Apr. 22, 1993, eff. Dec. 1, 1993); Federal Rule of Evidence 1101 & annotations thereto (Apr. 22, 1993, eff. Dec. 1, 1993). To be helpful to the trier of fact, there must be a "valid scientific connection to the pertinent inquiry as a prerequisite to admissibility." For example, although it is within the purview of scientific knowledge, knowing whether the moon was full on a given night does not typically assist the trier of fact in knowing whether a person was sane when he or she committed a given act.
Third, the Rules expressly provided that the judge would make the threshold determinationSee Federal Rule of Evidence 104(a) (Apr. 22, 1993, eff. Dec. 1, 1993). regarding whether certain scientific knowledge would indeed assist the trier of fact in the manner contemplated by Rule 702. "This entails a preliminary assessment of whether the reasoning or methodology underlying the testimony is scientifically valid and of whether that reasoning or methodology properly can be applied to the facts in issue." This preliminary assessment can turn on whether something has been tested, whether an idea has been subjected to scientific peer review or published in scientific journals, the rate of error involved in the technique, and even general acceptance, among other things. It focuses on methodology and principles, not the ultimate conclusions generated.
The Court stressed that the new standard under Rule 702 was rooted in the judicial process and intended to be distinct and separate from the search for scientific truth. "Scientific conclusions are subject to perpetual revision. Law, on the other hand, must resolve disputes finally and quickly. The scientific project is advanced by broad and wide-ranging consideration of a multitude of hypotheses, for those that are incorrect will eventually be shown to be so, and that in itself is an advance." Rule 702 was intended to resolve legal disputes and, thus, had to be interpreted in conjunction with other rules of evidence and with other legal means of ending those disputes.
Cross examination within the adversary process is adequate to help legal decision makers arrive at efficient ends to disputes. "We recognize that, in practice, a gatekeeping role for the judge, no matter how flexible, inevitably on occasion will prevent the jury from learning of authentic insights and innovations. That, nevertheless, is the balance that is struck by Rules of Evidence designed not for the exhaustive search for cosmic understanding but for the particularized resolution of legal disputes."
Aftermath
The Supreme Court reversed, and remanded the case to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. On remand, the court analyzed the case under the new standard, upholding the district court's original grant of summary judgement for the defendant. Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 43 F. 3d 1311 - Court of Appeals, 9th Circuit 1995
After Daubert, it was expected that the range of scientific opinion evidence used in court would be expanded. However, courts have strictly applied the standards in Daubert, and it has generally been successful in excluding "junk science" or "pseudoscience", as well as new or experimental techniques and research that the decision might have been expected to deem admissible.
Discerning between science and "pseudoscience" was the theme of a book by Karl Popper whose summary was quoted in Daubert: "the criterion of the scientific status of a theory is its falsifiability, or refutability, or testability." The book, Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge (5th ed. 1989), pp. 34–57, explains how psychology is more like astrology than astronomy because it does not make predictions about an individual which are falsifiable. He wrote that "the impressive thing about" Einstein's predictions "is the risk involved...If observation shows that the predicted effect is definitely absent, then the theory is simply refuted." But "it was impossible to describe a human behaviour" which would be accepted as proving psychology false.
The considerations in Daubert do not all have to be met for the evidence to be admitted. It is necessary only that the majority of the tests be substantially complied with.
The principle in Daubert was expanded in Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael (1999), where the evidence in question was from a technician and not a scientist. The technician was going to testify that the only possible cause of a tire blowout must have been a manufacturing defect, as he could not determine any other possible cause. The Court of Appeal had admitted the evidence on the assumption that Daubert did not apply to technical evidence, only scientific evidence. The Supreme Court reversed, saying that the standard in Daubert could apply to merely technical evidence, but that in this case, the evidence of the proposed expert did not meet the standard.
Pronunciation of Daubert
While not a matter of law, there has been disagreement over the pronunciation of the plaintiff's surname. Michael H. Gottesman, Jason Daubert's attorney, reports that Daubert and his family do not use the French pronunciation, which would sound similar to "dough-bear" . Rather, they pronounce their family name in the same manner as Dow-Burt.Gottesman, Michael. "Admissibility of Expert Testimony After Daubert: The "Prestige" Factor", 43 Emory L.J. 867, 867 (1994). Retrieved on 2009-01-13 The popular use of the French pronunciation may have arisen from Gottesman refraining from correcting the justices during oral argument before the Supreme Court.
The Yale Law Pronouncing Dictionary gives different guidance and quotes Jason Daubert himself. He related in a letter to Peter Nordberg, who was working on his blog, "A Definitive Solution to the Pronunciation Riddle", BLOG 702, Jan. 30, 2006 ("Jason Daubert writes ... 'DAW-bert' [] is how I pronounce it, if that helps!").
See also
Bendectin
Daubert Standard
Expert witness
Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael (1995)
Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc. v. Thompson (1986)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 509
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
External links
 Amicus brief of Atlantic Legal Foundation in support of Merrell Dow
 Daubert Institute for Science & Law
 Daubert-The Most Influential Supreme Court Decision You've Never Heard of
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Federal Rules of Evidence case law
Category:United States expert witness case law
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:Dow Chemical Company
"""

From "Davenport v. Dows" ==> """
Davenport v. Dows, 85 U.S. (18 Wall.) 626 (1873), is a US corporate law case concerning the derivative suits in Delaware..
Facts
Judgment
Justice Davis said the following.Davenport, 85 U.S. (18 Wall.) at 627
See also
United States corporate law
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:United States corporate case law
Category:1873 in United States case law
"""

From "Davenport v. Washington Education Ass'n" ==> """
Davenport v. Washington Education Association, 551 U.S. 177 (2007), is a ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held that it does not violate the First Amendment for a state to require its public-sector unions to receive affirmative authorization from a non-member before spending that nonmember's agency fees for election-related purposes.
Background of the case
The National Labor Relations Act, as amended, allows unions to require that non-union members pay agency fees to cover collective bargaining costs and prevent free rider problems. The Supreme Court has ruled in a number of cases that requiring non-members to pay agency fees is both constitutional and legal, provided a number of conditions are met. In Railway Employes' Dept. v. Hanson, 351 U.S. 225 (1956).Kearney, Richard C. and Carnevale, David G. Labor Relations in the Public Sector. 3rd ed. New York: CRC Press, 2001. Railway Employes' Dept. v. Hanson, 351 U.S. 225 (1956). the Court held that the agency shop provisions of the Railway Labor Act were constitutional,Kohler, Thomas C. "Setting the Conditions for Self-Rule: Unions, Associations, Our First Amendment Discourse and the Problem of DeBartolo." Wisconsin Law Review. 1990:149 (January 1990/February 1990). but withheld judgment as to "the validity or enforceability of a union or closed shop agreement if other conditions of union membership are imposed or if the exaction of dues, initiation fees or assessments is used as a cover for forcing ideological conformity or other action in contravention of the First or the Fifth Amendment."Railway Employes' Dept. v. Hanson, 351 U.S. 225, 238. Five years later, in Machinists v. Street, 367 U.S. 740 (1961), the Court held that the Railway Labor Act "denies the authority to a union, over the employee's objection, to spend his money for political causes which he opposes."Machinists v. Street, 367 U.S. 740, 749.
The high court also confronted the issue of remedy (how can non-members challenge the calculation of agency fees) in Machinists v. Street, and outlined several options which unions and employers might adopt (as well as rejecting remedies which the district court in the case had chosen).Machinists v. Street, 367 U.S. 740, 771-775.  Making its first private sector ruling in NLRB v. General Motors Corp., 373 U.S. 734 (1963), the Court held that agency fees equal to dues are not prohibited by the National Labor Relations Act.NLRB v. General Motors Corp., 373 U.S. 734 (1963).Canfield, Jeff. "Note: What A Sham(e): The Broken Becks Rights System in the Real World Workplace." Wayne Law Review. 47:1049 (Fall 2001). Nonetheless, in Retail Clerks v. Schermerhorn, 373 U.S. 746 (1963), the Court questioned whether an agency fee set at a level equal to member dues was unfair because it set collective bargaining fees higher for non-members than for members."...if nonmember payments, equal to those of a member, go entirely for collective bargaining costs, the nonmember will pay more of these expenses than his pro rata share. The member will pay less and to that extent a portion of his fees and dues is available to pay institutional expenses. The union's budget is balanced. By paying a larger share of collective bargaining costs the nonmember subsidizes the union's institutional activities. Retail Clerks v. Schermerhorn, 373 U.S. 746, 754. After reargument, however, the Court in Retail Clerks v. Schermerhorn, 375 U.S. 96 (1963), did not reach the issue again and instead decided the case on narrow procedural grounds (concluding that Florida's right-to-work law outlawed the union shop provision at issue).Retail Clerks v. Schermerhorn, 375 U.S. 96 (1963).Twomey, David. Labor and Employment Law: Text & Cases. 14th ed. Florence, Ky.: Cengage Learning, 2009.  The Court further elaborated on the issue of remedies in Railway Clerks v. Allen, 373 U.S. 113 (1963), allowing agency fee payers to opt out of all political expenditures rather than enunciate specific examples, but refusing to allow non-members to act as a class.Railway Clerks v. Allen, 373 U.S. 113 (1963).
The Supreme Court extended its constitutional and equity analysis to public employees in Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, 431 U.S. 209 (1977) (since overturned in 2018, see Janus v. AFSCME), holding that, where public employee collective bargaining exists and agency fee clauses are clearly authorized by law, public employee agency fee mechanisms also are constitutional.Carelli, Richard. "Ruling Eases Non-Union Dues Payments." Associated Press. June 29, 1988.Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, 431 U.S. 209 (1977). In Ellis v. Railway Clerks, 466 U.S. 435 (1984), the Supreme Court concluded that the agency fee may only cover those activities directly related to the union's role as a collective bargaining representative.  These included national conventions (where dues levels were set and union programs debated and established), social activities (which enhanced union solidarity, especially during negotiations), grievance handling, contract negotiation costs, and union communications, but excluded union organizing activities.Perl, Peter. "The Case of the Reluctant Union Contributor." Washington Post. November 2, 1984.Belman, Dale; Gunderson, Morley; and Hyatt, Douglas. Public Sector Employment in a Time of Transition. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1996. Ellis v. Railway Clerks, 466 U.S. 435 (1984) The Court in Ellis also wrestled with the issue of rebates, and concluded that a union could not simply rebate agency fees to workers for that would essentially constitute a forced, interest-free loan from the worker to the union.
In 1985, the Court held in Pattern Makers v. NLRB, 473 U.S. 95, that a union member may resign at any time without notice.Pattern Makers v. NLRB, 473 U.S. 95 (1985). Pattern Makers further undermined the union shop by giving workers the right to resign from the union at any time and incur no penalty (such as termination).  The Court also crafted additional rules regarding agency fees in Teachers v. Hudson, 475 U.S. 292 (1986). In Teachers, the union had failed to minimize the risk that agency fees might be used for impermissible purposes and had failed to provide agency fee payers with adequate information about how the agency fee was calculated.Teachers v. Hudson, 475 U.S. 292, 304-309. Now the Supreme Court imposed a third requirement, that agency fee payers must be offered a timely, fair, and objective mechanism for challenging the computation of agency fees. The Court did uphold, however, the use of interest-bearing escrow accounts for holding disputed dues.Teachers v. Hudson, 475 U.S. 292, 309-310.
In 1992, voters in the state of Washington approved a ballot initiative that requires unions to receive permission from non-union members to use their fees to support political campaigns.Kochkodin, Michael C. "Comment: A Good Politician Is One That Stays Bought: An Examination of Paycheck Protection Acts & Their Impact on Union Political Campaign Spending." University of Pennsylvania Journal of Labor and Employment Law. 2:807 (Spring 2000). This included getting each person's approval even for soft money expenditures, an issue not previously covered in Supreme Court rulings. Gary Davenport, a non-union member and state worker, and other state employees sued, contending that the union failed to secure their approval before spending their agency fees on political efforts.
A lawsuit was filed against the Washington Education Association by Washington Attorney General Christine Gregoire.  The Thurston County, Washington Superior Court ruled that the union had to pay $590,375 in fines for intentionally violating the Washington statute.  On appeal, the Washington Court of Appeals ruled 2-1 that section 760 of the Washington Fair Campaign Practices Act had violated the First Amendment of the Constitution by placing the speech of union members as more valuable than teachers.  However, the case was then appealed to the Washington Supreme Court, which ruled in favor of the union stating that the law was unconstitutional because it placed too large of an administrative burden on the union.  Therefore, non-union members could not prevent the union from using their money for political campaign purposes.
In 2006, the United States Supreme Court agreed to hear the case.  Oral argument was held on January 10, 2007 and the Court reached a decision on June 14, 2007.Davenport v. Washington Education Association, 551 U.S. 177.
The court's decision
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote the decision for a unanimous Court, and overturned the previous Washington Supreme Court's ruling. Justice Scalia outlined two reasons why the Court believed that the Washington statute was constitutional:
Breyer's concurrence
In a concurring opinion, Justice Stephen Breyer agreed with all aspects of Justice Scalia's opinion except for the respondent's arguments that had not been raised in lower courts. This criticism is one of procedure and not content. Justice Breyer believed that the lower courts should have addressed these arguments before they were heard by the Supreme Court.
Impact
The Davenport ruling was moot the moment it was issued, for the Washington state legislature had, before the ruling was handed down, changed the law to make it far easier for unions to comply with its provisions.Himebaugh, Daniel A. "Consider the Source: A Note on Public-Sector Union Expenditure Restrictions Upheld in Davenport v. Washington Education Association." Journal of the National Association of Administrative Law Judiciary. 28:533 (Fall 2008).
Nonetheless, legal scholars have been highly critical of the Supreme Court's ruling in Davenport. As one legal scholar (who is highly critical of the agency fee), has said, "Correctly understood, this decision promises little and delivers even less because it fails to deal decisively and comprehensively with the issues that both earlier private sector and public sector union dues disputes illuminated but failed to settle."Hutchison, Harry G. "Reclaiming the Union Movement Through Union Dues? A Postmodern Perspective in the Mirror of Public Choice Theory." University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform. 33:447 (2000). (Footnotes omitted) Other legal scholars have criticized Justice Scalia's judicial reasoning in Davenport, concluding that he should have ruled solely on First Amendment grounds and overturned the agency fee law entirely.Jaffe, Erik S. "Campaign Finance and Free Speech: When Easy Cases Make Bad Law: Davenport v. Washington Education Association and Washington v. Washington." Cato Supreme Court Review. 2006-07:115 (2006/2007).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:Legal history of Washington (state)
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:2007 in Washington (state)
Category:National Education Association
"""

From "Davidson v. City of New Orleans" ==> """
Davidson v. New Orleans, 96 U.S. 97 (1878), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld a Louisiana statute that provided for special assessments against property for drainage purposes.Varat, J.D. et al.  Constitutional Law Cases and Materials, Concise Thirteenth Edition.  Foundation Press, New York, NY: 2009, p. 359
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1878 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
"""

From "Davis v. Alexander" ==> """
Davis v Alexander, 269 U.S. 114 (1925), is a US corporate law case, concerning the duties of parent corporations for actions of subsidiaries.. 
Facts
Cattle were negligently injured while being transported from New Mexico to Oklahoma City.
Judgment
The Supreme Court held the federal government was liable for torts of a railroad subsidiary.
Justice Brandeis, writing for a unanimous court, said the following:
See also
US corporate law
References
External links
Category:1925 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States corporate case law
"""

From "Davis v. Ayala" ==> """
Davis v. Ayala, 576 U.S. 257 (2015), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States upheld a death sentence of a Hispanic defendant despite the fact that all Blacks and Hispanics were rejected from the jury during the defendant's trial., slip op. at 1–2, 29. The case involved a habeas corpus petition submitted by Hector Ayala, who was arrested and tried in the late 1980s for the alleged murder of three individuals during an attempted robbery of an automobile body shop in San Diego, California in April 1985.Davis, slip op. at 1–2. At trial, the prosecution used peremptory challenges to strike all Black and Hispanic jurors who were available for jury service. The trial court judge allowed the prosecution to explain the basis for the peremptory challenges outside the presence of Ayala's counsel, "so as not to disclose trial strategy".Davis, slip op. at 1. Ayala was ultimately sentenced to death, but he filed several appeals challenging the constitutionality of the trial court's decision to exclude his counsel from the hearings.Davis, slip op. at 4–8.
In a 5–4 opinion written by Justice Samuel Alito, the Supreme Court held that even if the trial court committed error, the error was harmless and that Ayala did not suffer any actual prejudice.Davis, slip op. at 9–10, 28–29. Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote a dissenting opinion in which she argued that Ayala's sentence should be reversed because the exclusion of Ayala's counsel from the hearings "substantially influenced the outcome" of the case.Davis, slip op. at 15 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). Additionally, Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote a separate concurring opinion in which he questioned the propriety of Ayala's placement in solitary confinement.Davis, slip op. at 1–5 (Kennedy, J., concurring). In response, Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a one-paragraph concurring opinion in which he stated that Ayala's accommodations were "far sight more spacious than those in which his victims ... now rest".Davis, slip op. at 1 (Thomas, J., concurring).
Commentators have described the case as "important" and note that will likely have a "significant effect" on similar cases in the future.See, e.g., Brandon Garrett, UVA Law Faculty Comment on Supreme Court Decisions, ; Steve Vladeck, Opinion analysis: How habeas courts should assess harmless error in a procedural Batson challenge,  (Jun. 18, 2015, 2:33 PM). However, some analysts have described the outcome as "particularly unjust".Lincoln Caplan, The Destruction of Defendants' Rights,  (June 21, 2015). Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion also received significant coverage from the media,Steve Vladeck, Opinion analysis: How habeas courts should assess harmless error in a procedural Batson challenge,  (Jun. 18, 2015, 2:33 PM) (noting that the case was "noteworthy for an unusually testy exchange between two of the Justices in the majority"); Mark Joseph Stern, 20 Years in a Windowless Cell,  (June 19, 2015) (discussing significance of Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion). and some analysts suggested that solitary confinement may become a "new battleground" for Justice Kennedy.Matt Ford, Justice Kennedy Denounces Solitary Confinement,  (June 18, 2015). One commentator described Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion as "the single most surprising and heartening development of the term".Marty Lederman, Supreme Court Breakfast Table,  (July 2, 2015).
Legal Background
Batson challenges
In Batson v. Kentucky, the Supreme Court of the United States held that a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution occurs when prosecutors use peremptory challenges to exclude jurors on the basis of race.Batson v. Kentucky, ; see also Swain v. Alabama,  (holding that the "purposeful or deliberate" of Black jurors violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment). If a defendant alleges that a prosecutor challenged a prospective juror on the basis of that juror's race (a process known as a "Batson challenge"), trial courts will conduct a three-part analysis of the peremptory challenge in question: "[f]irst, a defendant must make a prima facie showing that a peremptory challenge has been exercised on the basis of race; second, if that showing has been made, the prosecution must offer a race-neutral basis for striking the juror in question; and third, in light of the parties’ submissions, the trial court must determine whether the defendant has shown purposeful discrimination."Snyder v. Louisiana,  (internal quotations and alterations omitted). A court will only sustain a Batson challenge if all three elements of this test are satisfied.Miller-El v. Cockrell,  On appeal, a trial court's findings with respect to a Batson challenge will only be reversed if a trial court judge committed clear error.Rice v. Collins,  Additionally, the Supreme Court of the United States has held that findings with respect to a prosecutor's explanation of the reasons for their use of peremptory challenges is "entitled to 'great deference'".Felkner v. Jackson,  (per curiam).
The right to petition for a writ of habeas corpus under federal law
When individuals are convicted for crimes under state law, those individuals have the right to challenge the constitutionality of their convictions in federal court by petitioning for a writ of habeas corpus.See U.S. Const. art. I, § 9, cl. 2 (recognizing a right to habeas corpus); Claudia Wilner, "We Would Not Defer to That Which Did Not Exist:" AEDPA Meets the Silent State Court Opinion, 77  1442, 1445 (2002) (discussing the history of habeas corpus in the United States). This right was codified by the Habeas Corpus Act of 1867,Habeas Corpus Act, 14 Stat. 385 (1867). and in 1953, the United States Supreme Court held that even when a state court rules against a prisoner, that individual still has the right to seek de novo review of their constitutional claims in federal court.Brown v. Allen, . However, in the wake of the Oklahoma City bombing, congress passed the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act ("AEDPA")Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-132, 110 Stat. 1214 (codified, in part, at 28 U.S.C. § 2254). in 1996 to modify federal habeas corpus procedures.Stephen R. Reinhardt, The Demise of Habeas Corpus and the Rise of Qualified Immunity: The Court's Ever Increasing Limitations on the Development and Enforcement of Constitutional Rights and Some Particularly Unfortunate Consequences, 113  1219, 1224 (2015) (discussing origins of the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act). Under the AEDPA's new standards, when a prisoner's claim has been adjudicated in state court, that individual's petition for habeas corpus shall not be granted unless the state court decision "was contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of, clearly established Federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court of the United States".28 U.S.C. § 2254(d)(1). In 2007, the United States Supreme Court held that, as a "precondition" for relief under the AEDPA, habeas petitioners must demonstrate evidence that a state court's error resulted in "actual prejudice".Fry v. Pliler, .
Federal harmless error doctrine
The Supreme Court of the United States has identified a narrow range of errors that require automatic reversal; for all other errors, the decision of a lower court will be upheld if the error was harmless.Glebe v. Frost, No. 14-95, 574 U.S. ____ (2014), slip op. at 3 (per curiam). In 1967, the Supreme Court ruled in Chapman v. California that a constitutional error will only be considered harmless when the court is "able to declare a belief that it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt".Chapman v. California, . Additionally, when reviewing federal habeas corpus petitions, a petitioner must demonstrate that an error "had substantial and injurious effect or influence in determining the jury's verdict".Brecht v. Abrahamson, . The Supreme Court has also ruled that when reviewing a determination of harmlessness under Chapman, the AEDPA mandates that the reviewing court may not grant a petition for habeas corpus "unless the harmlessness determination itself was unreasonable".Fry, 551 U.S. at 119 (emphasis in original). According to the Supreme Court, the rationale underlying this doctrine is the public policy concern that states courts should not be forced to undertake the "arduous task" of retrying criminal defendants "based on mere speculation that the defendant was prejudiced by trial error".Calderon v. Coleman,  (per curiam).
Arrest and Trial of Hector Ayala
Hector Ayala was charged with three counts of murder that allegedly occurred during an attempted robbery of an automobile body shop in San Diego, California in April 1985.Davis, slip op. at 2. During jury selection, the prosecution used peremptory challenges to strike all Black and Hispanic jurors who were available for jury service. Ayala, who was of Hispanic descent, filed a series of Batson challenges to contest the prosecution's use of peremptory challenges.Davis, slip op. at 2–4. The trial judge permitted the prosecution to explain the basis of their peremptory challenges in a closed hearing, outside the presence of Ayala's counsel, "so as not to disclose trial strategy".Davis, slip op. at 1, 2–4. The trial court ultimately concluded that the peremptory challenges were based on race-neutral criteria, and Ayala was convicted of the three counts of murder in August 1989.Davis, slip op. at 3–4. The jury returned a sentence of death for the three murder convictions, and the trial judge entered a judgment consistent with the jury's sentence.Davis, slip op. at 4. On direct appeal, the California Supreme Court upheld Ayala's conviction and sentence, noting that even if the trial judge committed an error when considering the defense's Batson challenges, that error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.Davis, slip op. at 5 (citing People v. Ayala, 24 Cal. 4th 243 (2000)). Ayala subsequently filed a petition for habeas corpus, which was denied by a district court judge in 2006.Davis, slip op. at 7. On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit granted Ayala's habeas petition in 2013, holding that Ayala was denied due process at trial and that the trial court's error was not harmless.Davis, slip op. at 7–8;  In 2014, the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari to review the Ninth Circuit's ruling.Davis, slip op. at 9.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|upright=1.0|In his majority opinion, Justice Samuel Alito (pictured) held that Ayala did not suffer "actual prejudice".Davis, slip op. at 28–29.
In his majority opinion, Justice Samuel Alito held that the exclusion of Ayala's counsel during the Batson hearings was harmless error.Davis, slip op. at 12–28, 29. Justice Alito emphasized that under federal law, prisoners are not entitled to habeas relief unless they can demonstrate "actual prejudice".Davis, slip op. at 9–10 (internal quotations and citations omitted). Additionally, Justice Alito noted that under the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act, federal courts should be "highly deferential" to state courts "when a prisoner's 'claim' has been 'adjudicated on the merits' in state court".Davis, slip op. at 10–11 (citing 28 U.S.C. § 2254(d); Harrington v. Richter, ). Applying these standards to the facts of this case, Justice Alito ruled that Ayala did not suffer any actual prejudice and that the California Supreme Court's opinion "represented an entirely reasonable application of controlling precedent". Consequently, Justice Alito held that the Ninth Circuit's ruling should be reversed and that the case should be remanded for reconsideration in light of the Supreme Court's decision.Davis, slip op. at 29.
Concurring opinions
Although he noted that his support for the majority's opinion was "unqualified", Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote a separate concurring opinion in which he questioned the propriety of solitary confinement.Davis, slip op. at 1–4 (Kennedy, J., concurring). Justice Kennedy observed that since 1989, Ayala had spent more than twenty five years in solitary confinement.Davis, slip op. at 1 (Kennedy, J., concurring). Although the conditions of Ayala's confinement were not established in the record, Justice Kennedy wrote that "it is likely [he] has been held for all or most of the past 20 years or more in a windowless cell no larger than a typical parking spot for 23 hours a day; and in the one hour when he leaves it, he likely is allowed little or no opportunity for conversation or interaction with anyone".Davis, slip op. at 1 (Kennedy, J., concurring) (citing Wilkinson v. Austin, ; Amnesty International, Entombed: Isolation in the U. S. Federal Prison System (2014)). Justice Kennedy wrote that "[t]he human toll wrought by extended terms of isolation long has been understood, and questioned, by writers and commentators" and that solitary confinement "bears a further terror and peculiar mark of infamy".Davis, slip op. at 2 (Kennedy, J., concurring) (internal quotations omitted) (citing In re Medley, ). Justice Kennedy conceded that "in some instances temporary, solitary confinement is a useful or necessary means to impose discipline and to protect prison employees and other inmates", but that courts should ultimately determine "whether workable alternative systems for long-term confinement exist, and, if so, whether a correctional system should be required to adopt them".Davis, slip op. at 4 (Kennedy, J., concurring).
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a separate, one-paragraph concurring opinion to respond to Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion. He wrote that the "accommodations in which Ayala is housed are a far sight more spacious than those in which his victims, Ernesto Dominguez Mendez, Marcos Antonio Zamora, and Jose Luis Rositas, now rest". Justice Thomas also noted that because Ayala's victims were all 31 years of age or younger, "Ayala will soon have had as much or more time to enjoy those accommodations as his victims had time to enjoy this Earth".
Justice Sotomayor's dissenting opinion
Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote a dissenting opinion in which she was joined by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Justice Stephen Breyer, and Justice Elena Kagan.Davis, slip op. at 1 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). Justice Sotomayor argued that the exclusion of Ayala's counsel from the Batson hearings "substantially influenced the outcome" of the case and that "grave doubt exists as to whether [the exclusion] was harmless".Davis, slip op. at 1, 15 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). She critiqued Justice Alito's methodological approach, arguing that "[t]he proper inquiry is not whether the trial court’s determination can be sustained, but whether it may have been different had counsel been present". Considering the evidence presented in this case, Justice Sotomayor concluded that there "is neither a factual nor a legal basis for the Court’s confidence" that the prosecution's use of peremptory challenges was race neutral. She argued that in light of "the strength of Ayala’s prima facie case", the Court should have upheld the Ninth Circuit's ruling.
Commentary and analysis
Following the release of the Court's opinion, commentators described Davis v. Ayala as "an important case raising claims about jury selection and harmless error".Brandon Garrett, UVA Law Faculty Comment on Supreme Court Decisions, . Steve Vladeck wrote that "[g]oing forward, the dispute between the majority and dissent will have an especially significant effect on cases in which trial courts conduct Batson proceedings ex parte".Steve Vladeck, Opinion analysis: How habeas courts should assess harmless error in a procedural Batson challenge,  (Jun. 18, 2015, 2:33 PM). Hadar Aviram wrote that "[t]he Court was willing to accept, as a basic premise, that Ayala's constitutional rights were violated; but that is not enough to merit a reversal".Hadar Aviram, Davis v. Ayala: Post-conviction review of Batson, Harmless Error, and a Surprising Dignity Opinion from Justice Kennedy,  (June 18, 2015). In his review of the case for The New Yorker, Lincoln Caplan described the Court's opinion as "particularly unjust" because the Court "had the opportunity to hold a state prosecutor to account for using trumped-up reasons to justify racial discrimination in a jury selection" but failed to do so.
Commentary about Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion
Much of the initial commentary about the case focused on Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion.See, e.g., Steve Vladeck, Opinion analysis: How habeas courts should assess harmless error in a procedural Batson challenge,  (Jun. 18, 2015, 2:33 PM) (noting that the case was "noteworthy for an unusually testy exchange between two of the Justices in the majority"). Writing for the Los Angeles Times, David G. Savage described Justice Kennedy's opinion as "unusual" and "a rare instance of a Supreme Court justice virtually inviting a constitutional challenge to a prison policy".David G. Savage, Justice Kennedy practically invites a challenge to solitary confinement,  (June 19, 2015). Marty Lederman described Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion as "the single most surprising and heartening development of the term". Matt Ford wrote that "Kennedy’s critique of solitary confinement in Davis came without warning or fanfare" and that "[s]olitary confinement is a new battleground for the Court’s second-longest serving justice, but not a surprising one".
Although he suggested Justice Kennedy's concurrence may be "more consequential" than Justice Harry Blackmun's dissent in Callins v. Collins,Callins v. Collins,  (Blackmun, J., dissenting) ("From this day forward, I no longer shall tinker with the machinery of death."). Mark Joseph Stern described Justice Kennedy's concurrence as "myopic", noting that "large chunks of the 'legal academy' in the 'public' were aware—and outraged—by the practice long before Kennedy condemned it".Mark Joseph Stern, 20 Years in a Windowless Cell,  (June 19, 2015). Dahlia Lithwick wrote that even though "Kennedy may not come around on the death penalty" and rule it unconstitutional, "after reading his own words in Ayala—he probably should".Dahlia Lithwick, Fates Worse Than Death?,  (July 14, 2015). In an interview with Harvard Law School dean Martha Minow, Justice Kennedy explained that when he was in the Army, he was locked in a cell for four hours and "slightly tortured".Marcia Coyle, Justice Anthony Kennedy Loathes the Term Swing Vote,  (October 27, 2015) (internal quotations omitted) (noting that this was apparently part of Justice Kennedy's "combat training"). Justice Kennedy remarked that "[a]fter four hours in a cell, I was going mad. These people are in, some for 40 years. It drives people mad and we don’t even think about it. We’ve got to do something about it".Marcia Coyle, Justice Anthony Kennedy Loathes the Term Swing Vote,  (October 27, 2015) (internal quotations omitted).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 576
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Case information from SCOTUSblog
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Capital punishment in California
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:Batson challenge case law
Category:History of San Diego
"""

From "Davis v. Bandemer" ==> """
Davis v. Bandemer, 478 U.S. 109 (1986), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that claims of partisan gerrymandering were justiciable, but failed to agree on a clear standard for the judicial review of the class of claims of a political nature to which such cases belong. The decision was later limited with respect to many of the elements directly involving issues of redistricting and political gerrymandering, but was somewhat broadened with respect to less significant ancillary procedural issues. Democrats had won 51.9% of the votes, but only 43/100 seats. Democrats sued on basis of one man, one vote, however, California Democrats supported the Indiana GOP's plan.
The National Republican Committee filed an amicus brief in support of the Indiana Democrats,Brief Amicus Curiae of the Republican National Committee in Support of Appellees, Susan J. DAVIS, et al., Appellants, v. Irwin C. BANDEMER, et al., Appellees., 1985 (U.S.), 1. Democrats in the California house and senate filed briefs supporting the Republican redistricting plan.Brief Amicus Curiae of Assembly of the State of California in Support of Appellants, Susan J. DAVIS, et al., Appellants, v. Irwin C. BANDEMER, et al., Appellees., 1985 (U.S.).
Background
Democrats in the state of Indiana challenged the state's 1981 state apportionment scheme for Indiana General Assembly districts because of political gerrymandering. The Democrats argued that "the apportionment unconstitutionally diluted their votes in important districts, violating their rights." Indiana Democrats used the elections of November 1982 as proof that the new plan violated the 14th amendment due to voter dilution. In both the House and the Senate Democrats won the majority of votes, but failed to have a majority of candidates win. The District Court ruled in favor of the Democrats, throwing out the old plan and calling for the creation of a new one.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court ruled on two separate issues, first whether gerrymandering claims are justiciable and secondly, if the 1981 Indiana Reapportionment Plan was an infraction on citizen's rights to equal representation which was protected by the 14th Amendment.. The Court ruled 6-3 that federal courts can determine cases of partisan gerrymandering as worthy of intervention, but they also ruled 7-2 that Indiana's plan was constitutional under the Equal Protection Clause.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 478
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Vieth v. Jubelirer (2004)
 League of United Latin American Citizens v. Perry (2006)
 Gill v. Whitford (2018)
 Rucho v. Common Cause (2019)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States political question doctrine case law
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Indiana General Assembly
Category:Gerrymandering in the United States
"""

From "Davis v. Beason" ==> """
__NOTOC__
Davis v. Beason, 133 U.S. 333 (1890), was a United States Supreme Court case affirming, by a 9–0 vote, that federal laws against polygamy did not conflict with the free exercise clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Background
Congress had passed the Edmunds Act in 1882, which made polygamy a felony; over 1,300 Mormons were imprisoned.  The Act also required test oaths requiring voters to swear they were not bigamists or polygamists.  A statute of the Idaho Territory required a similar oath in order to register to vote, in order to limit or eliminate Mormons' participation in government and their control of local schools.American Cultural Pluralism and Law; Jill Norgren, Serena Nanda; p. 91-92; Greenwood Publishing Group, 2006; fetched from the version on Google Book Search on 18 March 2009. The loyalty also forbade being a member of any organization that advocated or spent resources defending bigamy or polygamy.
Mormons initiated a challenge to Idaho's oath test by having members who did not have plural marriages registering to vote.  Samuel D. Davis, a resident of Oneida County, Idaho, was convicted in the territorial district court of swearing falsely after taking the voter's oath."Davis v. Beason (1890)" , fetched 18 March 2009."Davis v. Beason 130 U.S. 333 (1890)", Richard E. Morgan, 1986.  Macmillan Reference USA.  Fetched 18 March 2009.  Davis appealed his conviction via a habeas corpus writ, claiming that the Idaho law requiring the oath violated his right to the free exercise of his religion as a member of the LDS Church.
Supreme Court ruling
Justice Field, writing for the Court, condemned polygamy, writing that "Few crimes are more pernicious to the best interests of society, and receive more general or more deserved punishment."  He went on to echo Reynolds v. United States (1878): "However free the exercise of religion may be, it must be subordinate to the criminal laws of the country, passed with reference to actions regarded by general consent as properly the subjects of punitive legislation."  He wrote by way of comparison that if a religious sect advocated fornication or human sacrifice, "swift punishment would follow the carrying into effect of its doctrines, and no heed would be given to the pretense that, as religious beliefs, their supporters could be protected in their exercise by the Constitution of the United States."
Field listed the limits that federal law placed upon the rights of United States territories to qualify voters, noted Idaho's specific prohibition of polygamists and people encouraging polygamy from the right to vote, and wrote that this was "not open to any constitutional or legal objection," as the Idaho law "simply excludes from the privilege of voting ... those who have been convicted of certain offenses".
Subsequent events
Richard Morgan wrote, "The decision became one of the principal underpinnings of what later came to be called the 'secular regulation' approach to the free exercise clause whereby no religious exemptions are required from otherwise valid secular regulations."
106 years later, in Romer v. Evans (1996), the Supreme Court ruled unconstitutional a Colorado constitutional initiative that prevented any jurisdiction from protecting homosexual citizens from discrimination.  In the dissent, Justice Scalia asked how Romer could be reconciled with Davis v. Beason:
References
External links
Category:1890 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Idaho
Category:United States law and polygamy in Mormonism
Category:Political history of Idaho
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Idaho
Category:1890 in Christianity
Category:1890 in Idaho Territory
Category:19th-century Mormonism
Category:Christianity and law in the 19th century
Category:Oneida County, Idaho
"""

From "Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County" ==> """
Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County (Docket number: Civ. A. No. 1333; Case citation: 103 F. Supp. 337 (1952)) was one of the five cases combined into Brown v. Board of Education, the famous case in which the U.S. Supreme Court, in 1954, officially overturned racial segregation in U.S. public schools. The Davis case was the only such case to be initiated by a student protest. The case challenged segregation in Prince Edward County, Virginia.
Background
R.R. Moton High School, an all-black high school in Farmville, Virginia, founded in 1923, suffered from terrible conditions due to underfunding. The school did not have a gymnasium, cafeteria or teachers' restrooms. Teachers and students did not have desks or blackboards, and due to overcrowding, some students had to take classes in an immobilized, decrepit school bus parked outside the main school building. The school's requests for additional funds were denied by the all-white school board.
In response, on April 23, 1951, a 16-year-old student named Barbara Rose Johns, who was the niece of Vernon Johns, the famous black Baptist preacher and civil rights leader, covertly organized a student general strike.  She forged notes to teachers telling them to bring their students to the auditorium for a special announcement. When the school's students showed up, Johns took the stage and persuaded the school to strike to protest poor school conditions. Over 450 walked out and marched to the homes of members of the school board, who refused to see them and instead threatened them with expulsions. This led to a two-week protest from students.
Further details about this story can be found in Taylor Branch's Parting The Waters, America In The King Years 1954-63, published by Simon and Schuster in 1988. This book mentions that the headmaster was told over the phone that the police were about to arrest two of his students at the bus station. He failed to recognize this call as a ruse, so he went to town. Only thereafter were notes calling to a special assembly delivered to the classroom. When the headmaster returned, he tried to talk the students out of striking, but they refused.
This book also gives a different account of the  teaching conditions. It states that some classes were held in "three temporary tar-paper shacks" built to house the overflow at the school. It was so cold during the winter that teachers and students had to keep their coats on. No classes held in a school bus are mentioned, although the school's bus is said to be hand-me-down from the white school, and was driven by the history teacher.
The Trials
On May 23, 1951, two lawyers from the NAACP, Spottswood Robinson and Oliver Hill, filed suit on behalf of 117 students against the school district to integrate the schools.  The district was represented by T. Justin Moore, Archibald G. ("Archie") Robertson and John W. Riely of the Hunton, Williams, Gay, Powell and Gibson, a large Virginia law firm, with its primary office in Richmond (now known as Hunton & Williams). J. Lindsay Almond, as Attorney General, represented the Commonwealth of Virginia. The first plaintiff listed was Dorothy E. Davis, a 14-year old ninth grader. The case was titled Dorothy E. Davis, et al. versus County School Board of Prince Edward County, Virginia.
The students' request was unanimously rejected by a three-judge panel of the U.S. District Court. "We have found no hurt or harm to either race," the court ruled. The case was then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court and consolidated with four other cases from other districts around the country into the famous Brown v. Board of Education case. In it, the US Supreme Court ruled that segregation in public education was, effectively, unconstitutional and illegal.
The Aftermath
The ruling was extremely unpopular among white Virginians and a considerable number of them attempted to resist integration through every means possible, during a period known as Massive Resistance. Schools remained segregated for several years. By 1959, J. Lindsay Almond had become Governor of Virginia, and faced with continuing losses in the courts, he dismantled the system of segregated schools in that state. Nevertheless, the Board of Supervisors for Prince Edward County refused to appropriate any funds for the County School Board at all, effectively closing all public schools rather than integrate them. White students often attended "segregation academies", which were all-white private schools that were formed. Black students had to go to school elsewhere or forgo their education altogether. Prince Edward County schools remained closed for five years, from 1959 to 1964.
In 2008, the case and the protest which led to it were memorialized on the grounds of the Virginia State Capitol in the Virginia Civil Rights Memorial.
 See also 
 Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County
 List of landmark African-American court cases
 Stanley Plan
 Further reading 
 https://www.encyclopediavirginia.org/moton_school_strike_and_prince_edward_county_school_closings
 References 
Category:1954 in United States case law
Category:1954 in Virginia
Category:African-American history of Virginia
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Education in Prince Edward County, Virginia
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Davis v. FEC" ==> """
Davis v. Federal Election Commission, 554 U.S. 724 (2008), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States which held that section 319 (popularly known as the "Millionaire's Amendment") of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 (popularly known as the McCain-Feingold law) unconstitutionally infringed on candidates' rights as provided by First Amendment.
Background
Section 319 of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 contained provisions which required a candidate for federal office in the United States to file a "declaration of intent" regarding how much of the candidate's personal funds he or she intended to spend in the upcoming election.  This provision was unofficially known as the "Millionaire's Amendment" and it could only be triggered if the candidate's "opposition personal funds amount" (OPFA)—the amount of personal funds available to them for expenditure in the race—exceeded $350,000 USD. Additional disclosures were required to be made to the opposition candidate, any involved national political parties, and the Federal Election Commission (FEC) if these personal expenditures exceeded additional, enumerated benchmarks in the legislation.  Once the OPFA was triggered, the wealthy candidate would still be subject to the contribution limitations imposed by the BCRA and other federal and state laws.  However, the Millionaire's Amendment provided that the contribution caps for the non-self-financing opposition candidate were now tripled, and the non-self-financing candidate could receive coordinated contributions and expenditures from his or her national political party without any limitation.
Plaintiff Jack Davis brought suit against the Federal Election Commission, alleging that the BCRA disclosure and limitation restrictions on wealthy candidates violated his First Amendment rights.
A three-judge panel of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia found that the court had jurisdiction over the case, but upheld the BCRA against Davis' challenge.  Davis appealed directly to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Jack Davis
John "Jack" Davis is an American businessman and founder of the I Squared R Element CompanyI Squared R Element which produces and sells heating elements. He has run four times for the Congressional seat representing New York's 26th congressional district, in 2004, 2006, 2008 and 2011; all bids have been unsuccessful. In the first three of those elections, Davis, a former Republican, ran as a Democrat. For the 2004 and 2006 candidacies, he was the Democratic nominee and faced no primary challengers in his unsuccessful bids against incumbent Republican Tom Reynolds; in the 2008 race, he finished in third place in a three-way Democratic primary to Alice Kryzan. In the 2011 election, Davis, who has since changed his registration back to Republican, ran on the "Tea Party" line, a line created by Buffalo area Libertarian Party activist James Ostrowski primarily to run candidates against endorsed Republicans. (Davis sought the endorsements of the Republican and Conservative parties in the 2011 election, but did not receive either one.)
Davis filed his lawsuit against the Federal Election Commission between his 2006 and 2008 runs for office.
Decision
Associate Justice Samuel Alito wrote the majority opinion for the court, in which Chief Justice John G. Roberts and Justices Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, and Clarence Thomas joined.
Majority ruling
Alito reviewed the law in question and major facts of the case in Section I of his ruling.
In Section II, Alito next dealt with the Court's jurisdiction, which had to be established for a ruling to occur. The Court would have jurisdiction only if the appellant could show a personal interest in the controversy, and if an actual controversy existed (and was not moot). All parties agreed that Davis had standing, but the FEC had argued that since Davis' opponent had not yet filed any documents there was no controversy. The majority held that standing applied only to the party raising the issue, not to all parties in the case. Additionally, the FEC argued that the issue was moot, as the election was long over. Again, the majority disagreed, holding that the case represented a "disputes capable of repetition, yet evading review."Davis v. Federal Election Commission, 554 U. S. __, 9. Justices John Paul Stevens, David Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Stephen Breyer concurred with the majority in part and dissented in part concerning Section III of the majority ruling (see below).
In Section III of his ruling, Alito concluded that Section 319(a) and 319(b) of the BCRA failed to pass constitutional muster. Campaign finance limitations not only must equally apply to all candidates, Alito argued from precedent, but they must be narrowly drawn to advance important governmental interests (such as avoiding corruption in the political process).  But Section 319(a) not only did not provide a level playing field, it fundamentally restricted the right of a self-financing candidate to spend his or her own money in a preferred way.  No important governmental interest was advanced, Alito held, because (as the Court had held in Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 in 1976) a reliance on personal expenditures fundamentally reduces the likelihood of corruption. The FEC had argued that a level playing field was an important governmental interest. But Alito held that this was not an important governmental interest, and in fact the Court had said as much in Buckley v. Valeo three decades earlier. Indeed, the BCRA raises the ominous spectre of the public determining how valuable a wealthy person's speech is, something (Alito said) the Constitution does not permit. The government had argued that the low limits on federal campaign contributions were actually ameliorated when OPFA was triggered, advancing another important government interest.  But Alito disagreed, arguing that if the limits are onerous then Congress should simply raise them to advance that important interest.
In Section IV of his decision, Alito declared Section 319(b) unconstitutional as well, tied as it was to Section 319(a).
Stevens' dissent
Justice John Paul Stevens dissented from Section III of the majority opinion. He was joined by Justices Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer.
Stevens joined Section II of the majority opinion, agreeing that Davis had standing and that the controversy was not moot.
The district court, Stevens said, had found no restriction on the self-financing candidate's ability to spend as much or as little money as he or she pleased.  Thus, he concluded, there was no First Amendment infringement whatsoever. Because Section 319(a) and 319(b) merely diminished the unequal footing of candidates for federal office, Stevens also found no infringement of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution either.
Stevens broke with Buckley v. Valeo, arguing that Justice Byron White's dissent in Buckley was correct.  White had argued that restrictions on political speech should not be seen as restrictions per se, but rather as reasonable regulations akin to "time, manner, and place" regulations long accepted by the Court. Such regulations are judged by the "legitimate and sufficiently substantial" test rather than the stricter "important governmental interest" test. He found the reporting regulations imposed on wealthy candidates a reasonable limitation which would survive constitutional scrutiny.
Even if one accepted the Buckley Court's reasoning, Stevens said, the two goals of reducing the influence of wealth as a criterion for office and reducing the impression that public office is available only to the highest bidder are important governmental interests which meet the majority's test. Davis had not shown that Section 319(a) harms his ability to spend, Stevens said. Amplification of the opponent's voice does not mean a diminution of the self-financing candidate's voice.  The Buckley Court had not concluded that reducing corruption and the appearance of corruption were the only important governmental interests to be served (as the majority had concluded), but were one of many such interests which might justify an infringement on First Amendment rights. Stevens cited several precedents where the Supreme Court had upheld restrictions on wealthy individuals in order to improve the political process.
Stevens also criticized the majority for not addressing Davis' equal protection claim. Citing Buckley v. Valeo and the more recent McConnell v. Federal Election Commission, 540 U.S. 93 (2003), Stevens said that the Court had condoned legislative solutions which treat candidates differently, and the BCRA did just that.
Ginsburg's dissent
Justice Ginsburg filed a short opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part. Justice Breyer joined her opinion.
Ginsburg joined Section II of the majority opinion, agreeing that Davis had standing and that the controversy was not moot.
However, Ginsburg joined Section II of Justice Stevens' dissent, and agreed that Section 319(a) and Section 319(b) of the BCRA passed constitutional muster.
Ginsburg did not join that part of Stevens' dissent where he argued that Buckley v. Valeo was wrongly decided.  The FEC had not asked the Court to overturn Buckley, and no briefs on that matter had been offered.  Since Ginsburg felt that Section 319(a) and Section 319(b) of the BCRA were constitutionally acceptable, she refused to go further (as Stevens had) and overrule Buckley.
Footnotes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2008 in American politics
Category:United States elections case law
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:Federal Election Commission litigation
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Davis v. Mann" ==> """
Davis v. Mann, 377 U.S. 678 (1964), was a United States Supreme Court which was one of a series of cases decided in 1964 that ruled that state legislature districts had to be roughly equal in population..
David J. Mays and Robert McIlwaine advocated on behalf of the Commonwealth of Virginia; Edmund D. Campbell and Henry E. Howell, Jr. advocated on behalf of the plaintiff Northern Virginia legislators. The Supreme Court issued the opinion in this case along with Reynolds v. Sims and cites that the opinion.
 Background 
Voters from Arlington County and Fairfax County, Virginia represented by Edmund D. Campbell challenged the apportionment of the Virginia General Assembly. Voters from Norfolk, Virginia represented by Henry E. Howell, Jr. were permitted to intervene as plaintiffs. On appeal, the United States (represented by Solicitor General Archibald Cox) intervened as amicus curiae to support the appellees.
Under the 1962 redistricting statute, in order to keep counties and cities wholly in a district, there were wide disparities in the population of Senate and House of Delegates districts. Arlington County, for example (where Campbell and plaintiff legislators Harrison Mann and Kathryn Stone lived), was apportioned one senator for its 163,401 persons, only 0.61 of the representation to which it would be entitled on a strict population basis, while the smallest senatorial district, with respect to population, had only 61,730, and the next smallest 63,703.  The District Court found "that the maximum population-variance ratio between the most populous and least populous senatorial districts is 2.65-to-1. Under the 1962 senatorial apportionment, applying 1960 population figures, approximately 41.1% of the State's total population reside in districts electing a majority of the members of that body."Davis, 377 U.S. at 687-688.
 Opinion of the Court 
Having already overturned its ruling that redistricting was a purely political question in Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. 186 (1962), the Court went further in order to correct what seemed to it to be egregious examples of malapportionment which were serious enough to undermine the premises underlying republican government.  Before Reynolds, urban counties and cities, like those in which the plaintiffs resided, were often drastically underrepresented in state legislatures.  This was presented as one of the defenses of the Commonwealth, but the Court rejected this defense, saying "Not only does this explanation lack legal merit, but it also fails to conform to the facts. Some Virginia urban areas, such as Richmond, by comparison with Arlington, Fairfax and Norfolk, appear to be quite adequately represented in the General Assembly."Davis, 377 U.S. at 692.
The Virginia case also presented a different argument regarding the presence of large numbers of military personnel in the affected city and counties.  However, the court reject appellants' argument dismissing it as a post-hoc explanation, saying there was no evidence that the legislature considered military personnel in drawing the 1962 districts.
Justice Potter Stewart issued a concurrence, in which he argued that wide disparities in population could be constitutional if the Commonwealth could articulate non-discriminatory reasons, but held that the Commonwealth could advance "no rational basis for the disfavoring of Arlington, Fairfax and Norfolk."Davis, 377 U.S. at 695 (Stewart, J., concurring).
Justice John Marshall Harlan II reiterated and adopted his dissent in Reynolds v. Sims.
 Subsequent developments 
The Commonwealth of Virginia redrew its legislative districts so that they were equipopulous, based on the 1960 decennial census data, in time for the 1967 elections.
 See also 
 One person, one vote
 Rotten borough, an English phenomenon
References
 External links 
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:Virginia General Assembly
Category:Legal history of Virginia
"""

From "Davis v. Massachusetts" ==> """
Davis v. Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 167 U.S. 43 (1897), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States sustained a conviction of a man for making a speech on Boston Common in violation of an ordinance that forbade the making of a public address there without a permit from the mayor.
 Facts of the case 
Section 66 of the Revised Ordinances of the City of Boston (1893) reads as follows: 
'Sec. 66. No person shall, in or upon any of the public grounds, make any public address, discharge any cannon or firearm, expose for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, erect or maintain any booth, stand, tent or apparatus for the purposes of public amusement or show, except in accordance with a permit from the mayor.'
It was alleged by the prosecution that Davis made a speech on Boston Common without a permit.  Davis was brought before the Municipal Court of the City of Boston and convicted of violating section 66.
 Prior history 
The proceedings were removed to the Superior Court of the county of Suffolk, where Davis renewed a motion which he had interposed in the municipal court to quash the complaint. There were seven reasons argued to support the motion; among these was the assertion that the ordinance violated the rights alleged to be secured to the accused by the constitution of the state, and by the Fourteenth Amendment. The motion to quash being overruled by the Superior Court, Davis was tried before the court and a jury.
At the trial the government put in evidence the ordinance heretofore referred to, and called the attention of the court to sections 35 and 39 of chapter 448 of the acts passed by the legislature of Massachusetts in the year 1854.  Davis was convicted and subsequently appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Decision 
Davis' conviction was upheld by a unanimous decision of the Supreme Court..
 References 
External links
Category:1897 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Legal history of Massachusetts
Category:Boston Common
"""

From "Davis v. Michigan" ==> """
Davis v. Michigan, 489 U.S. 803 (1989), is a case in the Supreme Court of the United States holding that states may not tax federal pensions if they exempt their own state pensions from taxation.. In the 1930s, the federal and state governments began to charge income tax on salaries paid to each other's employees. However, reciprocal treatment was required under the doctrine of intergovernmental immunity. The Court's ruling extended the reciprocity to pensions, since they are a form of deferred compensation for services previously rendered by an employee.
 Background 
 Intergovernmental immunity 
In McCulloch v. Maryland (1819), the Supreme Court held that Maryland could not tax the Second Bank of the United States, as it would interfere with the bank's right to exist under federal law.  The decision gave rise to the principle of intergovernmental immunity, which was gradually extended from government agencies to their employees. In Dobbins v. Commissioners of Erie (1842), the Court held that states could not tax the salaries of federal officials. In Collector v. Day (1870), the Court also held that the federal government could not tax the salaries of state officials.
In 1938, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt asked Congress to remove the reciprocal tax exemption for federal and state employees. The Supreme Court subsequently overturned its precedents from the 19th century. In Helvering v. Gerhardt (1938), the Court ruled that state salaries would not be exempt from federal income tax unless it caused an "actual and substantial" burden on the governmental functions of the state. Exempting state employees from federal taxation would intrude on the "national sovereign power to tax" and create "a privileged class of taxpayers." In Graves v. New York (1939), the Court held that federal salaries were also subject to "nondiscriminatory" taxation by the states.
In the Public Salary Tax Act (1939), which was codified as , Congress clarified the circumstances in which governmental salaries could be taxed. The Act stated that federal salaries could only be taxed if the state tax "does not discriminate against such officer or employee because of the source of such compensation." If the state exempted its own employees from taxation, then it cannot tax discriminate against federal employees by subjecting federal salaries to taxation.
 Case background 
Paul S. Davis served the federal government as a lawyer for the Securities and Exchange Commission and an administrative law judge. He retired from the federal government in 1980. From 1979 to 1984, he paid $4,299 in Michigan income taxes on his federal retirement benefits. At the time, Michigan exempted its own retirement benefits from taxation. However, pensions paid by the federal government, other states, and private industry were only entitled to a $7,500 deduction.
In Memphis Bank & Trust Co. v. Garner (1983), the Supreme Court held that states could not levy franchise taxes on federal bond interest if they exempted their own state bonds from taxation.  Upon learning of the decision, Davis filed amended Michigan tax returns to 1979, claiming tax refunds on his federal retirement benefits. The Michigan Commissioner of Revenue, the Michigan Court of Claims, and the Michigan Court of Appeals ruled that Davis was not entitled to a refund. The Michigan courts ruled that he was not covered by the nondiscrimination provisions of , as he was retired and therefore no longer a federal employee. Davis appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
In a rare occurrence, Davis argued his own case pro se before the Supreme Court. Although state attorneys general often argue their own cases when they are sued in an official capacity, it is unusual for private parties to appear pro se at oral arguments. Davis divided his time with Michael K. Kellogg from the Solicitor General's office, who appeared for the United States as amicus curiae.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court ruled 8-1 in favor of Davis.  The majority opinion, written by Justice Anthony Kennedy, held that states could not tax federal retirement benefits if they exempted their own state retirement benefits from taxation. Since retirement benefits were earned by employees as deferred compensation, federal pensions are entitled to the nondiscrimination provisions of , which covered "pay or compensation." The state of Michigan could remedy its discriminatory taxation by either removing the tax on federal pensions or levying a tax on its own pensions.
In a lone dissenting opinion, Justice John Paul Stevens argued that the tax was not discriminatory because it treated federal employees the same as other Michigan taxpayers. Since most Michigan taxpayers did not receive retirement benefits from the state, they were also subject to the Michigan income tax.
 Aftermath 
Michigan chose to extend the income tax exemption to federal retirement benefits. Davis received $4,299 of tax refunds. Fourteen states that exempted their own state pensions from taxation had to refund billions of dollars to federal retirees.
The National Association of Retired Federal Employees, which filed an amicus brief in the case, established the Paul S. Davis scholarship in honor of the plaintiff in the case.
References
External links
Category:United States federalism case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:Legal history of Michigan
"""

From "Davis v. United States (1895)" ==> """
Davis v. United States, 160 U.S. 469 (1895), is a criminal case establishing that in a federal case, the prosecution bears the burden of proof of sanity if an insanity defense is raised.Criminal Law - Cases and Materials, 7th ed. 2012, Wolters Kluwer Law & Business; John Kaplan, Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder, ,  It is a common law ruling that sets precedent in federal court, but is not a constitutional ruling interpreting the United States Constitution, so does not preclude states from requiring defendants to prove insanity, even to the point of requiring defendants to prove insanity beyond a reasonable doubt, as in Leland v. Oregon (1951).
References
External links
Category:1895 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Davis v. United States (1990)" ==> """
Davis v. United States, 495 U.S. 472 (1990), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court.Davis v. United States, . It concerned claims made by parents of two missionaries of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that their monetary contributions toward their sons' mission expenses constituted a "charitable contribution" under provisions of Treas. Reg. § 1.170A-1(g) (1989), a position that lower courts had rejected. In a unanimous decision, the Court ruled that these contributions could not be seen as "charitable contributions" under provisions of that statute.
 Background 
A husband and wife, members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, transferred funds into the personal checking accounts of their two sons, who were called to service as full-time, unpaid missionaries for the Church. The amount transferred equaled the amount the Church estimated would be needed to support this service. The sons used the transferred funds primarily to pay for rent, food, transportation, and personal needs while on their missions (in conformity with Church guidelines, which required such funds to be spent for only missionary work and forbade various leisure or personal activities). The sons submitted weekly reports of their total expenses for the week and month to date (even though these guidelines did not require the sons to obtain advance approval of each expenditure they made from their checking accounts).
In their 1984 amended federal income tax returns for the years 1980 and 1981, the parents claimed these amounts as deductible charitable contributions. The Internal Revenue Service disallowed the claims. The parents sued for refund of the claimed amounts pursuant to § 170 of the Internal Revenue Code. (which allows a deduction for a charitable contribution or gift "to or for the use of" a qualified organization) or as unreimbursed expenditures made incident to the rendition of services to a charitable organization under Treas. Reg. § 1.170A-1(g) (1989). In a second set of amended tax returns, filed in 1986, the parents limited their claimed charitable deductions to the amounts that had been indicated by the Church.
The District Court, granting summary judgment to the United States, found that the payments were not made "for the use of" the Church within the meaning of 26 U.S.C. § 170. Additionally, the court found the payments did not qualify as "reasonable expenditures" incurred while providing services to the Church, so as to be deductible under Treas Reg. 1.170A-1(g) (26 CFR 1.170A-1(g)), which provides that unreimbursed expenditures made incident to the rendition of services to an organization, contributions to which are deductible, may constitute a deductible contribution under 26 U.S.C. § 170.Davis v. United States, 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed the decision of the district court, holding that the funds in question were not deductible under 26 U.S.C. § 170, as the Church lacked actual control over the disposition of the funds, and 26 CFR 1.170A-1(g) did not apply to the parents, as the regulation permits a deduction for unreimbursed expenses by only the taxpayer who performed the charitable service.Davis v. United States, 
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote an opinion for a unanimous court, affirming the judgment of the lower courts and holding that, for purposes of 26 U.S.C. § 170, these payments were not charitable contributions "for the use of" petitioners' church. The Court instead accepted the government's interpretation of the statute: that a contribution or gift is "for the use of" a qualified organization only when it is held in a legally enforceable trust for the organization or in a similar legal arrangement. Justice O'Connor stated that the legislative history, the generally understood meaning of the language used, and the contemporaneous and longstanding construction all supported this interpretation. By contrast, Petitioners deposited the funds directly into their sons' personal bank accounts. Although the sons promised to spend the money only on church-related expenses, they had no legal obligation to do so. Petitioners did not donate the funds in trust for the church.
Justice O'Connor also concluded that the parents were not entitled to a deduction under 26 CFR 1.170A-1(g), as that regulation allows taxpayers to claim deductions for only the expenditures made in connection with their own contributions of services to charities. Petitioners were unable to claim a deduction for the funds as unreimbursed expenditures incident to a contribution of charitable services under Treas. Reg. § 1.10A-1(g) (1989) since the expenditures were not incurred in connection with petitioners' own rendition of services and they did not render the services.
 See also 
 Charitable trust
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 495
 References 
External links
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:1990 in religion
Category:Mormonism and law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:20th-century Mormonism
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Mormon missionaries
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Davis v. United States (1994)" ==> """
Davis v. United States, 512 U.S. 452 (1994), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court established that the right to counsel can only be legally asserted by an "unambiguous or unequivocal request for counsel."
Background
A bloodstain on one of the pool cues in the recreation hall led Naval Investigative Service (NIS) agents to Robert L. Davis.Davis v. United States, . During questioning, Davis said, “Maybe I should talk to a lawyer.”Davis, 512 U.S. at 455. When asked by the interviewers to clarify his ambiguous request, Davis responded that he did not want counsel. After his conviction of murder, Davis tried to appeal, claiming that his right to counsel was declined. However, his conviction was affirmed when his request for counsel was reviewed, deemed ambiguous, and it was concluded that the NIS indeed clarify his intentions before continuing with questioning.
Opinion of the Court
According to the court, the interrogators opted for the clarification method to determine if Davis's request for counsel was ambiguous or not. When Davis said “Maybe I should talk to a lawyer”, the interrogators replied by saying that they would not violate his rights. They made it clear that if he wanted a lawyer, they would have stopped the interrogation. When the interrogators asked for clarification, Davis answered that he was not asking for a lawyer.http://digitalcommons.lmu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2582&context=llr  Therefore, the interrogators did not believe his request for counsel was ambiguous since Davis announced he was not requesting counsel in the first place.
Nevertheless, Justice O’Connor decided otherwise. She declared that the threshold of clarity approach was legally required for this case. Thus, the Supreme Court ruled that an ambiguous and unclear request for counsel, such as David's “Maybe I should talk to a lawyer”, does not establish the right.Davis, 512 U.S. at 4561-62. The reasoning was that the defendant's rights under Edwards were not sufficiently requested with his utterance. The request for a lawyer must be clear and unambiguous. Justice O’Connor understands that fear, intimidation, and lack of linguistic and interrogation knowledge may affect the way the defendant requests a lawyer. However, she held that the Miranda Rights should be enough for the defendants to understand their right for counsel which lead to the decision that Davis's request was ambiguous.
Related Cases
Davis’ case is not independent in legislative history. Many cases have dealt with ambiguous requests for counsel. Among these include Smith v. Illinois. Smith was arrested, understood his Miranda rights, and when asked if he wanted a lawyer, Smith responded yes. However, his request for counsel was deemed ambiguous because he continued to answer questions during the investigation before a lawyer was present, thus terminating his request.. In the following case, State v. Demesme, defendant Warren Demesme's request for counsel was declined when he asked “why don’t you just give me a lawyer, dog.” Under review, his statement was deemed ambiguous. In another case, People v. Krueger, Michael Krueuger claims investigators continued to question him after his request to counsel, thus violating his Miranda rights. His request “Maybe I ought to have an attorney,”  was deemed ambiguous.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:1994 in cue sports
Category:Miranda warning case law
Category:Pool (cue sports)
"""

From "Davis v. United States (2011)" ==> """
Davis v. United States, 564 U.S. 229 (2011), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States "[held] that searches conducted in objectively reasonable reliance on binding appellate precedent are not subject to the exclusionary rule".Davis v. U.S., 564 US 229 (2011).
References
External links
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Davis v. Washington" ==> """
Davis v. Washington, 547 U.S. 813 (2006), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States and written by Justice Antonin Scalia that established the test used to determine whether a hearsay statement is "testimonial" for Confrontation Clause purposes. Two years prior to its publication, in Crawford v. Washington, the Supreme Court held that the Confrontation Clause bars “admission of testimonial statements of a witness who did not appear at trial unless he was unavailable to testify, and the defendant had had a prior opportunity for cross-examination.”Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36, 53–54, 124 S.Ct. 1354, 158 L.Ed.2d 177 (2004). The Supreme Court declined to define "testimonial" in Crawford which left lower courts without any guidance.Davis v. Washington, 547 U.S. 813, 821 (2006).Andrew C. Fine, Refining Crawford: The Confrontation Claus After Davis v. Washington and Hammon v. Indiana, 105 Mich. L. Rev. First Impressions 11 (2006). However, in Davis v. Washington, along with Hammon v. Indiana which was consolidated with Davis, the Court clarified the meaning of "testimonial" and articulated a new standard.Stephen A. Saltzburg, Testimonial Hearsay and Confrontation, 21 Crim. Just. 47, 47 (Fall 2006)
Specifically, the Court stated that:Andrew Dylan, Working Through the Confrontation Clause After Davis v. Washington, 76 Fordham L. Rev. 1905, 1914 (2007) (quoting Davis v. Washington, 547 U.S. 813 (2006)).
The Court further developed this standard in Michigan v. Bryant.Paul F. Rothstein & Ronald J. Coleman, Confrontation's Multi-Analyst Problem, 9 Tex. A&M L. Rev. 165, 171 (2021).
 Davis v. Washington 
 Background 
Davis was arrested after Michelle McCottry called 911 and told the operator that he had beaten her with his fists and then left. At trial, McCottry did not testify, but the 911 call was offered as evidence of the connection between Davis and McCottry's injuries. Davis objected, arguing that presenting the recording without giving him the opportunity to cross-examine McCottry violated his Sixth Amendment right to confront his accuser as interpreted by the U.S. Supreme Court in Crawford v. Washington. The Washington Supreme Court disagreed, finding that the call was not "testimonial" and was therefore different from the statements at issue in Crawford.
 Opinion 
The Court held that McCottry's statements were nontestimonial. Although McCottry identified her attacker to the 911 operator, she provided the information intending to help the police resolve an "ongoing emergency," not to testify to a past crime.Davis, 547 U.S. at 827. Factors that were determinative in the Court's analysis were: 
 McCottry was "speaking about events as they were actually happening," rather than describing past events;
 "McCottry's call was plainly a call for help against bona fide physical threat";
 The "elicited statements were necessary to be able to resolve the present emergency, rather than simply to learn ... what had happened in the past"
 The fact that McCottry was providing frantic answers over the phone, in an untranquil environment.
 Hammon v. Indiana 
Davis v. Washington was decided alongside Hammon v. Indiana. In contrast to Davis, the statements in Hammon were "easily" found by the Court to be testimonial.Davis, 547 U.S. at 829.
In Hammon, responding to a domestic disturbance call, police found Amy Hammon on the porch appearing frightened and Herschel Hammon inside. After getting permission to go inside, the police saw a broken furnace in the kitchen and glass on the floor. The police proceeded to question the pair separately, and rebuffed multiple attempts by Herschel to enter the room where his wife was being interrogated.Davis v. Washington, 547 U.S. 813, 819 (2006) Ultimately, the wife signed an affidavit stating that Herschel had broken their furnace, shoved her down on the floor into the broken glass, and hit her in the chest, among other things. Herschel was charged with felony violation of a domestic no-contact order.Davis, 547 U.S. at 819. However, at Herschel's trial, Amy Hammon refused to testify. Nonetheless, the trial court allowed her affidavit to be admitted after it was authenticated by the interrogating officer.
The Supreme Court held that the affidavit was testimonial because it was "entirely clear from the circumstances that the interrogation was part of an investigation into possibly criminal past conduct." Specifically, the Court noted the following facts as indicative of the statements in the affidavit being testimonial:
 Amy Hammon told the police "things were fine" when the officers arrived;Davis, 547 U.S. at 830.
 The interrogating officer stated that he heard no arguments nor saw anything being broken while at the apartment;
 The affidavit responses were elicited after the interrogating officer had already questioned Amy Hammon once before;
 Ms. Hammon was interrogated in a separate room from her husband.
 Thomas's Concurrence/Dissent 
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a separate opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part. He argued that though McCottry's statements were not testimonial, the Court should not "guess" at the primary motive behind the statements.
References	
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Confrontation Clause case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Davison v. Von Lingen" ==> """
Davison v. Von Lingen, 113 U.S. 40 (1885), was a United States Supreme Court case.
On 1 August 1879, a charter-party was entered into between the owners of the steam-ship Whickham and the firm of A. Schumacher & Co., composed of George A. Von Lingen, Carl A. Von Lingen, and William G. Atkinson.Davison v. Von Lingen, 113 U.S. 40 (1885) Justia.com  The ship was expected to leave Béni Saf in time to reach Philadelphia by August but left later than expected so that the arrival was pushed back to September so the firm hired a different boat.
Decision
The contract was broken when the vessel was found not to have left on time.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:United States contract case law
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Aïn Témouchent Province
Category:History of Philadelphia
"""

From "Dawson Chemical Co. v. Rohm & Haas Co." ==> """
Dawson Chemical Co. v. Rohm & Haas Co., 448 U.S. 176 (1980), is a 1980 5–4 decision of the United States Supreme Court.  limiting the patent misuse doctrine and explaining the scope of the 1952 amendment of the patent laws that resurrected the contributory infringement doctrine in the wake of the Mercoid cases. (Mercoid I), and  (Mercoid II). The Mercoid  cases and a few predecessor cases had denied relief against patent infringement to patentees who were deriving revenue from the sale of unpatented products used as supplies for patented combinations or as components of patented combinations, even when the unpatented products were specially adapted for use with the patented combinations and even when they lacked any utility other than that use. The patentees used contributory infringement suits or threats of such suits to enforce their business model, which the Mercoid cases outlawed.
In the Mercoid cases the Court had stated: "The result of this decision, together with those which have preceded it, is to limit substantially the doctrine of contributory infringement. What residuum may be left we need not stop to consider."See Mercoid I, 320 U.S. at 669. This caused "some consternation among patent lawyers," and some  "segments of the patent bar eventually decided to ask Congress for corrective legislation that would restore some scope to the contributory infringement doctrine. With great perseverance, they advanced their proposal in three successive Congresses before it eventually was enacted in 1952."Dawson, 448 U.S. at 199-200. Dawson interpreted the 1952 amendments to re-establish contributory infringement as a possible claim for relief and held that supplying an unpatented product especially adapted for use in practicing a patented process and without any substantial non-infringing use was unlawful contributory infringement.
Background
Factual setting
This case is part of the aftermath of Monsanto Co. v. Rohm & Haas Co., in which Rohm & Haas succeeded in invalidating Monsanto's patent on propanil, a selective herbicide, by showing that Monsanto deceived the Patent Office in procuring the patent. Propanil thus became an unpatented product.After the courts found that Monsanto had committed fraudulent procurement of the patent, Monsanto dedicated the patent to the public. 448 U.S. at 182. With an estimated use of about 8 million pounds in 2001,U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2000-2001 Pesticide Market Estimates . propanil was one of the more widely used herbicides in the United States.If applied in the proper quantities, propanil kills weeds normally found in rice crops without adversely affecting the crops themselves. It thus permits spraying of general areas where the crops are already growing, and eliminates the necessity for hand weeding or flooding of the rice fields. 448 U.S. at 181.
Although Monsanto had obtained the product patent on propanil on the basis of its selective herbicidal property, Rohm & Haas was able in 1974 to obtain U.S, Patent No. 3,816,092 (the Wilson patent) on a process for applying propanil to inhibit the growth of undesirable plants in areas containing established crops. Claims 1 and 2 are illustrative for purposes of this case:
    1. A method for selectively inhibiting growth of undesirable plants in an area containing growing undesirable plants in an established crop, which comprises applying to said area [propanil] at a rate of application which inhibits growth of said undesirable plants and which does not adversely affect the growth of said established crop.
    2. The method according to claim 1 wherein the [propanil] is applied in a composition comprising [propanil] and an inert dilutent therefor at a rate of between 0.5 and 6 pounds of [propanil] per acre.
The claims describe the only substantial use for propanil.
Rohm & Haas exploits the process patent by manufacturing propanil and selling it to farmers. Rohm & Haas does not license the patent to the farmers but they acquire an implied license to practice the process by operation of law when they buy propanil from Rohm & Haas, the owner of the process patent. Rohm & Haas does not license the patent to other manufacturers of agricultural chemicals, such as Dawson, which had been making and selling propanil for herbicidal use before Rohm & Haas received its patent. Dawson did not stop engaging in this business after the patent issued, and it sold propanil in packages labeled with instructions to use it as described in the patent. Accordingly, Rohm & Haas sued Dawson for contributory infringement and active inducement of infringement under 35 U.S.C. § 271(c)–(d). Dawson then requested a patent license but Rohm & Haas refused.448 U.S. at 183.
Proceedings in district court
When Rohm & Haas refused to grant it a license, Dawson raised a defense of patent misuse and counterclaimed for alleged antitrust violations. The parties stipulated the facts and Dawson moved for summary judgment of patent misuse, on the grounds that Rohm & Haas misused its patent by allowing the use of the patented method only to purchasers of its own propanil. The district court agreed and dismissed the complaint. In concluding that patent misuse occurred the district court stressed several points. First, Rohm & Haas refused to grant licenses when requested, which Mercoid had offered to do in the Mercoid cases. Therefore, Rohm & Haas "by seeking to monopolize the sale of an unpatented component of its protected method without even attempting to license other manufacturers, is exploiting its patent in a manner which is less legitimate than the exploitation condemned by the Supreme Court in Mercoid."1976 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 13707, at *19. Further, the court pointed to the court of appeals opinion in B.B. Chemical Co. v. Ellis, in which the misuse was based on the patentee's selling "unpatented component products specially made for use in a patented process for reinforcing shoe insoles; [and] the component had no other substantial commercial use."1976 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 13707, at *12. Finally, the facts of Mercoid involved a non-staple switch specially designed for use to practice the patent. The court concluded that the enactment of § 271(d) was intended to overrule the dicta in Mercoid against there being any residuum of contributory infringement but was not intended to overturn the ruling as to the specific facts, which the court considered equivalent to those of the case before it.1976 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 13707, at *28-29.
Ruling of Fifth Circuit
Rohm & Haas appealed to the Fifth Circuit, which reversed. It concluded that § 271(d) was intended to "provide for a patentee's right to exclude others and reserve to itself, if it chooses, the right to sell nonstaples used substantially only in its invention."448 U.S. at 185.
thumb|right|150px|Justice Harry A. Blackmun
Ruling of Supreme Court
Justice Harry Blackmun delivered the opinion of a 5-4 Court in which Chief Justice Warren Burger and Justices Potter Stewart, Lewis Powell, and William Rehnquist joined. Justice Byron R. White filed a dissenting opinion in which Justices William J. Brennan, Thurgood Marshall, and John Paul Stevens joined. Justice Stevens also filed a separate dissent.
Majority opinion
Importance of case
Justice Blackmun began by describing the case and its importance:
[This case] presents an important question of statutory interpretation arising under the patent laws. The issue before us is whether the owner of a patent on a chemical process is guilty of patent misuse, and therefore is barred from seeking relief against contributory infringement of its patent rights, if it exploits the patent only in conjunction with the sale of an unpatented article that constitutes a material part of the invention and is not suited for commercial use outside the scope of the patent claims.
The answer will determine whether respondent, the owner of a process patent on a chemical herbicide, may maintain an action for contributory infringement against other manufacturers of the chemical used in the process.
To resolve this issue, we must construe the various provisions of 35 U.S.C. § 271, which Congress enacted in 1952 to codify certain aspects of the doctrines of contributory infringement and patent misuse that previously had been developed by the judiciary.448 U.S. at 179
Contributory infringement versus patent misuse
The Court traced the doctrines of contributory infringement and patent misuse back respectively to  Wallace v. Holmes,29 F. Cas. 74 (No. 17,100) (C.C.D. Conn. 1871). and Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Mfg. Co.. "Both doctrines originally were developed by the courts" and "both concern the relationship between a patented invention and unpatented articles or elements that are needed for the invention to be practiced." But since 1952 when Congress enacted 35 U.S.C. § 271, they are governed by statute rather than judge-made rules.Dawson, 448 U.S. at 179-80.
"Of particular import to the present controversy are subsections (c) and (d). The former defines conduct that constitutes contributory infringement; the latter specifies conduct of the patentee that is not to be deemed misuse."448 U.S. at 181. They provide:
The Court explained the reason for the doctrine of contributory infringement:
 It exists to protect patent rights from subversion by those who, without directly infringing the patent themselves, engage in acts designed to facilitate infringement by others. This protection is of particular importance in situations . . . where enforcement against direct infringers would be difficult, and where the technicalities of patent law make it relatively easy to profit from another's invention without risking a charge of direct infringement.448 U.S. at 189.
But the doctrine has encountered difficulties because of "concern for potential anticompetitive tendencies inherent in actions for contributory infringement." Thus, the "judicial history of contributory infringement thus may be said to be marked by a period of ascendancy, in which the doctrine was expanded to the point where it became subject to abuse, followed by a somewhat longer period of decline, in which the concept of patent misuse was developed as an increasingly stringent antidote to the perceived excesses of the earlier period."
An example of ascendency was the decision in Leeds & Catlin Co. v. Victor Talking Machine Co.,. in which the Court upheld an injunction against contributory infringement by a manufacturer of phonograph discs specially designed for use in a patented disc-and-stylus phonograph-player combination. Although the disc itself was not patented, the Court noted that it was essential to the functioning of the patented combination, and that its method of interaction with the stylus was what "mark[ed] the advance upon the prior art."Leeds & Catlin, 213 U.S. at 330. Also, the disc was useful only when used with the stylus of the patent. The contributory infringement doctrine then "achieved its high-water mark with the decision in Henry v. A.B. Dick Co.. In that case, a divided Court extended contributory infringement principles to permit a post-sale restriction by which a manufacturer of a patented mimeograph machine required purchasers to buy from the patentee all supplies used in connection with the patented machine (for example, such staple items as paper and ink). The Court reasoned that the market for these supplies was created by the invention, and that sale of a license to use them could be therefore properly be limited by whatever conditions the patent owner wished to impose.See 224 U.S. at 31-32. The A.B. Dick decision and its progeny in the lower courts led to a vast expansion in tie-in conditions in the licensing of patented goods and processes, and control of markets for staple and nonstaple goods alike.Dawson, 448 U.S. at 190-91.
This led to "an inevitable judicial reaction" and the overruling of the A.B. Dick case. In Motion Picture Patents Co. v. Universal Film Mfg. Co., the Court "signalled a new trend that was to continue for years thereafter." In that case, the owner of a patent on film projection equipment attempted to prevent competitors from selling film for use in the patented equipment by attaching to the projectors it sold a notice purporting to condition use of the machine on exclusive use of its unpatented film. Relying upon the rule that the scope of a patent "must be limited to the invention described in the claims,Motion Picture Patents,Motion Picture Patents, 243 U.S. at 511. the Court held that the attempted restriction on use of unpatented supplies was improper because it expanded the patent monopoly beyond the scope of the claims and the patent law.See Dawson, 448 U.S. at 191-92.
A series of cases followed in which the Court condemned various tie-ins. In Carbice Corp. v. American Patents Dev. Corp.,. the Court denied relief to a patentee that tied use of a patented shipping package to the purchase of unpatented, staple dry ice. Leitch Manufacturing Co. v. Barber Co.,. found patent misuse in an attempt to exploit a process patent for the curing of cement through tying to the use of the process the purchase of bituminous emulsion, an unpatented staple article of commerce used in the process. The Leitch Court refused to limit the rule of Carbice and Motion Picture Patents to cases involving explicit tie-in agreements extending the patent monopoly, and it stated the broad proposition that "every use of a patent as a means of obtaining a limited monopoly of unpatented material is prohibited."Leitch,Leitch, 302 U.S. at 463. Morton Salt Co. v. G.S. Suppiger Co.,. involved an attempt by tie-in to control the market for salt tablets used in a patented dispenser; the Court explicitly linked the doctrine of patent misuse to the "unclean hands" doctrine traditionally applied by courts of equity. Its companion case, B.B. Chemical Co. v. Ellis,. held that patent misuse barred relief even where infringement had been actively induced, and that practical difficulties in profitably marketing a patented invention could not justify patent misuse.See Dawson, 448 U.S. at 192-95.
None of the Court's decisions up to this point had explicitly addressed how the doctrines of contributory infringement and patent misuse applied in the case of a tie-in restriction on a nonstaple article capable of use only for infringing a patent. "[S]ome courts and commentators apparently took the view that control of nonstaple items capable only of infringing use might not bar patent protection against contributory infringement. This view soon received a serious, if not fatal, blow from the Court's controversial decisions" in The Mercoid Cases. In these cases, "the Court definitely held that any attempt to control the market for unpatented goods would constitute patent misuse, even if those goods had no use outside a patented invention."See 448 U.S. at 195.
Court's analysis of the Mercoid cases
Both Mercoid cases involved a single patent that claimed a combination of elements for a furnace heating system. Mid-Continent was the owner of the patent, and Honeywell was its only licensee. Although neither company made or installed the furnace system, Honeywell manufactured and sold stoker switches especially made for and essential to the system's operation, and the switches had no other substantial use. The right to build and use the patented furnace system was granted to purchasers of the stoker switches, and royalties owed the patentee were calculated on the number of stoker switches sold. Mercoid manufactured and marketed a competing stoker switch that was designed to be used only in the patented combination. Mercoid had been offered a sublicense but had refused to take one. Mid-Continent and Honeywell separately sued Mercoid for contributory infringement and it raised tie-in patent misuse as a defense.448 U.S. at 195-96.
In Mercoid I, the Court held the licensing arrangement to be an unlawful attempt to extend the patent monopoly. The Dawson Court said that the Mercoid I opinion "painted with a very broad brush." Prior patent misuse decisions had involved attempts "to secure a partial monopoly in supplies consumed . . . or unpatented materials employed" in connection with the practice of the invention. None of them, however, had involved an integral component necessary to the functioning of the patented system.See Mercoid I, 320 U.S. at 665. Yet, the Mercoid Court refused to infer any "difference in principle" from this distinction in the facts.  Instead, it stated an expansive legal rule that apparently admitted no exception:
The necessities or convenience of the patentee do not justify any use of the monopoly of the patent to create another monopoly. The fact that the patentee has the power to refuse a license does not enable him to enlarge the monopoly of the patent by the expedient of attaching conditions to its use. . . . The method by which the monopoly is sought to be extended is immaterial. . . . When the patentee ties something else to his invention, he acts only by virtue of his right as the owner of property to make contracts concerning it, and not otherwise. He then is subject to all the limitations upon that right which the general law imposes upon such contracts. The contract is not saved by anything in the patent laws because it relates to the invention. If it were, the mere act of the patentee could make the distinctive claim of the patent attach to something which does not possess the quality of invention. Then the patent would be diverted from its statutory purpose and become a ready instrument for economic control in domains where the anti-trust acts or other laws, not the patent statutes, define the public policy.Dawson, 448 U.S. at 196 (quoting Mercoid, 329 U.S. at 666).
The Mercoid Court "recognized that its reasoning directly conflicted with Leeds & Catlin Co. v. Victor Talking Machine Co." and it "registered disapproval, if not outright rejection, of that case."See Mercoid I, 320 U.S. at 668. It also recognized that "[t]he result of this decision, together with those which have preceded it, is to limit substantially the doctrine of contributory infringement." Then the Mercoid "Court commented, rather cryptically, that it would not 'stop to consider' what 'residuum' of the contributory infringement doctrine 'may be left.'"
As for Mercoid II the Dawson Court said that it "did not add much to the breathtaking sweep of its companion decision," but it nonetheless commented: "However worthy it may be, however essential to the patent, an unpatented part of a combination patent is no more entitled to monopolistic protection than any other unpatented device."Dawson, 448 U.S. at 197 quoting Mercoid 320 U.S. at 684.
 Court's conclusions about caselaw 
The Court drew two principal conclusions from its review of the case law up to the Mercoid cases. It saw "a fairly complicated picture in which the rights and obligations of patentees as against contributory infringers have varied over time." It drew these inferences pertinent to the case before it:
How § 271 affected Mercoid
"The Mercoid decisions left in their wake some consternation among patent lawyers [Footnote 15] and a degree of confusion in the lower courts.448 U.S. at 199. As a result: "Certain segments of the patent bar eventually decided to ask Congress for corrective legislation that would restore some scope to the contributory infringement doctrine. With great perseverance, they advanced their proposal in three successive Congresses before it eventually was enacted in 1952 as 35 U.S.C. § 271."448 U.S. at 200.
The majority agreed with Rohm & Hass that "§ 271(d) immunizes its conduct from the charge of patent misuse," and therefore "it should not be barred from seeking relief." In summary:
The approach that Congress took toward the codification of contributory infringement and patent misuse reveals a compromise between those two doctrines and their competing policies that permits patentees to exercise control over non-staple articles used in their inventions. Section 271(c) identifies the basic dividing line between contributory infringement and patent misuse. It adopts a restrictive definition of contributory infringement that distinguishes between staple and nonstaple articles of commerce... As a result, it is no longer necessary to resort to the doctrine of patent misuse in order to deny patentees control over staple goods used in their inventions.448 U.S. at 200-01.
Also, § 271(d) rolled back Mercoid 's expansion of misuse to nonstaples:
In our view, the provisions of § 271(d) effectively confer upon the patentee, as a lawful adjunct of his patent rights, a limited power to exclude others from competition in nonstaple goods. A patentee may sell a nonstaple article himself while enjoining others from marketing that same good without his authorization. By doing so, he is able to eliminate competitors, and thereby to control the market for that product. Moreover, his power to demand royalties from others for the privilege of selling the nonstaple item itself implies that the patentee may control the market for the nonstaple good; otherwise, his "right" to sell licenses for the marketing of the nonstaple good would be meaningless, since no one would be willing to pay him for a superfluous authorization.  271(d) effectively confer upon the patentee, as a lawful adjunct of his patent rights, a limited power to exclude others from competition in nonstaple goods. A patentee may sell a nonstaple article himself while enjoining others from marketing that same good without his authorization. By doing so, he is able to eliminate competitors, and thereby to control the market for that product. Moreover, his power to demand royalties from others for the privilege of selling the nonstaple item itself implies that the patentee may control the market for the nonstaple good; otherwise, his "right" to sell licenses for the marketing of the nonstaple good would be meaningless, since no one would be willing to pay him for a superfluous authorization.448 U.S. at 201.
Since all of what Rohm & Hass did here is immunized under § 271(d), it is entitled to prevail against Dawson in its contributory infringement suit.448 U.S. at 202.
The majority found that the legislative history confirmed its view. Even though Senator McCarran, a spokesman for the legislation, commented on the floor of the Senate that the Act just "codif[ies] the patent laws," he also submitted a statement "which explained that, although the general purpose of the Act was to clarify existing law, it also included several changes taken '[i]n view of decisions of the Supreme Court and others.' " The legislative reports also said that § 271 was intended "to codify in statutory form the principles of contributory infringement and, at the same time, [to] eliminate... doubt and confusion" that had resulted from "decisions of the courts in recent years."448 U.S. at 203-04.
In addition, there was testimony in the 1948 hearings on the legislation from the "New York Patent Law Association, which had supervised drafting of the legislation... that candidly declared that the purpose of the proposal was to reverse the trend of Supreme Court decisions that indirectly had cut back on the contributory infringement doctrine." This group "criticized several decisions, including Leitch and Carbice as well as the two Mercoids... [and] went on to explain that the proposed legislation was designed to counteract this effect by providing that... enforcement of the right to be protected against contributory infringement... shall not be regarded as misuse of the patent." Giles Rich, then a prominent New York patent lawyer, testified that the proper distinction was that between the Carbice and Mercoid cases, stressing the staple-nonstaple distinction between dry ice and the special stoker switch without any noninfringing use was critical. Because proposed § 271 "incorporated a staple-nonstaple distinction in the definition of contributory infringement," Rich argued, the bill would "correct [the] situation left by Mercoid without giving sanction to practices such as those in the Carbice case."338 U.S. at 205-06.
Rich spoke out similarly in the 1949 hearings, the majority noted. "To restore the doctrine of contributory infringement where it was most needed, Rich argued, it was essential to restrict pro tanto the judicially created doctrine of patent misuse":
[W]e are dealing with a problem which involves a conflict between two doctrines, contributory infringement and misuse... [T]he only way you can make contributory infringement operative again as a doctrine is to make some exceptions to the misuse doctrine and say that certain acts shall not be misuse... Contributory infringement has been destroyed by the misuse doctrine...448 U.S. at 207-08. 
The majority opinion summarized the meaning of § 271(d) as disclosed by the hearings as follows:
 It is the consistent theme of the legislative history that the statute was designed to accomplish a good deal more than mere clarification. It significantly changed existing law, and the change moved in the direction of expanding the statutory protection enjoyed by patentees. The responsible congressional Committees were told again and again that contributory infringement would wither away if the misuse rationale of the Mercoid decisions remained as a barrier to enforcement of the patentee's rights. They were told that this was an undesirable result that would deprive many patent holders of effective protection for their patent rights. They were told that Congress could strike a sensible compromise between the competing doctrines of contributory infringement and patent misuse if it eliminated the result of the Mercoid decisions, yet preserved the result in Carbice. And they were told that the proposed legislation would achieve this effect by restricting contributory infringement to the sphere of nonstaple goods, while exempting the control of such goods from the scope of patent misuse. These signals cannot be ignored. They fully support the conclusion that, by enacting §§ 271(c) and (d), Congress granted to patent holders a statutory right to control nonstaple goods that are capable only of infringing use in a patented invention, and that are essential to that invention's advance over prior art.448 U.S. at 213.
Post-1952 Supreme Court decisions
Dawson argued that post-1952 decisions of the Supreme Court such as the two Aro decisions, continued to follow Mercoid and rejected the majority's interpretation of § 271(d). In Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co. (Aro I), (Aro I). the Court had considered whether Aro's supplying to GM car owners a piece of common fabric cut to fit the contours of a patented convertible top combination, where the owners wanted to replace a worn top, was contributory infringement. Because contributory infringement cannot exist without underlying direct infringement, and the car owners had a right to keep their cars in good repair, there was no direct infringement and thus no contributory infringement. In so ruling, the Aro Court had quoted passages in Mercoid that said no part of a patented combination, such as the unpatented fabric top of the convertible top combination. was essential or the heart or gist of the invention and therefore separately protectable. The Dawson majority said this ruling was not inconsistent with its interpretation of § 271(d). In Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co. (Aro II), (Aro II).  the same controversy turned to Ford cars that used the convertible top invention but had not been licensed. This time the Aro II majority held that repairing unlicensed cars by supplying new fabric tops was contributory infringement under § 271(c). That, too, the Dawson majority said, was consistent with its interpretation of § 271. Moreover, the Court said, the Aro II majority rejected attempted reliance on Mercoid because "§ 271 was enacted for the express purpose . . . of overruling any blanket invalidation of the [contributory infringement] doctrine that could be found in the Mercoid opinions." Finally, the Court said, the Aro cases involved repair versus reconstruction, for which the staple-nonstaple distinction is not relevant, the case at bar involved "the primary-use market for a chemical process," in which the staple-nonstaple distinction "supplies the controlling benchmark."Dawson, 448 U.S. at 217-20.
Dissenting opinion by Justice White
thumb|150px|right|Justice Byron White
Writing for a four-justice minority, Justice White strongly criticized the majority because it "recognizes, as it must, that § 271 does not, on its face, exempt the broad category of nonstaple materials from the misuse doctrine, yet construes it to do so based on what it has gleaned from the testimony of private patent lawyers given in hearings before congressional Committees and from the testimony of Department of Justice attorneys opposing the bill." Despite the fact that nothing in support of the Court's construction could be "found in the Committee Reports or in the statements of those Congressmen or Senators sponsoring the bill," he added, the majority chose to rely "only on the opposing positions of nonlegislators . . . to extend the patent monopoly beyond preexisting standards."448 U.S. at 223-24.
White reviewed the prior patent misuse cases from Motion Picture Patents to Mercoid and found they uniformly prohibited "every use of a patent as a means of obtaining a limited monopoly of unpatented material," and did so regardless of "the nature of the device by which the owner of a patent seeks to effect such unauthorized extension of the monopoly."448 U.S. at 227. He pointed out that the lower courts in the B.B. Chemical case "had rejected the patent owner's attempt to distinguish previous patent misuse cases as involving efforts to control the use of staple materials with substantial noninfringing uses."448 U.S. at 227. In that case, the patent covered a process in which an unpatented strip of fabric was coated with an unpatented rubber cement composition. The accused infringer supplied similarly coated strips, which were unpatented but specially adapted for use in the patented method. The patentee unsuccessfully sued for contributory infringement. This was held patent misuse. B.B. Chemical Co. v. Ellis.  The Supreme Court then unanimously affirmed them, which White said "necessarily reject[ed]ing petitioner's position that patent misuse was limited to staple products, and did not apply when the alleged infringer went beyond selling an unpatented staple material and manufactured and sold materials useful only in the patented construct."448 U.S. at 227. White pointed out that there had been a conflict of circuits on the issue and it had been briefed by the parties and the United States as amicus curiae. Id. n.2.
According to White, the line of cases since Motion Picture Patents "established, even before this Court's decisions in the Mercoid cases, . . . that the patent misuse doctrine would bar recovery by a patent holder who refused to license others to use a patented process unless they purchased from him an unpatented product for use in the process."448 U.S. at 229. He argued that Rohm & Haas's "conduct in this clearly constitutes patent misuse under these pre-Mercoid decisions because [it] refuses to license others to use its patented process unless they purchase from it unpatented propanil." He dismissed as irrelevant the fact that propanil was a non-staple. Indeed, the fact that propanil lacked non-infringing use further made the conduct misuse:
Moreover, the fact that propanil is a nonstaple product having no substantial use except in the patented process has been without significance at least since B.B. Chemical, and only serves to reinforce the conclusion that respondent is attempting to extend the patent monopoly to unpatented materials. Because propanil has no substantial noninfringing use, it cannot be sold without incurring liability for contributory infringement unless the vendor has a license to sell propanil or its vendee has an unconditional license to use the patented process. Respondent's refusal to license those who do not purchase propanil from it thus effectively subjects all competing sellers of propanil to liability for contributory infringement.448 U.S. at 230-31. . . . This would permit an even more complete extension of the patent monopoly to a market for unpatented materials than would result from a patentee's attempts to control sales of staples that have substantial alternative uses outside of the patented process.
Section 271(d) should not be interpreted to immunize this conduct without a clear signal from Congress that it desires that result, he said, and that signal is lacking. 271(d) "does not state that respondent may exclude all competitors from the propanil market by refusing to license all those who do not purchase propanil from it. This is the very conduct that constitutes patent misuse under the traditional doctrine."448 U.S. at 233.
He turned to the opinion of the court of appeals, which chose to give Rohm & Haas a monopoly over unpatented propanil because "the rights to license another to sell [nonstaple] unpatented items would be rendered worthless if the only right conferred by (d)(1) were the right to sell the item as one competitor among many freely competing." That was wrong for two reasons. First, Rohm & Haas could collect royalties from its licensed competitors, who would need licenses to avoid contributory infringement liability. Second, "it also is fundamentally inconsistent with the congressional policy 'to preserve and foster competition' in the sale of unpatented materials, a policy that, as we have recognized, survived enactment of § 271."
The majority "acknowledges that respondent refused to license others to sell propanil, but it observes that 'nothing on the face of the statute requires it to do so.' " White says that is so, but that does not "absolve" Rohm & Haas from misuse: "Section 271(d) does not define conduct that constitutes patent misuse; rather, it simply outlines certain conduct that is not patent misuse. Because the terms of the statute are terms of exception, the absence of any express mention of a licensing requirement does not indicate that respondent's refusal to license others is protected by § 271(d). This much seems elementary."448 U.S. at 234. The legislative history indicates only an intention by Congress "of reinstating the doctrine of contributory infringement as it had been developed by decisions prior to Mercoid, and of overruling any blanket invalidation of the doctrine that could be found in the Mercoid opinions." The majority can find nothing in the debates or Committee Reports to support its position, or anything said by legislators, so it turns to "the opinions of private patent attorneys as to the meaning of the proposed legislation."448 U.S. at 236-37. White then says it is contrary to precedent to do that. Moreover, not even the patent attorneys went as far as the majority in overturning misuse law. The patent attorneys only argued that knowingly selling a non-staple specially adapted for infringement should be made unlawful, as it was in § 271(c). That testimony does "not support the Court's broad holding that Congress intended to give patent holders complete control over nonstaple materials that otherwise would be in the public domain." The majority, White protested, was extending contributory infringement "far beyond what the Committees were told § 271(d) would effect. Indeed, the representations were that, aside from the exemptions spelled out in § 271(d), a patentee's control of nonstaples would be subject to the doctrine of patent misuse."448 U.S. at 238.
Dissent by Justice Stevens
thumb|right|Justice John Paul Stevens
Justice Stevens joined in the White dissent but added further remarks to criticize the majority's approach. He called Rohm & Haas's conduct "a classic case of patent misuse" that "nothing in 35 U.S.C. § 271(d) excludes . . . from the well-established misuse doctrine."448 U.S. at 240. He observed that the majority was led into reaching its result by the fact that it would not have been "profitable to exploit this patent by granting express licenses for fixed terms to users of propanil or by granting licenses to competing sellers." and that the patent would have little value "unless the patentee is permitted to engage in patent misuse." That was not a sound basis for the majority's decision: "For the logic of the Court's holding would seem to justify the extension of the patent monopoly to unpatented nonstaples even in cases in which the patent could be profitably exploited without misuse."448 U.S. at 241.
Commentary
Hodgeman
Roger Hodgeman sees the problems encountered in Dawson Chemical as "engendered by conflict between lawmaking authorities." Law occurs in legislation and in judicial opinions dealing with the subject matter of the legislation. " Ideally, these two sources of law should not be at odds with each other and should reflect the same policies on subject matter governed by federal law." But in the case of §§ 271(c) and (d) that did not happen, largely because the legislative history was ambiguous.Roger Hodgeman,  Resolution of the Conflict between Contributory Infringement and Patent Misuse: Dawson Chemical Co. v. Rohm & (and) Haas Co., 50 U.  314, 336 (1981).
The issue presented in Dawson Chemical was "whether Rohm & Haas' method of selling unpatented propanil, coupled with a refusal to license competitors to sell that item, constituted patent misuse," and therefore "that Rohm & Haas should have been required to grant express licenses to competing producers of propanil before it could claim and recover for contributory infringement. Both parties and the majority and dissent made strong arguments for their respective positions. Hodgeman maintains that the majority correctly rejected the proposal to impose compulsory licensing:
If the Court had required that Rohm & Haas grant licenses to its competitors before suing for infringement under section 271(c), especially in light of the differing interpretations of pre-Mercoid case law, then the Court necessarily would have engaged in a great deal of judicial legislation reaching far into uncharted waters that cannot be reached by interpretation of existing law. Without a clear signal from Congress and with no clear reconciliation of the pre-Mercoid contributory infringement and patent misuse decisions, the Court was wise not to read any additional requirement into section 271.Hodgeman, supra at 338–39.
He sees the result of the decision "not as inherently unjustifiable as the dissent suggests." To be sure, Rohm & Haas may choose to monopolize the sale of all propanil in the United States for the life of the patent, but propanil is not in widespread noninfringing use—it has no noninfringing use. Unless someone discovers another use, the monopoly and commercial value will coincide with the patented invention.Hodgeman, supra at 339. Before the invention, propanil was worthless nec it had no commercial use. On the other hand, Hodgeman says the compromise made here may give Rohm & Haas too long an exclusive right:
Congress might consider enacting legislation that would limit a patent owner's right to sue contributory infringers to a period of seven years, when the patent owner (1) sells the patented invention's material, nonpatented, nonstaple component, which has no substantial noninfringing use, and at the same time (2) expressly refuses to license any competitors to sell the component.Hodgeman, supra at 340.
Kobak
James Kobak observes, "Watershed event though it was, the Rohm and Haas case does not appear to have led to many changes in patent licensing practices or to extensive practical reliance on Sections 271(c) and (d)." He attributes this to the risks of a misstep, which "have clearly counseled caution and conservatism in interpreting five to four Supreme Court decisions," and the fact that "fundamentally, a licensor could not at the time of licensing necessarily know with assurance whether an item would be held to be a non-staple – or whether it would remain that way for the life of the patent."James B. Kobak. The New Patent Misuse Law, 71 J.  859, 870–71 (1989).
The 1988 passage of § 271(d), however, may have significantly changed things by establishing that "a patentee may explicitly tie in either a license or sale transaction without being found guilty of misuse as long as its patent does not confer 'market power.' " Moreover, patentees are free to do this irrespective of "whether what is tied is ultimately determined to be a staple or non-staple." Accordingly, "if the patentee is confident that a non-staple is involved," then it can "also license (but not sell) under Section 271(d)(3) with a tie-in condition even if it fears that the patent may be found to confer market power."Kobak, supra at 873.
Sherry
Stephen Sherry argues that the majority should have "balanced the policy objectives embodied in the contributory infringement and patent misuse doctrines" against one another rather than expanding patent monopoly privileges. He states, "A balanced approach to the decision would have protected the patentee's privilege to derive economic benefit from the patent by permitting the use of tying arrangements" while preserving competition among suppliers of nonstaples and not imposing extra costs on consumers.Stephen F. Sherry, Extending The Patent Monopoly to Unpatented Nonstaple Goods—Dawson Chemical Co. v. Rohm & Haas Co., 30 . 875, 897–98 (1981).
Since Congress had not spoken one way or the other about tying nonstaples, Sherry argues, the Court should have looked to the patent law policy that disfavors contributory infringement, to the misuse policy disfavoring tie-ins, and considered each. Had it done so, "it might have opted for a more cautious and reasonable resolution to the Dawson conflict." Sherry maintains:
A tying scheme can enhance the economic reward received by a patent owner making the legal monopoly more profitable to the inventor. Increasing the remunerative aspects of the patent monopoly promotes the policy objectives of the patent law. Conversely, requiring the patent owner to license competitors that supply the tied product fosters competition favored by the antitrust laws. Permitting the use of a tying arrangement only when competition in the unpatented nonstaple component is maintained represents a balanced approach toward resolving the policy conflict present in Dawson.
Sherry insists that "Congress did not intend section 271(d) to endorse or reject tying arrangements per se." Rather, "Congress was apparently trying to
modify the [Mercoid] Court's view that some conduct was patent misuse per se irrespective of the actual effect it might have had on competition." Therefore, the Dawson Court should have effectuated this compromise to realize that "the logical result would have been to permit the use of tying arrangements only under circumstances where competition in the market supplying the nonstaple component would not be eliminated." The Court should not have ignored the testimony by some proponents of the amendment who "characterized section 271(d) as a remedial measure aimed at protecting those patent owners, like the one in Mercoid, who were willing to license others to supply the unpatented nonstaple components of the invention."
Morris
Ann Morris finds the majority's interpretation of §§ 271(c) and (d) correct – "The statutory language seems capable of no other interpretation." She finds the Dawson Court's position "consistent with its recent willingness to allow flexibility in matters concerning protection for intellectual property," as shown in such then recent pro-IP cases as Diamond v. Chakrabarty,. Aronson v. Quick Point Pencil Co.,. Zacchini v. Scripps-Howard Broadcasting Co.,. Kewanee Oil v. Bicron Corp.,. and Goldstein v. California,.
Morris insists:
A patentee of a combination or process [should] retain the rights of his patent monopoly, without relinquishing any of the control inherent in the right, even though part of his complex invention is not
patentable. The Court has seen that in today's industrial world, a nonstaple item (as defined by section 271(c)) should not dictate any narrowing of the patent privilege, for by definition it is used solely with the patented invention. More importantly, infringers of the patent should not be permitted to rely on thequirks of patentability to escape liability for their acts.Ann Morris, Patents - Restraining Sales of Nonstaple Components of Patented Process Is Not Patent Misuse'',  11  434, 443–44 (1981).
References
External links
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States misuse law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Dawson v. Delaware" ==> """
Dawson v. Delaware, 503 U.S. 159 (1992), was a United States Supreme Court decision that ruled that a person's rights of association and due process, as granted under the First Amendment and Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution, cannot be infringed upon if such an association has no bearing on the case at hand.
 Background 
Early in the morning of December 1, 1986, David Dawson and three other inmates escaped from the Delaware Correctional Center at Smyrna.  Dawson stole a car and headed south, while the other escapees stole another car and headed north.  After burglarizing one home in Kenton, Dawson entered the home of Richard and Madeline Kisner.  Dawson tied up Mrs. Kisner, who was at home alone preparing for work, and stabbed her 12 times before taking her car and some money.  He was found the next day sleeping in a different stolen car in Milford.
The Delaware Superior Court found Dawson guilty of first-degree murder and several other crimes on June 24, 1988.US District Court Information Order, Civil Action No. 96-300-RRM Retrieved August 12, 2012  During the penalty phase, the prosecution planned to present evidence that Dawson belonged to the prison's chapter of the Aryan Brotherhood, including expert testimony about that group, to prove that Dawson's membership was relevant to his crimes. Eventually, Dawson agreed to a stipulation that the Aryan Brotherhood was a white racist group that had its roots in a California prison gang of the same name, in return for the exclusion of expert testimony about the group. The jury concluded that the aggravating factors in the case, including Dawson's prison record, his escape from prison, the fact that he committed the murder adjunct to a second felony, and his association with the Aryan Brotherhood outweighed the mitigating factors and sentenced him to death. The Supreme Court of Delaware upheld the death sentence.
 Opinion of the Court 
In writing the Court's opinion, Chief Justice Rehnquist noted that the Constitution does not erect a per se barrier to the admission of evidence of a person's beliefs and associations during sentencing simply because those beliefs and associations are protected by the First Amendment. Chief Justice Rehnquist cited Barclay v. Florida, , for which he had written the Court's opinion as an Associate Justice, as a case where such beliefs were material in establishing the murderers' motives.  In Barclay, Elwood Barclay and four other black men, looking to start a race war, killed white hitchhiker Stephen Orlando in Jacksonville Beach, Florida, in 1974. The Supreme Court of Florida imposed the death penalty on Barclay and co-defendant Jacob John Dougan. In 1985, however, the court reversed itself by ordering that Barclay's sentence be commuted to life in prison with eligibility for parole in 25 years and that Dougan be re-sentenced.Florida Supreme Court Overturns Death Sentences In Racial Murder Retrieved November 13, 2012 Dougan was sentenced to death again in 1987 and remains on Florida's Death Row.Florida Department of Corrections Information on Jacob John Dougan, Retrieved May 26, 2013
Chief Justice Rehnquist noted that because of the narrowness of the stipulation regarding the Aryan Brotherhood that the Delaware trial court agreed to – that is, because the trial court did not seek to provide evidence that the chapter Dawson was associated with was engaged in or endorsed racist activities, or was engaged in or endorsed any other violent or unlawful acts – it violated Dawson's rights under both the First and Fourteenth Amendments. Chief Justice Rehnquist also noted that even if the Aryan Brotherhood chapter did hold racist beliefs, elements of racial hatred were absent in this case. Both Dawson and Kisner, the woman he murdered, were white. The Court vacated the sentence against Dawson and remanded the case.
 Concurrence 
In his concurrence, Justice Blackmun agreed with the Court's opinion, but specifically noted that the Court did not require harmless error review on remand. In the next-to-last paragraph of the Court's opinion, Chief Justice Rehnquist noted that the question of harmless error was not before the Court with regard to the admission of the Aryan Brotherhood stipulation. Justice Blackmun agreed with Rehnquist that the issue of harmless error was best left for Delaware to consider.
 Dissent 
In his dissent, Justice Thomas declared that he believed the Aryan Brotherhood stipulation spoke directly to Dawson's character, and as such the stipulation had relevance at sentencing as an aggravating factor. Justice Thomas noted that even if the prosecution did not introduce specific evidence of the Aryan Brotherhood chapter's activities, the jury could reasonably conclude that Dawson had engaged in some sort of illegal or forbidden activities during his membership in the gang. Justice Thomas cited a 1985 report from the U.S. Department of Justice about prison gangs to illustrate their deviant nature,Prison Gangs: Their Extent, Nature and Impact on Prisons, July 1985, U.S. Department of Justice Retrieved May 25, 2013 and the U.S. Court of Appeals case Jones v. Hamelman (7th Cir. 1989) to illustrate that expert testimony was unnecessary to describe a prison gang once its existence was noted.Jones v. Hamelman, 869 F. 2d 1023 (7th Cir. 1989) - a case in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit Retrieved January 20, 2013. Justice Thomas believed that the Court was imposing a double standard on the prosecution in this case and future cases by allowing Dawson to present mitigating character evidence during sentencing without explaining such evidence explicitly while not allowing the prosecution to do the same.
Chief Justice Rehnquist acknowledged Justice Thomas's points in the opinion. He wrote that while the state was certainly free to submit aggravating evidence, the stipulation in and of itself could not be viewed as "bad" character evidence in its own right. Chief Justice Rehnquist went further by noting:
 Aftermath 
Upon re-sentencing, David Dawson was sentenced to death a second time on April 2, 1993.  He was executed by lethal injection on April 26, 2001.Information on executions in Delaware  Retrieved August 11, 2012
 See also 
 First Amendment to the United States Constitution
 Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 503
 List of people executed in Delaware
 List of people executed in the United States in 2001
 References 
 External links 
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Day v. McDonough" ==> """
Day v. McDonough, 547 U.S. 198 (2006), is a US Supreme Court case involving the one-year statute of limitations for filing habeas corpus petitions that was established by the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA). In a 5–4 decision, the Court ruled that if the government unintentionally failed to object to the filing of a petition after the AEDPA limitations period has expired, it is not an abuse of discretion for a district court to dismiss sua sponte (on its own initiative) the petition on that basis.
 Background 
On September 3, 1998, Patrick Day was convicted of second-degree murder in Florida state court and sentenced to imprisonment for 55 years. After the Florida First District Court of Appeals affirmed Day's conviction and sentence, the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act (AEDPA) 365-day statute of limitations for Day to obtain federal habeas corpus relief began to run on March 20, 2000. On March 9, 2001, Day filed a post-conviction petition under Florida state procedure, which tolled the limitation period for filing a habeas petition until December 3, 2002, when the First District Court of Appeals issued its mandate denying Day collateral relief. By then, Day had used 353 of his allotted 365 days and accordingly had until December 16, 2002 to file a federal habeas petition.
However, Day did not file his petition until January 8, 2003, after the limitations period had run. A US magistrate judge nevertheless acknowledged that the petition was "in proper form" and ordered Florida to file an answer and to make all arguments regarding Day's potential failure to exhaust state remedies or procedural default. The order stated that those arguments would be waived if not addressed in the answer, but it did not expressly mention the statute of limitations. The answer of the State of Florida erroneously asserted that Day's petition was timely filed after "352 days of untolled time" and then addressed Day's substantive arguments.
In December 2003, the court sua sponte issued an order to show cause why Day's petition should not be dismissed as untimely. Day made three arguments against dismissal. Firstly, Day argued that the court should not dismiss his complaint after it had been pending for nearly a year without any suggestion that it was untimely. Secondly, Day argued that he had 90 days from the denial of his motion for rehearing on collateral appeal to file a petition for a writ of certiorari to the U.S. Supreme Court. Under his calculation, the limitation period for filing his federal habeas petition did not run until 90 days after November 15, 2002. Thirdly, Day argued that the state public defenders had withheld his trial transcript for 352 days and the delay had cost him time in which he could have worked toward filing his appeals.
The magistrate judge recommended dismissal of Day's habeas petition. In his objection to the report and recommendation of the magistrate judge, Day argued for the first time that the concession of timeliness by the state was dispositive because it was a forfeiture of that defense. The district court instead adopted the magistrate judge's report and dismissed Day's petition.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit granted a certificate of appealability only regarding Day's forfeiture argument and affirmed it in a per curiam decision.Day v. Crosby, 391 F.3d 1192 (11th Cir. 2004). Circuit Judges Gerald Bard Tjoflat, Joel Fredrick Dubina and William H. Pryor, Jr. constituted the three-judge panel that decided his appeal. The court had ruled on the issue to uphold the ability of a trial court to review sua sponte the timeliness of a petition.Jackson v. Sec'y for Dep't of Corrections, 292 F.3d 1347 (11th Cir. 2002)  The court also believed that Florida's concession of timeliness was "patently erroneous."
 Decision 
The Court affirmed the decision of the Eleventh Circuit in a 5–4 ruling. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg delivered the opinion for the majority in holding that district courts are permitted but not obliged to consider sua sponte the timeliness of a state prisoner's habeas corpus petition. Based on precedent involving other affirmative defenses to habeas petitions and the perceived lack of difference between outright dismissal by the district court and dismissal after allowing the State to amend its answer to include the limitations defense, the Court did not consider the district court's dismissal of Day's petition to be an abuse of discretion. Justices John Paul Stevens and Antonin Scalia filed dissenting opinions.
 Majority opinion 
The Court grouped the statute of limitations defense with other non-jurisdictional affirmative defenses to a habeas corpus petition such as exhaustion of remedies, which the Court had ruled in Granberry v. Greer, 481 U.S. 129 (1987) federal appellate courts may address sua sponte although the issue not had been raised at the district court level. There was similar precedent involving the non-retroactivity ruleSee Caspari v. Bohlen, 510 U.S. 383 (1994), ruling that courts are allowed but are not required to decline to apply the non-retroactivity rule if the State does not raise it. The rule prevents a habeas petitioner from challenging his conviction with changes in the law that postdate it. and procedural default.The Court had not addressed the waiver of procedural default in the habeas context but noted in its majority opinion that there was unanimity among the courts of appeals in ruling that it could also be raised sua sponte. The Court noted that the statute of limitations is expressly grouped with those other defenses under the current version of Rule 5(b) of the Rules Governing Section 2254Section 2254, a reference to 28 U.S.C. § 2254, is the statutory provision governing habeas corpus petitions filed by state prisoners. It is distinguished from Section 2255, which governs petitions filed by federal prisoners. Cases in the United States District Courts (simply known as the Habeas Rules), which provides that the State's answer to a habeas petition "must state whether any claim in the petition is barred by a failure to exhaust state remedies, a procedural bar, non-retroactivity, or a statute of limitations."
Day's argument was characterized by the Court as relying primarily on Habeas Rule 4, which requires district courts to "promptly examine" petitions and dismiss "if it plainly appears... that the petitioner is not entitled to relief." Day argued that this limited a court's ability to raise AEDPA's limitation sua sponte to the preanswer, initial screening stage, and that after that point, the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure governed the proceedings. Under Fed. R. Civ. P. 8(c), the statute of limitations defense is forfeited if it is not asserted in its answer, or an amendment thereto, just as the State of Florida failed to do. However, the Court believed that were it to accept Day's position, courts would rarely be positioned to raise AEDPA's time bar sua sponte because information essential to the time calculation is often absent until the State has filed, along with its answer, copies of documents from the state-court proceedings, as was the case in Day's proceedings.
The Court instead agreed with the State of Florida, which argued that "[t]he considerations of comity, finality, and the expeditious handling of habeas proceedings that motivated AEDPA...counsel against an excessively rigid or formal approach to the affirmative defenses" such as the statute of limitations. The State argued that Granberry was instructive in establishing that courts instead have the discretion in each case to decide "whether the administration of justice" would be better served by reaching the merits of the petition or dismissing it because of the statute of limitations, and a petition should not be deemed timely simply because a government attorney miscounted the days. The Court observed that the State could have simply amended its answer had the Magistrate Judge informed it of its computation error rather than acting sua sponte.Amendments to pleadings are governed by Fed. R. Civ. P. 15, which grants parties a limited time to amend a pleading once as of right, or thereafter with leave of the court. "Recognizing that an amendment to the State's answer might have obviated this controversy," the Court wrote, "we see no dispositive difference between that route, and the one taken here."
The Court concluded by emphasizing the need for the parties to receive fair notice and an opportunity to be heard before a court acts on its own initiative. Courts must also ensure that the petitioner is not significantly prejudiced by the delayed focus on the limitation issue, and "determine whether the interests of justice would be better served" by addressing the merits or by dismissing the petition as time barred. The Court also stated that a district court would not have the discretion to disregard the choice of a defendant to intelligently waive the limitations defense. In that case, however, the Court believed the Magistrate Judge gave Day due notice and a fair opportunity to show why the limitation period should not yield dismissal of the petition, and there was nothing to suggest that the State "strategically" withheld the defense or chose to relinquish it. The record instead indicated that the miscalculation was "merely an inadvertent error."
 Stevens' dissent 
Justice Stevens, though believing the case was rightly decided, dissented from the Court's decision to announce its judgment when a relevant case would be decided later in the term. Justice Breyer, who believed the case was wrongly decided, also joined in Stevens' dissent on this issue.
The Court had recently granted certiorari in Lawrence v. Florida,Cert. granted, 164 L. Ed. 2d 332 (2006). a case which would answer the question of whether Day's petition was actually barred by the statute of limitations. Stevens wrote, "It seems improvident to affirm a possibly erroneous Court of Appeals judgment that dismissed Day's habeas petition without an evaluation of its merits when we have already granted certiorari to address the issue on which the Court of Appeals may have erred." He suggested that the lower court may still avoid a "miscarriage of justice" by keeping Day's case on its docket until after Lawrence is decided, "but it would be better practice for us to do so ourselves."
 Scalia's dissent 
Scalia, joined by Breyer and Clarence Thomas, objected that the Court was disregarding the clear provisions of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP), which required the forfeiture of affirmative defenses when they are not raised. Because that ordinary forfeiture rule would be entirely consistent with the Habeas Rules and statutes, it should apply to the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act (AEDPA) statute of limitations. Scalia asserted that it is instead "the Court's unwarranted expansion of the timeliness rule enacted by Congress that is inconsistent with the statute, the Habeas Rules, the Civil Rules, and traditional practice."
The FRCP govern in habeas corpus proceedings to the extent that those rules are not inconsistent with federal statutes or the Habeas Rules.See Fed. R. Civ. P. 81. Scalia stated that the Court did not identify any such inconsistency "because there is none." Scalia believed the forfeiture rule could not be inconsistent with traditional habeas practice because there was no applicable statute of limitations until AEDPA was enacted in 1996. It was also consistent with Habeas Rule 5(b), which requires the State's answer to state whether any claim in the habeas petition is barred by the statute of limitations. Finally, as Day had argued, forfeiture is also consistent with Habeas Rule 4 because that rule provides for sua sponte screening and dismissal by the district courts only prior to the filing of the State's answer. Scalia believed that the Court's concern over whether district courts could ever raise the AEDPA limitation sua sponte under Day's construction of the Habeas Rules begged the question, by assuming that courts should be able to raise that issue sua sponte. "That is precisely the question before us."
Scalia considered it most important that no provision of the habeas statute would be contradicted or undermined by applying the forfeiture rule to the limitations period. "Quite the contrary, on its most natural reading, the statute calls for the forfeiture rule." AEDPA enacted the one-year limitation period "without further qualification." Given the "background understanding" that failure to raise the defense of limitations constitutes waiver, "the statute implies that the usual forfeiture rule is applicable."
Scalia distinguished the other affirmative defenses to habeas petitions as having been created as judicial doctrines by the courts, "in the exercise of their traditional equitable discretion, because they were seen as necessary to protect the interests of comity and finality that federal collateral review of state criminal proceedings necessarily implicates." None of the defenses involved a time limitation, and the one-year limit in AEDPA "is entirely a recent creature of statute. If comity and finality did not compel any time limitation at all, it follows a fortiori that they do not compel making a legislatively created, forfeitable time limitation nonforfeitable." Court precedent prior to AEDPA had furthermore affirmatively rejected that the traditionally broad discretionary powers of habeas courts would support the imposition of a time limitation. "There is, therefore, no support for the notion that the traditional equitable discretion that governed habeas proceedings permitted the dismissal of habeas petitions on the sole ground of untimeliness."
The Court's observation that there was no substantive difference between allowing the State to amend its answer and simply dismissing sua sponte was characterized by Scalia as "what appears to be the chief ground of its decision." Scalia argued that if there was truly no "dispositive difference" between the alternatives, "the natural conclusion would be that there is no compelling reason to disregard the Civil Rules. Legislatively enacted rules are surely entitled to more respect than this apparent presumption that, when nothing substantial hangs on the point, they do not apply as written." Ata minimum, Scalia believed it "a nontrivial value in itself" to observe "the formalities of our adversary system" by requiring the State to amend its own pleading. Scalia also observed that in contrast to the "novel regime" adopted by the majority, there is already a well-developed body of law regarding whether a party should have leave to amend a pleading. "Ockham is offended by today's decision, even if no one else is."
Scalia also believed that under the Court's ruling, it would not be an abuse of discretion for a district court to override an affirmative waiver of the defense by the State, and that the Court's assertion to the contrary was "without relevant citation or reasoning."
 Footnotes 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "De Canas v. Bica" ==> """
De Canas v. Bica, 424 U.S. 351 (1976), was a case decided by the US Supreme Court on February 25, 1976, that challenged Section 2805(a) of the California Labor Code.
This case was monumental in defining the relationship between federal and state powers on immigration policy, as well as illustrating the ways in which state governments can fit into the overarching reach of federal immigration power.
 Provisions of the law 
Section 2805(a) of the California Labor Code prohibits employers from knowingly employing aliens that do not have lawful residence in the United States if their employment would have a negative effect on lawful resident workers.
 Background 
The petitioners of this case were migrant farmworkers, who had been employed by farm labor contractors, the respondents, between June and September 1972. On September 28, 1972, the farm labor contractors refused to extend their employment due to the surplus of labor that they had. The petitioners filed a complaint against the respondents, alleging that they were lawful residents and that their employers knowingly employed illegal aliens, violating Section 2805(a) of the California Labor Code. This complaint not only sought for the reinstatement of their employment, but to file an injunction against the respondent's continued employment of illegal aliens. In response, the respondents filed a demurrer, challenging the constitutionality of this section of the labor code itself.
Ignoring the petitioner's complaint, the California Superior Court ruled that Section 2805(a) of the California Labor Code was unconstitutional since it interfered with immigration policy – an area over which Congress has exclusive power.
The California Court of Appeals, Second Appellate District, affirmed this lower court ruling, emphasizing that congressional power was exclusive within the bounds of immigration and naturalization.
This ruling was again challenged, leading to the US Supreme Court granting a writ of certiorari.
 Ruling 
In a decision published on February 25, 1976, the US Supreme Court unanimously reversed the lower court's ruling, finding that Section 2805(a) of the California Labor Court was constitutional, and that it is not preempted under the Supremacy Clause of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA). The majority opinion, written by Justice William J. Brennan Jr., articulated three main reasons for the Supreme Court's decision:
 Although illegal aliens may be the subjects of this California statute, it is not immediately a regulation of immigration. Thus, even if a local statute were to have somewhat of an impact of immigration, it doesn't necessarily become a constitutionally prescribed regulation of immigration. 
 Preemption on the basis of congressional intent is not necessarily applicable, as the creation of federal acts such as the INA was not intended to derail a state's authority to regulate their employment and protect their workers. For example, the Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act, which prohibited farm workers from employing illegal aliens, was enacted in order to supplement state protections, and thus, the INA can function in the same manner.
 Interpreting this code should be up to the California courts, and they should subsequently decide to what extent this code is unconstitutional with the INA or any other federal act.
 Impacts of the law 
The ruling in this case provided insight into the role that state governments could play in immigration policy. In much of American history, immigration policy and regulations were exclusively delegated to the federal government – specifically the Congress. The federal government utilized their extensive plenary power to dictate all major immigration policies, limiting the influence of the state governments in this regard. Despite the fact that De Canas v. Bica challenged a California statute, the Supreme Court upheld the statute as constitutional, since it did not counter or infringe upon the Immigration and Nationality Act, or any other federal immigration act at that time. Thus, this case indicated that states were able to introduce policies that concerned immigration, as long as they didn't go against the goals of the federal government.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1976 in United States case law
"""

From "De Jonge v. Oregon" ==> """
De Jonge v. Oregon, 299 U.S. 353 (1937), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Fourteenth Amendment's due process clause applies freedom of assembly against the states.. The Court found that Dirk De Jonge had the right to speak at a peaceful public meeting held by the Communist Party, even though the party generally advocated an industrial or political change in revolution. However, in the 1950s with the fear of communism on the rise, the Court ruled in Dennis v. United States (1951) that Eugene Dennis, who was the leader of the Communist Party, violated the Smith Act by advocating the forcible overthrow of the United States government..
Background
Oregon's "criminal syndicalism" statute made it a crime to, among other things "assist in conducting any assemblage of persons ... which teaches or advocates ... the doctrine which advocates crime, physical violence, sabotage, or any unlawful acts or methods as a means of accomplishing or effecting industrial or political change or revolution."De Jonge, 299 U.S. at 356 n.1.  The statute was similar to state laws the Court had upheld in cases like Gitlow v. New York (1925) and Whitney v. California (1927).
Dirk De Jonge addressed an audience regarding jail conditions in the county and a maritime strike in progress in Portland at a meeting called by the Portland branch of the Communist Party on July 27, 1934.  De Jonge was a member of the Party, but the meeting was open to the public and had been publicly advertised as such.De Jonge, 299 U.S. at 358-59.  A raid on the meeting was carried out by Portland police. De Jonge was arrested and charged with violating the State's criminal syndicalism statute.  Once convicted, De Jonge motioned for an acquittal, arguing that there was insufficient evidence to warrant his conviction, since there was no evidence that either De Jonge nor anyone else at the meeting advocated violent acts or revolution.  The Oregon Supreme Court upheld his conviction, ruling that the indictment did not charge De Jonge with criminal syndicalism, but rather that he "presided at, conducted and assisted in conducting an assemblage of persons, organization, society and group called by the Communist Party, which was unlawfully teaching and advocating in Multnomah county the doctrine of criminal syndicalism and sabotage."  In other words, De Jonge was convicted for associating with the Communist Party, which at other times, although not at that meeting, had advocated criminal syndicalism.De Jonge, 299 U.S. at 361.  De Jonge took his case to the Supreme Court, arguing that his conviction violated his rights under the Fourteenth Amendment.
Representation
 Osmond K. Fraenkel of New York City for the appellant
 Maurice E. Tarshis, Deputy District Attorney of Portland for the State of Oregon.
 Supreme Court decision 
Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes delivered the opinion of the Court, which unanimously reversed De Jonge's conviction.The decision was 8-0; Justice Harlan Fiske Stone did not participate.  Hughes began by emphasizing the precise questions involved in light of the state court's decision.  The Court had to accept the indictment as  the state court had defined it, and decide the case on the basis that the law had been properly applied: the Oregon Supreme Court had final authority to interpret Oregon law, and by sustaining the conviction, had held that the indictment was sufficient under the Criminal Syndicalism statute.  Given that, the Court could only review the indictment as setting out the substantive offense.  It couldn't examine the evidence at trial to determine if De Jonge had done anything more culpable than conduct a public Communist Party meeting, because he wasn't charged with anything else, and "Conviction upon a charge not made would be sheer denial of due process".De Jonge, 299 U.S. at 362.  Thus it was irrelevant that De Jonge was, in fact, a member of the Communist Party, and that he encouraged others to join and help the Party at the meeting, since those acts were not necessary to his conviction and anyone else conducting the meeting, whether or not a Party member, could have been prosecuted under the statute.  As Hughes explained, "[De Jonge's] sole offense as charged, and for which he was convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for seven years, was that he had assisted in the conduct of a public meeting, albeit otherwise lawful, which was held under the auspices of the Communist Party.... Thus if the Communist Party had called a public meeting in Portland to discuss the tariff, or the foreign policy of the Government, or taxation, or relief, or candidacies for the offices of President, members of Congress, Governor, or state legislators, every speaker who assisted in the conduct of the meeting would be equally guilty" of violating the criminal syndicalism act.De Jonge, 299 U.S. at 362-63.
With the scope of the case clarified, Hughes next distinguished decisions like Gitlow and Whitney, which had upheld Criminal Syndicalism laws on their face.  He pointed out that in those cases, the defendant was convicted of actually advocating the violent overthrow of the Government, or joining a conspiracy to that end and with that intent.De Jonge, 299 U.S. at 363.  Hughes explained that despite a number of decisions permitting abridgment of free speech,Decisions like Gitlow and Whitney have since been discredited, with the Court recognizing that they went too far in permitting restrictions of free speech. See . "none of our prior decisions go to the length of sustaining such a curtailment of the right of free speech and assembly as the Oregon statute demands in its present application."
Hughes proceeded to explain why freedom of assembly is such an important right.  In poignant and powerful passages, he explained:
[Freedom of assembly] cannot be denied without violating those fundamental principles of liberty and justice which lie at the base of all civil and political institutions. ... The greater the importance of safeguarding the community from incitements to the overthrow of our institutions by force and violence, the more imperative is the need to preserve inviolate the constitutional rights of free speech, free press, and free assembly in order to maintain the opportunity for free political discussion, to the end that government may be responsive to the will of the people and that changes, if desired, may be obtained by peaceful means.  Therein lies the security of the Republic, the very foundation of constitutional government.DeJonge, 299 U.S. at 364.
For these reasons, the Court held, "consistently with the Federal Constitution, peaceable assembly for lawful discussion cannot be made a crime."De Jonge, 299 U.S. at 365.  When a person was charged with unlawfully assisting a group, even a criminal conspiracy like the Communist Party (as the Court assumed), a court had to inquire whether his specific purpose, and his specific actions, aided that unlawful purpose: "If the persons assembling have committed crimes elsewhere, if they have formed or are engaged in a conspiracy against the public peace and order, they may be prosecuted for their conspiracy or other violation of valid laws."  As Hughes emphasized in finishing his opinion, the Court accepted the finding that the Communist Party was constantly engaged in criminal syndicalism and attempting to overthrow the government, in Multnomah County and elsewhere.  But De Jonge nevertheless had a constitutional right "to discuss the public issues of the day and thus in a lawful manner, without incitement to violence or crime, to seek redress of alleged grievances.  That was of the essence of his guaranteed personal liberty."De Jonge, 299 U.S. at 365-66.  De Jonge's conviction was consequently reversed as a violation of the Due Process Clause.
Over three decades later, the Supreme Court declared a criminal syndicalism law unconstitutional on its face in Brandenburg v. Ohio (1969), overruling Whitney and casting serious doubt on Gitlow.  Brandenburg reaffirmed the holding of De Jonge that peaceful political assembly is a right protected by the Fourteenth Amendment.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 299
Whitney v. California, 
Dennis v. United States, 
References
Further reading
External links
 First Amendment Library entry on DeJonge v. Oregon
Category:1937 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Freedom of Assembly Clause case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:Legal history of Oregon
Category:1937 in Oregon
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Communist Party USA litigation
Category:History of Portland, Oregon
"""

From "De Sylva v. Ballentine" ==> """
De Sylva v. Ballentine, 351 U.S. 570 (1956), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held after the death of an author, the widow and children are eligible to renew copyright, equally as a class. Additionally, conditional on state laws, illegitimate children are also eligible for a share of the copyright..
This extension to children and widows was not considered retroactive by courts, however. In Easton v. Universal Pictures Co., 288 N.Y.S. 2d 776 (1968), a 1951 document assigning control of a copyright from the author's family after his death was invalidated because "they had, in fact, as the law then appeared to be, nothing to assign." Another limitation to this new right of inheritance was that the family would not be eligible to renew the copyright if it had been passed permanently to another party, which was in line with Fred Fisher Music Co. v. M. Witmark & Sons..
 References 
External links
Category:1956 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "De Veau v. Braisted" ==> """
De Veau v. Braisted, 363 U.S. 144 (1960), is a 5-to-3 ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States that an interstate compact restricting convicted felons from holding union office is not preempted by the National Labor Relations Act or the Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act, does not violate the Due Process Clause of the 14th Amendment, and is not an ex post facto law or bill of attainder in violation of Article One, Section 10 of the Constitution..
Background
Cargo ships entering a port must be loaded and unloaded quickly, because delay can ruin perishable cargo and/or lead to heavy financial losses.Jacobs, Mobsters, Unions, and Feds: The Mafia and the American Labor Movement, 2006, p. 49. Prior to the development of container ships, this work was done largely by hand by longshoremen. A single longshoreman can refuse to unload cargo, but can easily be replaced by another worker.  However, when longshoremen are unionized, the longshoremen's union can obtain great leverage over shippers. Labor racketeers can essentially extort wages, benefits, and featherbed jobs from employers;This extortion affects unionized and nonunionized employers alike. Nonunionized employers will often raise wages and benefits, create excess jobs, or provide bribes to avoid being unionized. engage in extensive cargo theft; solicit and receive bribes; and extort payments from longshoremen in order to obtain union jobs.
In 1937, Genovese crime family mobster Anthony "Tough Tony" Anastasio gained control of all six of the International Longshoremen's Association's local unions at the Port of New York and New Jersey. Extensive corruption and widespread violence followed.Jacobs, Mobsters, Unions, and Feds: The Mafia and the American Labor Movement, 2006, p. 49–50. After a 1951 wildcat strike and the 1950–1951 revelations of the United States Senate Special Committee to Investigate Crime in Interstate Commerce, which exposed extensive organized crime influence throughout the U.S., New York Governor Thomas E. Dewey announced on March 28, 1951, that he was establishing the New York State Crime Commission to report on the extent of organized crime in the Port of New York and New Jersey, and to make recommendations on combating the menace.Kimeldorf, Reds or Rackets?: The Making of Radical and Conservative Unions on the Waterfront, 1988, p. 155; "Dewey Names 5-Man Board to Investigate State Crime," New York Times, March 30, 1951; "Dewey Sets Saratoga Inquiry and Plans State Crime Body," New York Times, March 29, 1951. The commission held public and private hearings for more than a year before issuing a report in May 1953.Jensen, Hiring of Dock Workers and Employment Practices in the Ports of New York, Liverpool, London, Rotterdam, and Marseilles, 1964, p. 30. As a direct result of the Crime Commission's report,Mello, "Strikes on the Port of New York, 1945-1960," in The Encyclopedia of Strikes in American History, 2009, p. 569. the states of New York and New Jersey both enacted legislation (known as the "New York Waterfront Commission Act of 1953") establishing a New York Waterfront Commission whose main task was to rid the Port of New York and New Jersey of corruption.Weaver, "Bills to Rid Docks of 'Gangster' Rule Offered By Dewey," New York Times, June 22, 1953; Weaver, "Dewey and Driscoll Sign Laws Setting Up Port Crime Controls," New York Times, July 1, 1953.
However, in 1935, Congress had passed and President Franklin D. Roosevelt had signed into law the National Labor Relations Act, a federal law which governed labor relations in the United States. Article VI, Section 1, Clause 2 of the United States Constitution (better known as the Supremacy Clause) and subsequent Supreme Court rulings establish that states are barred from acting in an area of law where the federal government has already asserted jurisdiction through the passage of law.O'Reilly, Federal Preemption of State and Local Law: Legislation, Regulation, and Litigation, 2006, p. 30. Additionally, Article One, Section 10, Clause 3 of the Constitution (often called the "Compact Clause") bars states from entering into compacts or agreements with one another without the express approval of the United States federal government. Thus, for the New York–New Jersey legislation to survive constitutional scrutiny, the federal government would also need to approve it. Congress did exactly that, and on August 12, 1953 (two and a half months after Governor Dewey first proposed the legislation), President Dwight Eisenhower signed federal legislation giving federal sanction to the New York Waterfront Commission Act of 1953.Leviero, "President Signs Bill Aimed at Ending Dock Crime Here", New York Times, August 13, 1953.
Section 8 of the New York Waterfront Commission Act of 1953, in essence, bars from union office any person convicted of a felony who has not either been pardoned or received a certificate of good conduct from the New York or New Jersey parole board.
George De Veau, secretary-treasurer of Local 1346 of the International Longshoremen's Association, had been convicted of grand larceny and received a suspended sentence.  In 1956, the district attorney of Richmond County, John M. Braisted, Jr. informed De Veau and the union that since De Veau had never been pardoned or received a certificate of good conduct, he could no longer serve as secretary-treasurer.  The union suspended De Veau.  De Veau sued for an injunction which would return him to office, claiming that the New York Waterfront Commission Act of 1953 violated the Supremacy Clause, violated the Due Process Clause of the 14th Amendment, and was an ex post facto law and bill of attainder which violated Article One, Section 10 of the Constitution.
The New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division denied De Veau relief. De Veau appealed, but the Court of Appeals of New York, the highest court in New York state, affirmed the denial in 1959."Court Keeps Curbs on I.L.A. Officials", New York Times, February 27, 1959. De Veau appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
Ruling
Majority decision
Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter wrote the majority decision for the Court, joined by Associate Justices Tom C. Clark, Charles Evans Whittaker, and Potter Stewart.
Justice Frankfurter noted that the Court had jurisdiction as a constitutional issue had been raised.De Veau, 363 U.S. at 146. He reviewed the extensive problems with organized crime which had given rise to the Act, the investigations by the U.S. Senate committee and the state of New York, the structure of the Act, and supplementary enacting legislation passed by both New York and New Jersey.De Veau, 363 U.S. at 147-150. Section 8 of the New York supplementary legislation was at issue. Frankfurter noted that the compact expressly provided for congressional pre-approval of supplementary legislation, that Sec. 8 had been enacted after the compact had been submitted to Congress but before Congress had approved the original compact, and that Sec. 8 was not bi-state in nature (even though New York and New Jersey had enacted substantively identical legislation).De Veau, 363 U.S. at 150-151.
De Veau had argued that the Supreme Court's decision in Hill v. Florida, 325 U.S. 538 (1945), in which a Florida labor relations law similarly barred from union office any person convicted of a felony.  But the bi-state compact, Frankfurter held, was not like the Florida law.  The bi-state compact did not impede the federal legislation, and the two were not prevented from functioning side-by-side.De Veau, 363 U.S. at 152. In a major restatement of the doctrine of preemption, Frankfurter wrote:
The fact that there is some restriction due to the operation of state law does not settle the issue of preemption. The doctrine of preemption does not present a problem in physics, but one of adjustment because of the interdependence of federal and state interests and of the interaction of federal and state powers. Obviously, the National Labor Relations Act does not exclude every state policy that may, in fact, restrict the complete freedom of a group of employees to designate "representatives of their own choosing."
Congress had not intended to bar all state restrictions on union officials, Frankfurter asserted.De Veau, 363 U.S. at 153. Indeed, the purely local problem faced by New York and New Jersey had prompted a purely local solution, one which Congress had "unambiguously" supported, he said. Indeed, Sec. 8 had already been enacted by both states prior to Congressional approval of the compact, and Sec. 8 had clearly been brought to the attention of Congress during debate over the original compact.De Veau, 363 U.S. at 153-154. Furthermore, Congress had expressly approved of supplementary legislation in its enabling bill, and neither the extensive federal and state acknowledgement of corruptionnor the congressional debate over pre-approval of supplementary legislation had occurred in the Florida case.De Veau, 363 U.S. at 155. 
De Veau had further argued that the passage in 1959 of the Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) also preempted the interstate compact. Title V of the LMRDA specifically imposed restrictions on union officers, clearly preempting any state action in this area, De Veau said.  The majority disagreed.  Passage of Title V of the LMRDA, Frankfurter wrote, shows just the opposite—that Congress did not find state restrictions on the right to hold union office incompatible with pre-1959 federal labor policies.De Veau, 363 U.S. at 156. Furthermore, Frunkfurter interpreted Section 504(a) and Section 603(a) of the LMRDA as specifically disclaiming of preemption of state laws regulating union officials (which only a few, limited, express exceptions).De Veau, 363 U.S. at 157.
Frankfurter next turned the majority's attention to De Veau's due process claim.  Applying a reasonability test to the bi-state compact, Frankfurter concluded that the extensive record of the federal and state investigations had shown that corruption on the waterfront was so extensive and so intertwined with those who were felons that a felony bar was eminently reasonable.De Veau, 363 U.S. at 157-158. He went on to note that federal law often employed this remedy, and that the Court had previously approved state laws which had done so.De Veau, 363 U.S. at 158-160, citing .
As for De Veau's final challenge, Frankfurter noted that, under United States v. Lovett, 328 U.S. 303 (1946), the critical factor was whether legislative determination of guilt had been substituted for judicial judgment.De Veau, 363 U.S. at 160. Since a court of competent jurisdiction (not the legislature) had already convicted De Veau, Sec. 8 was clearly not a bill of attainder. Under Hawker v. New York, the majority said, the critical factor was whether "unpleasant consequences are brought to bear upon an individual for prior conduct is whether the legislative aim was to punish that individual for past activity, or whether the restriction of the individual comes about as a relevant incident to a regulation of a present situation, such as the proper qualifications for a profession." The intent of the states of New York and New Jersey was clearly not to punish felons, Frankfurter wrote, but rather to rid the waterfront of corruption. Subsequently, Sec. 8 was not an ex post facto law, either.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals of New York was affirmed.
Concurrence by Justice Brennan
Associate Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. wrote an opinion concurring in the majority opinion. His 109-word concurrence agrees with the majority that Sec. 8 was a reasonable restriction, was not preempted by federal law, and did not deny due process.De Veau, 363 U.S. at 160-161.
Dissent
Associate Justice William O. Douglas wrote a dissent, in which Chief Justice Earl Warren and Associate Justice Hugo Black joined.
Justice Douglas argued that the majority's ruling simply could not be squared with the Court's decision in Hill v. Florida.De Veau v. Braisted, 363 U.S. 144, 161. Citing Hill v. Florida, 325 U. S. 538 at 541, Douglas noted that the Hill court had Sec. 7 of the NLRA to provide for absolutely no state restrictions whatsoever on the qualifications for union office.De Veau v. Braisted, 363 U.S. 144, 162-163.  Douglas also concluded that the court's reading of the legislative history of the Act was incorrect.  The plain text of Article 15, Section 1 of the compact, he said, clearly provided for no additional state restrictions on union officers.De Veau v. Braisted, 363 U.S. 144, 163-164. Similarly, Douglas held that Section 2(a) of the LMRDA unmistakably reserved to Congress the right to place restrictions on an individual's qualifications for union office.De Veau v. Braisted, 363 U.S. 144, 164.  The majority, Douglas said, fundamentally misconstrued Sec. 504(a) of the LMRDA, which only refers to enforcement of criminal (not civil) laws against union officers.De Veau v. Braisted, 363 U.S. 144, 164-165.
Since Sec. 8 is not valid under the Supremacy Clause, Douglas said, he would overturn the judgment of the Court of Appeals of New York.De Veau v. Braisted, 363 U.S. 144, 165. He would rule narrowly on those grounds, and not decide the remaining questions.
Assessment
Although only a plurality opinion, De Veau v. Braisted was embraced by a majority of the Supreme Court in Brown v. Hotel and Restaurant Employees, 468 U.S. 491 (1984).Brown v. Hotel and Restaurant Employees, 468 U.S. 491 at 505. De Veau is sometimes cited as a key case in which the Supreme Court relied heavily on congressional debate and authorizing legislation to determine congressional intent.Broun, The Evolving Use and the Changing Role of Interstate Compacts: A Practitioner's Guide, 2006, p. 32-33.
The Supreme Court has used several tests of the decades to decide whether a law is an ex post facto one or not. De Veau v. Braisted is generally considered the first modern restatement of these tests, although others have since been used.Feldman and Benjamin, Tales From the Sausage Factory: Making Laws in New York State, 2010, p. 213.
References
Bibliography
Broun, Caroline N. The Evolving Use and the Changing Role of Interstate Compacts: A Practitioner's Guide. Chicago, Ill.: American Bar Association, 2006.
"Court Keeps Curbs on I.L.A. Officials." New York Times. February 27, 1959.
"Dewey Names 5-Man Board to Investigate State Crime." New York Times. March 30, 1951.
"Dewey Sets Saratoga Inquiry and Plans State Crime Body." New York Times. March 29, 1951.
Feldman, Daniel L. and Benjamin, Gerald. Tales From the Sausage Factory: Making Laws in New York State. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 2010.
Jacobs, James B. Mobsters, Unions, and Feds: The Mafia and the American Labor Movement. Paperback ed. New York: New York University Press, 2006.
Jensen, Vernon. Hiring of Dock Workers and Employment Practices in the Ports of New York, Liverpool, London, Rotterdam, and Marseilles. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1964.
Kimeldorf, Howard. Reds or Rackets?: The Making of Radical and Conservative Unions on the Waterfront. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1988.
Leviero, Anthony. "President Signs Bill Aimed at Ending Dock Crime Here." New York Times. August 13, 1953.
Mello, William. "Strikes on the Port of New York, 1945-1960." In The Encyclopedia of Strikes in American History. Aaron Brenner, Benjamin Day, and Immanuel Ness, eds. Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe, 2009.
O'Reilly, James T. Federal Preemption of State and Local Law: Legislation, Regulation, and Litigation. Chicago: American Bar Association, 2006.
Weaver, Jr., Warren. "Bills to Rid Docks of 'Gangster' Rule Offered By Dewey." New York Times. June 22, 1953.
Weaver, Jr., Warren. "Dewey and Driscoll Sign Laws Setting Up Port Crime Controls." New York Times. July 1, 1953.
External links
Waterfront Commission of New York
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1960 in United States case law
Category:Supremacy Clause case law
Category:United States ex post facto case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:International Longshoremen's Association
Category:Port of New York and New Jersey
"""

From "Dean Milk Co. v. City of Madison" ==> """
Dean Milk Co. v. City of Madison, Wisconsin, 340 U.S. 349 (1951), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the Dormant Commerce Clause, used to prohibit states from limiting interstate commerce. 
Facts
The court held that a municipal ordinance requiring all milk sold in Madison to be pasteurized at an approved plant within 5 miles of the city, unconstitutionally discriminated against interstate commerce.
Illinois milk producer, Dean Milk, on appeal from a state court holding that found the municipal ordinance to be reasonable, charged that the true purpose of the ordinance was to protect local industries from competition from non-local producers.
Decision
In the court's opinion, Justice Clark said:  "In thus erecting an economic barrier protecting a major local industry against competition from without the state, Madison plainly discriminates against interstate commerce.  This it cannot do, even in the exercise of its unquestioned power to protect the health and safety of the people, if reasonable nondiscriminatory alternatives... are available".
The fact that in-state producers were also discriminated against was not found to be relevant to the fact that it discriminated against interstate commerce.
Justices Vinson, Reed, Frankfurter, Jackson, and Burton concurred.
Justices Black, Douglas and Minton dissented on the grounds that any imposition on commerce is minor compared to the city's need to insure their milk is healthy without burdening their inspectors.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 340
City of Philadelphia v. New Jersey, 
Further reading
External links
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:History of Madison, Wisconsin
Category:Food safety in the United States
Category:Dairy farming in the United States
"""

From "Dean v. United States" ==> """
Dean v. United States, 556 U.S. 568 (2009), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court upholding a 10-year penalty for the discharge of a firearm during the commission of any violent or drug trafficking crime, against a bank robber whose gun went off accidentally.
 Background 
In 2004, a bank robber, Christopher M. Dean entered a branch of AmSouth Bank in Rome, Georgia wearing a mask and waving a gun. He instructed everyone to get down, walked behind the teller counter, and took cash from the teller station with his left hand while holding his gun with his right. The gun discharged, leaving a bullet hole in the partition between two stations. Dean cursed and ran out of the bank. Witnesses later testified that he seemed surprised that the gun had gone off. No one was hurt.
Dean and an accomplice were later caught and charged with conspiracy to commit a robbery affecting interstate commerce, in violation of 18 U.S.C. §1951(a), and aiding and abetting each other in using, carrying, possessing, and discharging a firearm during an armed robbery, in violation of §924(c)(1)(A)(iii) and §2. Dean admitted to committing the robbery and was convicted by a jury of the robbery and firearm counts.
Under 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(A)(iii), an individual convicted for using or carrying a firearm during and in relation to any violent or drug trafficking crime, or possessing a fire-arm in furtherance of such a crime, receives a 10-year mandatory minimum sentence, in addition to the punishment for the underlying crime "if the firearm is discharged."
Dean was sentenced to 10 years in prison. He appealed, contending that the discharge was accidental, and that the sentencing enhancement in §924(c)(1)(A)(iii) requires proof that the defendant intended to discharge the firearm.  Deans conviction was affirmed by the Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit and the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari to resolve a conflict in the circuits.
 Decision 
In a 7 to 2 decision delivered by Justice Roberts, the Supreme Court held that Section 924(c)(1)(A)(iii) required no separate proof of intent. Justice Stevens and Justice Breyer filed dissenting opinions.
External links
 Court Upholds 10-Year Penalty for Robber’s Flub (NYT)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:Bank robbery
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:United States federal firearms case law
"""

From "Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. v. Byrd" ==> """
Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. v. Byrd, 470 U.S. 213 (1985), is a United States Supreme Court case concerning arbitration. It arose from an interlocutory appeal of a lower court's denial of brokerage firm Dean Witter Reynolds' motion to compel arbitration of the claims under state law made against it by an aggrieved former client. The Court held unanimously that the Federal Arbitration Act required that those claims be heard that way when the parties were contractually obligated to do so, even where parallel claims made under federal law would still be heard in federal court.
Justice Thurgood Marshall wrote for the court, resolving a conflict between the appellate circuits; Byron White added a concurrence in which he noted some issues with the underlying securities law that were not before the Court but, he felt, could in future cases make it harder for parties such as Byrd to claim that federal law always allowed them to litigate private actions for securities fraud. In the aftermath of the decision many district courts followed his opinion, leading to later Supreme Court rulings that greatly favored arbitration over litigation in securities disputes. It has been described as completing the federalization of American arbitration law.Hirshman, Linda; "The Second Arbitration Trilogy: The Federalization of Arbitration Law",  71 Va. L. Rev. 1305 (1985).
Underlying dispute
In 1981 A. Lamar Byrd, a dentist in Southern California, sold his practice and invested the $160,000 proceeds with Dean Witter Reynolds, a retail brokerage firm. Over the next several months his account lost more than half its value; he alleged that his broker represented to him that the account was profiting. Byrd claimed that the broker was using his account to churn, or making trades primarily to generate commissions for himself.Durrer, Michael; Enforcing Arbitration of Federal Securities Law Claims: The Effect of Dean Witter Reynolds, Inc. v. Byrd 28 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 335, 344 (1987).
His client agreement with Dean Witter included a standard arbitration clause, by which the parties agreed to use that method to settle any disputes. However, it was limited by the Supreme Court's 1953 holding in Wilko v. Swan, another case in which an investor had sued a broker alleging fraud and the broker had responded with a motion to compel contractually mandated arbitration per the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) passed in 1925. The plaintiff had sued under the Securities Act of 1933, under which any provision mandating that an investor waive their right to sue was prohibited. A 7–2 majority found the latter statute was controlling.Wilko v. Swan, .
Lower courts
Byrd sued Dean Witter in federal court, alleging violations of both the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and applicable California law. During the pendency of the action, Justice William Brennan had suggested in Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Constr. Corp., where the petitioner sought to prevent the respondent it had already sued in state court from compelling arbitration through a federal action, that the FAA applied to proceedings in state courts as well, and that its enactment amounted to "a national policy favoring arbitration."Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Constr. Corp.,  24–27,  Brennan, J. Dean Witter moved to have Byrd's state-law claims arbitrated pending the outcome of the federal case, and was denied. It made an interlocutory appeal to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
A panel composed of circuit judges Alfred Goodwin and Thomas Tang and district judge Robert Aguilar heard the case late in 1983. They announced their decision early the next year. Unanimously, they affirmed the district court.
Writing for the panel, Goodwin reviewed the relevant law on securities cases that mixed arbitrable state claims with non-arbitrable federal one. Both courts within the Ninth Circuit,For bifurcation cases, see Roueche v. Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner & Smith, Inc., 554 F. Supp. 338 (D.Hawaii, 1983) and Macchiavelli v. Shearson, Hammill & Co., Inc., 384 F. Supp. 21 (E.D. Cal. 1974); for intertwining, see Cunningham v. Dean Witter Reynolds, 550 F. Supp. 578 (E.D. Cal. 1982) and Milani v. ContiCommodity Serv., Inc., 462 F. Supp. 405 (N.D. Cal. 1976).  and other circuits, had considered similar arguments and decided them differently. The Sixth and Seventh circuits had stayed state claims for arbitration once the federal claim had been litigated.Liskey v. Oppenheimer & Co., 717 F.2d 314 (6th Cir., 1983);  Others followed a doctrine called "intertwining", created in the 1981 Fifth Circuit case Miley v. Oppenheimer & Co., under which, if the district court found the circumstances underlying the federal and state claims were substantially similar, it had the discretion to deny arbitration in the interest of efficient dispute resolution.
Since the Ninth Circuit had not had to rule on the problem before, it was a question of first impression for the panel. Citing precedential holdings that a federal court has the sole jurisdiction to decide the essential issues to a federal securities claim, Goodwin felt that not permitting intertwining might frustrate both the goals of speedy dispute resolution, which he believed the FAA was intended to promote, and the preservation of access to the federal courts. "The 1925 Arbitration Act certainly did not anticipate the Supreme Court's 1953 determination that the protective intent of federal securities laws was to take priority over the economic advantages of arbitration," he wrote, concluding that the district court's denial of Dean Witter's motion was proper.
Decision
Since the appellate court decision had created a conflict among the circuits, the Supreme Court granted certiorari later in 1984. It heard oral arguments in December. Eugene Bell, a cofounder of the Los Angeles firm Jones Bell, argued for Dean Witter, while Eric V. Benham argued for Byrd. Lawyers for the Securities Industry Association filed an amicus curiae brief urging reversal.Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. v. Byrd, .
Four months after oral argument, the Court handed down its decision, which unanimously reversed the Ninth Circuit and held the stay to be properly granted. Justice Thurgood Marshall wrote for the court, and Byron White added a concurrence. It was remanded to the Ninth Circuit, which in turn remanded it to the trial court.
Opinion of the Court
After reviewing the facts of the case, and the contrasting responses of the circuits, Marshall explained the justices' reasoning. He admitted that the legislative history of the FAA did not offer any guidance as to how a court might handle a case with both arbitrable and non-arbitrable claims, much less suggest that they had even considered the problem. But it was very clear that while Congress and its drafters had expressed some concern about the effect of delays in dispute resolution, "the purpose behind its passage was to ensure judicial enforcement of privately made agreements to arbitrate."Dean Witter Reynolds v. Byrd, at 218–19, Marshall, J.
Thus the Court did not see the need for any balancing test pitting arbitration against efficient dispute resolution. "The preeminent concern of Congress in passing the Act was to enforce private agreements into which parties had entered," wrote Marshall, "and that concern requires that we rigorously enforce agreements to arbitrate, even if the result is 'piecemeal' litigation ... By compelling arbitration of state-law claims, a district court successfully protects the contractual rights of the parties and their rights under the Arbitration Act." In Moses Cone the year before, he noted, the Court had chosen to bifurcate a proceeding between federal and state courts, however inefficient that was, in order to uphold the FAA.Dean Witter Reynolds v. Byrd, at 221–22.
Lastly, Marshall addressed a concern that the Ninth Circuit had not discussed, but was part of the Fifth Circuit's justification for Miley.
The Court did not believe this was a serious problem. Again Marshall returned to a case from the preceding term: McDonald v. West Branch. There another unanimous Court had held that since arbitration was not a judicial proceeding, federal courts were not bound by arbitrators' findings., at 287–88, Brennan, J. Since the question was not currently before the Court, Marshall merely advised that "in framing preclusion rules in this context, courts shall take into account the federal interests warranting protection."Dean Witter Reynolds v. Byrd, at 223.
White concurrence
Justice Byron White wrote a concurring opinion raising a question that, he agreed with Marshall, was not before the Court in this particular case but was ancillary to it. Indeed, he noted, it had been raised in another case a decade earlier, where it was also not before the Court. Specifically, he questioned whether the federal claims were indeed not arbitrable.
The claim that they were arbitrable rested on Wilko v. Swan, which had held that three provisions of the Securities Act of 1933, including one with specific language to that effect, barred the mandatory arbitration of private securities-fraud claims. But White distinguished Byrd's case as having been filed under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and argued that "Wilko's reasoning cannot be mechanically transferred to the 1934 Act."Dean Witter Reynolds v. Byrd, at 223–225, White, J., concurring.
Only one of the three, the non-waiver provision, was identical in both statutes. Furthermore, the 1934 Act limited jurisdiction to federal courts and allowed for only an implied cause of action rather than an express one, resulting in a higher burden of proof for a plaintiff making allegations under the same sections as Byrd. Therefore, the 1934 Act's non-waiver language was inapplicable since it explicitly referred to "any provision of this chapter" and could not thus cover the 1933 Act as well.
White reminded his colleagues that the Court had acknowledged this in its 1974 majority opinion in Scherk v. Alberto-Culver Co.. In that case, the respondent, an Illinois company seeking to recover from petitioner, a German citizen it alleged to have misrepresented the status of trademarks it sold, appealed an order to arbitrate before a panel in Paris. Since the transaction had also involved a stock purchase, Alberto-Culver argued that the 1933 Act and Wilko controlled and the case could not be arbitrated..
Since Alberto-Culver had, like Byrd, made their claim under the 1934 Act, Justice Potter Stewart had made the same point that the two statutes were not identical, but accepted it for argument's sake to hold that it was irrelevant since arbitration was desirable in that case due to the international nature of the dispute.Scherk at 513–514, Stewart, J. In a dissent that both White and Marshall signed, William O. Douglas countered that the 1934 Act was remedial legislationScherk at 522, Douglas, J., dissenting. which the Court had, as such, previously held was to be construed broadly. Further, against Stewart's semantic criticisms, Douglas had reiterated Wilko'''s misgivings about the shortcomings of arbitration, such as a lack of discovery or appellate review and the possibility that an arbitrator would have a poor understanding of the relevant law.Scherk at 532. White did not take either side in his concurrence, but reminded his colleagues that the question had not been resolved.
Subsequent jurisprudence
White's concurrence had the most immediate effect of any aspect of the decision. Many district courts began pointing to it to require litigants who had filed claims under the 1934 Act to arbitrate them, regardless of precedent in their circuits. Some declined to, noting that the Court had not considered the question and that Wilko still governed.Durrer, at 346–48. This created another conflict in the circuits that the Court had to resolve.
Shearson/American Express v. McMahon
It took a year from Byrd for one of the circuits to consider one of these cases. In McMahon v. Shearson/American Express, the Second Circuit followed the Supreme Court in ordering state-law claims arbitrated and the federal ones litigated. It believed that public policy and precedent were on the side of resolving the latter judicially. "Although Scherk and Byrd may cast some doubt on whether the Supreme Court, if presented with the issue, would hold [such] claims ... to be non-arbitrable," wrote William Homer Timbers, "it would be improvident for us to disregard clear judicial precedent in this Circuit based on mere speculation."
Four other circuits accepted this.Jacobson v. Merrill Lynch, 797 F.2d 1197 (3rd Cir. 1986); King v. Drexel Burnham Lambert, 796 F.2d 59 (5th Cir., 1986); Conover v. Dean Witter Reynolds, 794 F. 2d 520 (9th Cir. 1986) and  In Conover v. Dean Witter Reynolds, the Ninth Circuit examined White's critique at length. Judge Mary M. Schroeder looked beyond the text of the statutes to the accompanying legislative history. When Congress had overhauled the 1934 Act in 1975, the conference committee report had contained statements referring to Wilko and making it clear that the conferees did not intend to require arbitration. She reiterated the concern that arbitration did not fully safeguard the rights of an unsophisticated investor, and noted that the right to sue was so well established by case law that an implied cause of action was not necessary.Conover, 522–27.
The First and Eighth circuits, on the other hand, sided with Stewart and White in holding that Wilko did not cover claims under the 1934 Act.Page v. Moseley, Hallgarten, Estabrook & Weeden, 806 F.2d 291 (1st Cir., 1986);  This created another conflict in the circuits. The Supreme Court decided to resolve it later in the yearShearson/American Express v. McMahon, certiorari granted,  when it heard McMahon on appeal from the Second Circuit, and decided it in early 1987.Shearson/American Express Inc. v. McMahon, .
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote for a 5–4 majority that Wilko did not cover claims under the 1934 Act, since that Court had expressed doubts about the ability of arbitration to protect a claimants' rights under the 1933 Act that the present court had recently indicatedMitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc.,  it no longer shared. The nonwaiver provision of the 1934 Act applied only to its substantive provisions. She was unpersuaded that the adhesive nature of most brokerage contracts required greater protection for investors, and noted that most of the reservations the Wilko Court expressed had been rejected by later holdings on arbitration. The later amendments, she wrote, had not addressed the issue and been meant to enhance the self-regulatory powers of the stock exchanges and organizations like the National Association of Securities Dealers. "The suitability of arbitration as a means of enforcing Exchange Act rights is evident from our decision in Scherk", O'Connor said.Shearson/American Express v. McMahon, at 227–38, O'Connor, J.
Harry Blackmun wrote a dissent signed by Brennan and Marshall. He argued that the majority had read Wilko too narrowly and understated the significance of the 1975 reforms. While allowing that arbitration was not as problematic as it had been, he still felt there were valid concerns. "It is thus ironic that the Court's decision, no doubt animated by its desire to rid the federal courts of these suits, actually may increase litigation about arbitration."Shearson/American Express v. McMahon, at 243–68, Blackmun, J., dissenting. John Paul Stevens added one of his own expressing surprise that the Court would so casually overturn what had been settled law in all the circuits for the past three decades.Shearson/American Express v. McMahon, at 268–69, Stevens, J., dissenting.
Orders to compel arbitration in securities-fraud cases increased in the wake of McMahon, beyond the decision's clarifying effect. In mixed-claim cases like it and Byrd, some lower courts began requiring all claims to be arbitrated in the interest of efficient dispute resolution. Others even began applying it to the 1933 Act, forcing another Supreme Court case in 1989, Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/American Express Inc., which finally overturned Wilko..
Analysis and commentary
In the wake of the case, commentators focused on the impact it would have on securities arbitration. "Unless arbitration procedures are fair both in fact and in appearance," warned Constatine Katsoris, a Fordham law professor and securities arbitrator, "their present popularity as a means of resolving
securities disputes will be greatly diminished".Katsoris, Constantine;The Securities' Arbitrators Nightmare, 14 Fordham Urb. L.J. 1:3–15, at 3, Fall 1986. Retrieved February 24, 2012. In particular he was concerned about backlash resulting from the standard form contracts most brokerages signed their clients to, calling on them to make arbitration voluntary. He also recommended that the arbitration forums run by NASD and the exchanges, traditionally formed of securities-industry professionals, to include members of the public both on panels and in their administration.
Michael Durrer, a law student at William & Mary, echoed Katsoris, adding suggestions to amend the 1934 Act to allow for an express private right of action and for NASD and the exchanges to establish an amount in controversy threshold, an upper limit on arbitrable claims.Durrer, at 360–61.
Other commentators have given the decision a key place in the Court's arbitration jurisprudence. Linda Hirschman of Chicago–Kent College of Law calls Byrd the final case in the "Second Arbitration Trilogy", in homage to the "Steelworkers Trilogy" of cases from 1960 involving labor arbitration.;  and . It completed the federalization of arbitration law, begun in Moses Cone when Brennan's majority opinion suggested the FAA applied to proceedings in state court, a position formalized a year later in Southland Corp. v. Keating.. In the securities context, Lynn Katzler of American University's Washington College of Law later described Byrd as continuing "[t]he slow destruction of the Wilko doctrine" that began with Scherk and culminated in Rodriguez de Quijas''.Katzler, Lynn; ; 45 Am. U. L. Rev. 91995) 151–97, 160. Retrieved February 25, 2012.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
References
External links
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United States securities case law
"""

From "DeBoer v. Snyder" ==> """
DeBoer v. Snyder is a lawsuit that was filed by April DeBoer and Jayne Rowse on January 23, 2012 in federal district court, challenging Michigan's ban on adoption by same-sex couples so they can jointly adopt their children. In August 2012, Judge Bernard A. Friedman invited the couple to amend their suit to challenge the state's ban on same-sex marriage, "the underlying issue". Following a hearing on October 16, 2013, Friedman scheduled a trial that ran from February 25 to March 7, 2014. On March 21, Judge Friedman issued his ruling overturning the ban. On March 22, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit placed a temporary hold on Judge Friedman's ruling. The appeal was argued on August 6. On November 6, the Sixth Circuit reversed Judge Friedman and upheld Michigan's ban on same-sex marriage.
The decision was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which, on January 16, 2015, consolidated this case with three others and agreed to review the case. Oral arguments were heard on April 28, 2015, and the Supreme Court struck down the state's same-sex marriage ban on June 26, 2015.
Background
On January 23, 2012, a lesbian couple filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan on behalf of themselves and three children, challenging the state's ban on adoption by same-sex couples so they can jointly adopt their children. The women are April DeBoer and Jayne Rowse, both nurses. One has an adopted son and the other two adopted daughters, all with special needs. At the time of filing, Michigan law restricted second-parent adoption to married couples and did not license or recognize same-sex marriages.
In August 2012, Judge Bernard A. Friedman invited the couple to amend their suit to challenge the state's ban on same-sex marriage, "the underlying issue". They did so on September 7, 2012. To the original defendants, the governor and attorney-general of Michigan, they added the Oakland County Clerk.
The plaintiffs were originally represented by three private attorneys, Dana Nessel, Carole Stanyar and Kenneth M. Mogill, along with Wayne State University Distinguished Professor of Law Robert A. Sedler, an experienced litigator in civil rights cases. In January 2014, attorneys from the American Civil Liberties Union and Gay & Lesbian Advocates & Defenders joined them.
Hearing and trial
On March 7, 2013, after hearing arguments in the case, Friedman announced that he would delay ruling pending the outcome of two same-sex marriage cases before the Supreme Court of the United States, United States v. Windsor and Hollingsworth v. Perry. National LGBT advocacy groups had recommended the delay. On July 1, citing the recent Supreme Court decision in United States v. Windsor, he denied the state officials' motion to dismiss the suit. Friedman heard arguments on motions in the case on October 16, 2013, and said he was unable to rule on the basis of the arguments. He said: "I'm in the middle. I have to decide this as a matter of law. I intend to do so." An attorney for one of the defendants, Oakland County Clerk Lisa Brown, said she was eager to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples as soon as the law allowed her to do so. At the end of that hearing, Friedman scheduled the trial for February 25, 2014. On a motion by the plaintiffs, and over the objections of the defense, Friedman agreed on January 3, 2014, to divide the trial in two, reserving for a second phase, if needed, all discussion of the level of scrutiny appropriate to Michigan's denial of adoption and marriage rights to same-sex couples.
Witnesses for the plaintiffs
The plaintiffs called witnesses from February 25, 2014 to February 28, 2014.
Dr. David Brodzinsky
A psychologist in the San Francisco Bay Area whose research and scholarly writings have focused on psychological issues in gay and lesbian parenting and adoption, adoption and foster care, stress and coping in children, non-traditional family life, child custody issues, and children's cognitive development. He was a founding director of the Evan B. Donaldson Adoption Institute in New York and currently serves as the Research Director of the Institute's West Coast Office. He has testified in a number of previous cases, including the Baby M contested adoption case in New Jersey, the Baby Jessica case, the Woody Allen and Mia Farrow contested adoption and custody case in New York, and Baehr v. Miike. Brodzinsky testified on February 25, 2014 that there are no "discernible differences" in children who are raised by same-sex couples and youth raised by heterosexuals. Under cross-examination by Michigan Assistant Attorney General Joseph Potchen, Brodzinsky acknowledged that studies on the stability of same-sex couples were mixed, with some showing a higher breakup rate among same-sex couples.
Dr. Nancy Cott
A professor of American history at Harvard University specializing in the history of gender and sexuality has researched gender roles and marriage trends for decades. Dr. Cott has testified for the plaintiffs in both United States v. Windsor and Hollingsworth v. Perry. Cott offered several examples of discriminatory practices involving marriages over the years which are no longer accepted, among them interracial marriages once being banned, American women who married foreigners once lost their citizenship and property, and the U.S. government at times not acknowledging Native American and Japanese marriages. Cott testified on February 28, 2014 that “The trend is moving toward same-sex gender neutrality/gender equality marriages; and the trend is moving toward same-sex marriages.” She also testified that “The Michigan Marriage Amendment obstructs that trend from continuing.” In explaining how marriage has evolved, Cott cited the 300-year ban on interracial marriage, which was overturned by the U.S. Supreme Court in Loving v. Virginia in 1967. Cott said marriage is a “civil contract” that only be legally sanctioned by legislatures and the courts. In addressing religious objections to same-sex marriage, she said religious authorities have no legal standing over marriages even though they are allowed to conduct marriage ceremonies. Cott testified that there have been no laws in U.S. history that made procreation a requirement for marriage, an argument used by opponents of same-sex marriage. Under cross-examination by state attorney Michelle Brya, Cott admitted the state of Michigan does have an interest in marriage between a man and a woman for population purposes and sometimes economic reasons but did not believe those two issues should stand in the way of same-sex couples legally marrying.
Dr. Gary Gates
Serves as the Williams Distinguished Scholar at the Williams Institute at the UCLA School of Law. His doctoral dissertation included the first significant research study using United States Census data to explore characteristics of same-sex couples. Dr. Gates has been an expert witness in several cases involving LGBT issues. He wrote a brief in support of the plaintiffs in the United States v. Windsor. He has also testified before the United States House Committee on Armed Services on repealing "Don't ask, don't tell" and before the United States Senate on LGBT inclusion in federal immigration law reforms. Gates testified on February 27, 2014 that 8.3 million people in the United States identify themselves as LGBT, including 287,000 Michigan residents whose numbers are growing, particularly among individuals under the age of 30 years. He also cited surveys which found 43% of Americans “see nothing wrong” with same-sex relationships compared to 13% in 1990.
Dr. Michael Rosenfeld
An associate professor of sociology at Stanford University and a social demographer who studies race, ethnicity, and family structure, the family's effect on children, and the history of the family. Dr. Rosenfeld has examined the study by defense witness Regnerus. Some of the work by defense witness Allen is based on Rosenfeld's work which was based on the United States Census. Rosenfeld testified on February 26, 2014 that "there is no basis" for believing that kids develop better in a household led by a man and a woman. Broadly summarizing research in the field, he said "it’s clear that being raised by same-sex parents is no disadvantage to children." While cross-examining Rosenfeld, Assistant Attorney General Kristin Heyse suggested it was rational for voters to approve the same-sex marriage ban nearly 10 years ago because same-sex marriage in the U.S. was just emerging. Rosenfeld’s method of research was questioned by Heyse regarding the sample size used.
Dr. Vivek Sankaran
A clinical professor of law at the University of Michigan in the Child Advocacy Law Clinic, and Director of the Detroit Center for Family Advocacy. Dr. Sankaran has litigated numerous cases before the Michigan Supreme Court on behalf of parents. He also was appointed by Governor Rick Snyder to the Child Abuse Prevention Board. Sankaran testified on February 26, 2014 that more children would be adopted if same-sex couples had the same joint-adoption rights as married heterosexual couples. He noted that nearly 14,000 children in Michigan’s foster care system need homes, saying that allowing joint adoption by same-sex couples would expand the pool of potential parents for those children, which includes about 3,500 orphans. Sankaran added that if one of them adopts a child as a single person, which the state allows, the other has no legal rights to custody of the child if the other parent dies or is incapacitated.
Dr. George Chauncey, who as a professor of history and American studies at Yale University and co-director of the Yale Research Initiative on the History of Sexualities had previously testified in the LGBT case Hollingsworth v. Perry, was expected to testify but had to cancel. He submitted written testimony.
Witnesses for the defense
The defense called witnesses from March 3, 2014 to March 6, 2014.
Douglas W. Allen
An economist at Simon Fraser University in Vancouver, British Columbia who makes ties between same-sex parenting and childhood instability by looking at couples from unstable homes and comparing them to those who have been raised consistently by two heterosexual parents. Allen takes a 2010 study by Michael Rosenfeld - who testified for the plaintiffs, and re-examines it by adding in the outliers. "We re-examine Rosenfeld's (2010) study on the association between child outcomes and same-sex family structure. Using the same data set, we replicate and generalize Rosenfeld's findings and show that the implications of his study are different when using either alternative comparison groups or alternative sample restrictions. Compared with traditional married households, we find that children being raised by same-sex couples are 35 percent less likely to make normal progress through school; this difference is statistically significant at the one percent level," states the brief for Allen's report. Signed onto an amicus brief with both Price and Regnerus urging the Supreme Court to uphold California’s Proposition 8. Allen was the defense's final witness and testified on March 6, 2014 that the state "should be very cautious in making such a fundamental change to such a fundamental institution when there really isn’t any evidence on the child outcomes." Allen argued that although U.S. psychology and sociology organizations have expressed consensus opinions that children of same-sex couples suffer no measurable disadvantages, conflicting results and limited data show that there's no such certainty on the matter. While maintaining he has no bias, he admitted that his religious views lead him to believe that homosexual acts are grounds for being sent to Hell.
Lisa Brown
A Democrat who was elected Oakland County Clerk & Register of Deeds, a defendant in the case, on November 6, 2012. Brown was previously a member of the Michigan House of Representatives. Brown represented the 39th State House District, located in Central Oakland County since 2009. Although a defendant, Brown testified on March 3, 2014 in favor of same-sex marriage and said her office is ready to issue same-sex marriage licenses.
Sherif Girgis
Author of a book What is Marriage? Man and Woman: A defense and a Ph.D. candidate in philosophy at Princeton University and a law student at Yale University. When Girgis was called to testify on March 3, 2014, Friedman ruled he was not an expert and not qualified to testify.
Loren Marks
Works for the Louisiana State University School of Social Work, and whose research focuses primarily on the role of faith in families. He is known for his criticism of the many studies that look at same gender parenting. He suggests that the American Psychological Association is wrong for citing studies with less than 100 participants. Marks pre-released his study in order for it to be included in Hollingsworth v. Perry, and though he was scheduled to testify in favor of California's Proposition 8, he was not called. Marks testified on March 5, 2014 and criticized a 2005 American Psychological Association study that found there was no difference in the outcomes of children raised by gay and lesbian parents. He said the studies the APA used to frame its report did not include enough heterosexual couples and there were too few gay fathers represented. Under cross-examination by attorney Carole Stanyar, the co-counsel for the DeBoer-Rowse family, Marks admitted that finding a large enough sample to study gay and lesbian parents is like trying to find a "needle in a haystack." Marks also testified under cross-examination that he is "not in favor of redefining marriage at present" but “neutral” on whether there is a difference in outcomes for children raised by gay couples.
Joseph Price
Economics professor from Brigham Young University who worked with Allen. Price also did his own study on the number of people who are gay or bisexual. This was his first study on same-sex parenting. Previous research involved healthy eating, the National Basketball Association, pornography and marriage and media impact on families, among other projects. Price signed onto an amicus brief with both Allen and Regnerus urging the Supreme Court to uphold California’s Proposition 8. Price testified on March 4, 2014 about his 2012 study that reached a different conclusion than Rosenfeld using the same data set. He said his study concluded that children raised in a home with a married father and mother have 35 percent greater odds of "making normal progress in school" than children of same-sex parents.
Mark Regnerus
An associate professor of sociology at the University of Texas at Austin (UT-Austin) who conducted research called "New Family Structures Study" that looked at children in stable, long-term two parent homes compared to those in less-stable homes. An internal audit by the journal that published Regnerus’ study found his conclusions to be flawed and the American Sociological Association have condemned its results. Regnerus himself has admitted that the study doesn’t address same-sex parenting. Signed onto an amicus brief with both Allen and Price urging the Supreme Court to uphold California’s Proposition 8. Regnerus testified on March 3, 2014 that it is too early for social scientists to make far-reaching conclusions about families headed by same-sex couples. "We aren't anywhere near saying there's conclusive evidence" that children with same-sex parents grow up with no differences when compared to kids with heterosexual parents, he said. "Until we get more evidence, we should be skeptical. ...It's prudent for the state to retain its definition of marriage to one man, one woman," testified Regnerus. Christine L. Williams, chair of the sociology department at the UT-Austin, released a statement following Regnerus' testimony stating that his views "do not reflect the views of the Sociology Department of The University of Texas at Austin. Nor do they reflect the views of the American Sociological Association, which takes the position that the conclusions he draws from his study of gay parenting are fundamentally flawed on conceptual and methodological grounds and that findings from Dr. Regnerus' work have been cited inappropriately in efforts to diminish the civil rights and legitimacy of LBGTQ partners and their families. We encourage society as a whole to evaluate his claims." The university's College of Liberal Arts had also distanced itself from Regnerus' views.
 Conclusion 
The nine-day trial concluded on March 7 after Kenneth M. Mogill provided the plaintiffs' summation and Kristin Heyse, an assistant attorney general, spoke for the defense. Attorney Michael Pitt spoke separately for defendant Brown, the county clerk, and joined the defense in urging Friedman, should he rule for the plaintiffs, to stay his ruling pending appeal. Judge Friedman said he hoped to rule within two weeks.
Decision
On March 21, after 5 p.m. EDT, Judge Friedman ruled for the plaintiffs without staying enforcement of his decision. In ruling that the Michigan Marriage Amendment violated equal protection, Friedman found it unnecessary to address the Due Process Clause or levels of scrutiny higher than rational review. The state defendants asserted that the same-sex marriage ban furthered legitimate state interests in providing an optimal environment for child rearing, proceeding with caution before altering the traditional definition of marriage, and upholding tradition and morality. Friedman wrote that the first interest could logically be used to "require that only rich, educated, suburban-dwelling, married Asians may marry, to the exclusion of all other heterosexual couples." He wrote that an interest in proceeding with caution can be asserted in any setting and that "any deprivation of constitutional rights calls for prompt rectification".
Regarding morality, Friedman wrote:
Many Michigan residents have religious convictions whose principles ... inform their own viewpoints about marriage. Nonetheless, these views cannot strip other citizens of the guarantees of equal protection under the law. The same Constitution that protects the free exercise of one’s faith in deciding whether to solemnize certain marriages rather than others, is the same Constitution that prevents the state from either mandating adherence to an established religion ... or enforcing private moral or religious beliefs without an accompanying secular purpose.
The state defendants cited Windsor v. United States to maintain that states still hold exclusive power to define marriage. Friedman wrote that Windsor "noted that this power ... must respect the constitutional rights of persons," citing Loving v. Virginia. He wrote that Windsor and Loving "stand for the proposition that, without some overriding legitimate interest, the state cannot use its domestic relations authority to legislate families out of existence."
At the time the ruling was handed down, most county clerks offices in the state had closed. Michigan Attorney General Schuette announced he was filing an emergency request for a stay of the decision pending appeal. Marriages for same-sex couples began the following morning.
Stay and appeal
DeBoer v. Snyder was appealed to the U.S Court of Appeals for the 6th Circuit on March 21, 2014. The next day, after 323 marriage licenses had been issued in four Michigan counties, the appellate court placed a temporary hold on the district court's order allowing same-sex marriage through March 26. After hearing arguments on March 25, an appellate court panel voted 2–1 to approve the state attorney general's motion to extend the stay indefinitely until appeals have concluded. The court also decided to expedite the appeal. A three-judge panel of the Sixth Circuit heard the appeal on August 6 along with similar cases from Kentucky (Bourke v. Beshear and Love v. Beshear), Ohio (Henry v. Himes and Obergefell v. Himes), and Tennessee (Tanco v. Haslam).
Court of Appeals decision
On November 6, 2014, the Sixth Circuit ruled 2–1 that Michigan's ban on same-sex marriage does not violate the constitution. It said it was bound by the U.S. Supreme Court's 1972 action in a similar case, Baker v. Nelson, which dismissed a same-sex couple's marriage claim "for want of a substantial federal question".
The majority ruling said the case was about "change" and "how best to handle it under the Constitution". It noted that the question seemed to be not if, but when and how, this would happen for same-sex marriage. The ruling concluded that Baker had not yet been explicitly overturned and until addressed by the Supreme Court in some future case, there were no legal grounds at present to allow it to be ignored or deemed redundant, since the court could not attempt to anticipate what the changing position of society or the Supreme Court might be in future. Quoting Tully v. Griffin Inc and Hicks, the court noted that it was also not for them to engage in new "doctrinal development" without a basis in new guidance from the Supreme Court. Nor could the court draw conclusions that contradict precedents in previous rulings on the matter.
The ruling noted that the rejection of some past appeals by the Supreme Court were not necessarily a sign that the appeal was ill-founded, and such meaning should not be read into them ("this kind of action - or inaction - imports no expression upon the merits of the case, as the bar has been told many times"). The ruling examined various dubious bases often allowed by States for marriage, and the extent of sanctimonious expressions used in discussing and practicing marriage, and the deference owed to individual states' legislative power to examine such questions at their own pace, and the fact that just one year had passed from the first legalization of same-sex marriage in the United States to the matters leading to this case. It concluded that "what we are left with, is [that] by creating a status (marriage) and subsidizing it (with privileges) the States created an incentive for two people who procreate together to stay together for the purposes of rearing offspring". The court also described the Supreme Court's 2013 ruling in Windsor as one that should be seen less as an affirmation of same-sex marriage, and instead, as a case concerning Federal law encroachment upon State law, in which it had been confirmed that it was not the place of the Federal legislation to effectively seek to determine for all States how they should each treat same-sex marriage. Writing for the majority, Judge Jeffrey Sutton also dismissed the arguments made on behalf of same-sex couples in this case: "Not one of the plaintiffs' theories, however, makes the case for constitutionalizing the definition of marriage and for removing the issue from the place it has been since the founding: in the hands of state voters."
 Dissenting opinion
Dissenting, Judge Martha Craig Daughtrey wrote: "Because the correct result is so obvious, one is tempted to speculate that the majority has purposefully taken the contrary position to create the circuit split regarding the legality of same-sex marriage that could prompt a grant of certiorari by the Supreme Court and an end to the uncertainty of status and the interstate chaos that the current discrepancy in state laws threatens."
U.S. Supreme Court
The same-sex couples filed a petition for certiorari with the U.S. Supreme Court on November 17. They presented a single question for the court's consideration: "Whether a state violates the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution by denying same-sex couples the right to marry." On November 24, Attorney General Schuette filed a brief with the Supreme Court supporting the same-sex couples' petition for certiorari.
On January 16, 2015, the Supreme Court consolidated this case as Obergefell v. Hodges, , with three other same-sex marriage cases Tanco v. Haslam (Tennessee), Obergefell v. Hodges (Ohio), and Bourke v. Beshear (Kentucky) challenging state laws that prohibited same-sex marriage and agreed to review the case. It set a briefing schedule to be completed April 17 and scheduled oral argument for April 28, 2015. The court asked the parties to address two questions: "1) Does the Fourteenth Amendment require a state to license a marriage between two people of the same sex? 2) Does the Fourteenth Amendment require a state to recognize a marriage between two people of the same sex when their marriage was lawfully licensed and performed out-of-state?"
The United States Supreme Court had heard oral arguments on April 28, 2015.
thumb|right|upright|Justice Anthony Kennedy, the author of the Court's opinion.
On June 26, 2015, the U.S. Supreme Court held in a 5–4 decision that the Fourteenth Amendment requires all states to grant same-sex marriages and recognize same-sex marriages granted in other states. The Court overturned its prior decision in Baker v. Nelson, which the Sixth Circuit had invoked as precedent.
The Obergefell v. Hodges decision came on the second anniversary of the United States v. Windsor ruling that struck down Section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), which denied federal recognition of same-sex marriages. It also came on the twelfth anniversary of Lawrence v. Texas which struck down sodomy laws in 13 states. Each justice's opinion on Obergefell was consistent with their opinion in Windsor.  In both cases, Justice Kennedy authored the majority opinion and was considered the "swing vote".
See also
 Accidental Activists
 LGBT rights in Michigan
 Same-sex marriage in Michigan
References
External links
 DeBoer v. Snyder, No. 14-571: U.S. Supreme Court official Docket entry
 U.S. District Court, March 21, 2014
 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
Judgment
 Case Docket from CourtListener
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:LGBT rights in Michigan
Category:2012 in Michigan
Category:2013 in Michigan
Category:2014 in Michigan
Category:United States same-sex union case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Adoption law in the United States
Category:LGBT adoption in the United States
Category:2015 in LGBT history
"""

From "Debs v. United States" ==> """
Debs v. United States, 249 U.S. 211 (1919), was a United States Supreme Court decision, relevant for US labor law and constitutional law, that upheld the Espionage Act of 1917.
Facts
thumb|Debs, at center, delivering the speech in Canton, Ohio, for which he was prosecuted
Eugene V. Debs was an American labor and political leader and five-time Socialist Party of America candidate for the American Presidency. On June 16, 1918 Debs made an anti-war speech in Canton, Ohio, protesting US involvement in World War I. He was arrested under the Espionage Act of 1917 and convicted, sentenced to serve ten years in prison and to be disenfranchised for life.
The case against Debs was based on a document entitled Anti-War Proclamation and Program, showing that Debs' original intent was to openly protest against the war. The argument of the Federal Government was that Debs was attempting to arouse mutiny and treason by preventing the drafting of soldiers into the United States Army. This type of speech was outlawed in the United States with the Espionage Act of June 15, 1917. The defense argued that Debs was entitled to the rights of free speech provided for in the first amendment of the Bill of Rights. This was one of three cases decided in 1919 in which the Court had upheld convictions that restricted free speech.
Judgement
In its ruling on Debs v. United States, the Court examined several statements that Debs had made regarding the war. While he had tempered his speeches in an attempt to comply with the Espionage Act, the Court found he had shown the "intention and effect of obstructing the draft and recruitment for the war." Among other things, the Court cited Debs' praise for those imprisoned for obstructing the draft. In his opinion, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. stated that Debs' case was essentially the same as Schenck v. United States (1919), in which the Court upheld a similar conviction. The Supreme Court decided against Debs, and maintained the power of the Espionage Act. Debs' sentence to ten years imprisonment and loss of citizenship was upheld. Holmes J said the following:
Significance
Debs went to prison on April 13, 1919. While in federal prison, he was nominated for president by the Socialist Party of America in the 1920 Election for the fifth and final time despite his disfranchisement. He received 919,799 votes (3.4% of the popular vote), the most ever for a Socialist Party presidential candidate in the U.S. It was slightly more than his 900,672 total in the 1912 election, which had equaled six percent of the popular vote. (National women's suffrage in 1920 greatly increased the total number of votes cast.)
In 1921, Congress largely repealed the Espionage and Sedition Acts. On December 23, 1921 President Warren G. Harding commuted Debs' sentence to time served, effective Christmas Day. He did not issue a pardon. The two met the following day at the White House.
See also
 United States labor law
 In re Debs
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 249
 Inherent powers
Notes
External links
 Appellate record and case briefs for Debs v. United States
Category:1919 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:History of the Socialist Party of America
Category:Opposition to World War I
Category:United States military case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States home front during World War I
Category:Eugene V. Debs
"""

From "Deck v. Missouri" ==> """
Deck v. Missouri, 544 U.S. 622 (2005), was a United States Supreme Court case that dealt with the constitutionality of shackling a prisoner during the sentencing phase of a trial. In a 7–2 opinion delivered by Justice Breyer, the court held that it is against due process, a right prescribed by the 5th and 14th Amendments, to shackle a defendant in the sentencing portion of a trial unless the shackling relates to a specific defendant and certain state interests.
 Background 
On August 27, 1996, Carman Deck (August 9, 1965 – May 3, 2022) was officially charged and arrested for six felonies. Among those felonies were a count of first-degree robbery, a count of first-degree burglary, two counts of armed criminal action, and two counts of first-degree murder. During the guilt phase of Deck's original trial, he was dressed as a normal citizen, but had leg-braces under his clothes. Deck's trial began on February 17, 1998 and within three days, he was convicted on all counts. After handing down a verdict, it took the jury only one additional day to sentence Deck to death. After the trial, Deck appealed to the Supreme Court of Missouri, where his conviction and sentence were upheld. However, Deck was later granted a new penalty phase after he appealed to the Supreme Court of Missouri on the grounds that he received ineffective assistance of counsel at sentencing.
The retry of Deck's penalty phase began on April 29, 2003, where he was brought into court wearing shackles. The defense objected to Deck being visibly restrained, stating that Deck's behavior did not justify shackles. The defense stated the only justification for shackling Deck would have been if he caused a disturbance in the courtroom. However, he did not. The defense also suggested other measures that the court could have taken to ensure safety instead of shackling Deck. These measures included adding extra security guards to the courtroom, and having the people who wanted to sit in the gallery walk through metal detectors. However, the defense's objections were overruled. Deck's attorneys once again objected during voir dire. Deck's defense thought that asking jurors if the shackles biased them was not enough to ensure that Deck would receive reliable sentencing. The court overruled the objection again, stating “The objection that you’re making will be overruled. He has been convicted and will remain in leg irons and belly chain.” The jury once again sentenced Deck to death.
Deck appealed to the Supreme Court of Missouri, arguing that the shackles infringed upon his right to due process, equal protection, right to confront evidence against him, and freedom from cruel and unusual punishment (prescribed from Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution). The Missouri Supreme Court held that the trial court had standing to impose security measures if it was necessary. The Supreme Court of Missouri stated that Deck had committed murder and that he would run if he had the chance. Additionally, the court ruled that there was “no record of the extent of the jury’s awareness of the restraints throughout the penalty phase.”  The Missouri Supreme Court concluded by stating that it was not claimed that the shackles prevented Deck from participating in the trial and that no evidence has been put forth to prove that it did.
 Petitioner's argument 
Deck and his attorneys submitted a Writ of Certiorari to the United States Supreme Court to try to get his death sentence thrown out. The Writ of Certiorari laid out Deck's arguments as to why the shackling was unconstitutional. Deck and his counsel claimed that some of Deck's basic constitutional rights were violated when he was shackled in open court.
Deck specifically claimed that his rights to due process, prescribed by the 5th and 14th Amendments, were violated. Deck's counsel made it clear that there was no reason such as a court disturbance to permit such shackling. In Deck's argument to the Supreme Court, it was also argued that Deck's 6th Amendment rights had been violated on the grounds of the Confrontation Clause. Deck's shackling told the jury that Deck was dangerous and was shackled to protect the courtroom,  resulting in what his attorneys referred to as prejudice towards Deck, i.e. the jury may have been influenced by these arbitrary details in deciding Deck's sentence, not just the presented facts. As a result, his right to confront witnesses as stated in the 6th Amendment (as well as the requirement of an impartial jury) were violated by the shackles. Deck's counsel argued that the shackles violated the defendant's rights that "give meaning to the defendant’s right to be present at his trial".  It was argued that the shackles limited Deck from freely conversing with his counsel, and that they prevented him from taking the stand to defend himself. The defense wrote that this would increase the chances of Deck being sentenced to death by the jury which made the shackling unconstitutional.
Additionally Deck argued that his 8th Amendment rights had been violated because of the idea of reliable sentencing. This also ties into the idea of a biased jury. According to justices Souter and Stevens’ concurring opinion in the case of Simmons v. South Carolina, the “Eight Amendment requires provision of accurate sentencing information as an indispensable prerequisite to a reasoned determination of whether a defendant shall live or die” (case from 1994).  Deck's attorneys argued that since the jury considered arbitrary evidence, Deck's right to reliable sentencing had been violated.
Deck and his attorneys also argued about the burden of proof. Deck's counsel believed that the bias created by the shackles put the burden of proof on Deck and not the state. The defense argued that the state could not prove that the shackles did no harm. Ultimately, the defense felt that the shackling of Deck was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, meaning shackling made a difference in the decision that the jury made. The defense argued that this alone was a violation against the constitution and due process.
 Amicus curiae briefs 
An amicus curiae brief was filed by Thomas H. Speedy Rice on behalf of the Bar Human Rights Committee of England and Wales and the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers on behalf of Deck (petitioner).
In their brief, the Bar of Human Rights Committee and the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers argued that the shackling of Deck was a human rights violation. It was also argued that the shackles violated due process and common law and that the shackles diminished courtroom dignity. Additionally, it was argued that the shackles contributed to self-incrimination, and prevented Deck from confronting witnesses against him.
A brief was filed by the state of California by “Bill Lockyer, Attorney General of California, Manuel M. Medeiros, State Solicitor General, Robert R. Anderson, Chief Assistant Attorney General, Mary Jo Graves, Senior Assistant Attorney General, Ward A. Campbell, Supervising Deputy Attorney General, and Catherine Chatman and Eric L. Christoffersen, Deputy Attorneys General, by John W. Suthers, Interim Attorney General of Colorado.”  Additionally, the Attorneys General of the following states filed briefs: “Roy King of Alabama, M. Jane Brady of Delaware, Steve Carter of Indiana."
 Opinion of the Court 
 Majority opinion 
In a 7–2 decision, the Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Missouri Supreme Court. The opinion, written by Justice Breyer, made it clear that shackling a defendant during the sentencing portion of a trial does violate the Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. The Supreme Court held that unless the shackling pertains to a specific defendant for specific state interests, the Constitution forbids the shackling of a defendant in the sentencing phase (as well as the guilt phase) of a trial.
The Supreme Court first noted that the law (historically) has prohibited the shackling of a defendant in the guilty-innocent phase of a trial. The court also noted shackling is only allowed when there is a “special need.".  The court explained that this concept is embedded in the law and that courts have followed this rule throughout history. The court noted that this rule was first written by William Blackstone in his 18th Century Commentaries on England. Blackstone, a politician, judge and jurist, wrote “it is laid down in our ancient books, that, though under an indictment of the highest nature, a defendant must be brought to the bar without irons, or any manner of shackles or bonds; unless there be evident danger of an escape.” Next, the court looked at more recent opinions to show that this rule relates to a defendant's right to due process. The court looked at the dictum of three cases, Illinois v. Allen, Holbrook v. Flynn and Estelle v. Williams. In Allen, the Court said that trial courts should only use shackles on defendants, during the guilty phase, as a “last resort.”  In Holbrook, the court stated that shackling is “prejudicial” and should only be allowed when state interests are involved. Lastly, in Estelle, the court stated that making a defendant go to trial wearing prison attire threatened the “fairness of the fact-finding process” and should only be allowed when “essential state policy” justifies it.  The Court then established that these cases give acknowledgement to standards that are embedded in the Constitution and the law which governs in the United States. The court then tried to determine if this rule also applies to the sentencing phase of a trial, not just the guilt-innocent portion.
The court established that in fact the due process clause of the 5th and 14th amendments prohibits the shackling of a defendant during the sentencing phase of a trial. The court made this determination by looking at important facts or legal standards. The court noted that shackling a defendant undermines the presumption of innocence, since shackling tells jurors that the person being shackled is dangerous and needs to be restrained. Breyer also noted that shackling a defendant hurts his ability to interact with his attorneys, and prevents a defendant from taking the witness stand. The principle of court dignity also came up in the opinion of the court. The court stated, “The routine use of shackles in the presence of juries would undermine these symbolic yet concrete objectives.”Deck, 544 U.S. at 631.  By making these conclusions about shackling a defendant, the court ruled “the considerations that militate against the routine use of visible shackles during the guilt phase of a criminal trial apply with like force to penalty proceedings in capital cases.”Deck, 544 U.S. at 632. This deals with the fact the in these cases, the jury is still deciding between life and death and that this is a decision of equal importance compared to the question of innocence and guilt. The decision of life or death in the sentencing phase is serious which requires reliable sentencing. According to Justice Breyer, the court has “stressed the ‘acute need’ for reliable decision making when the death penalty is at issue.”  Breyer stated that in Deck’s case his right to reliable sentencing was infringed upon (a right derived from the Eighth Amendment).
The Court then made it clear that the opinion of the Missouri Supreme Court did not meet the Constitutional requirements for permitting the shackling of Deck. The Supreme Court said this because they determined that the jury was aware of the shackles, that the trial judge did not permit the shackling of Deck because he was a security risk but because he had been previously convicted, and that the shackling created “prejudice” towards the defendant.  All of these factors were not recognized by the Missouri Supreme Court on Deck's initial appeal. The Court concluded by saying there is one exception to shackling a defendant. The opinion of the Court permits a judge to use discretion to shackle a defendant under certain circumstances, including protecting people in the courtroom. Breyer also wrote that the determination of whether a defendant should be shackled “must be case specific.”Deck, 544 U.S. at 633.  Breyer said that if that is not the case, the shackling violates due process as it did in Deck's case.
 Dissent 
In the dissent, delivered by Justice Clarence Thomas and joined by Justice Scalia, it was stated that shackling Deck was not excessive as he had already been convicted, and since the jury knew of Deck's conviction, his shackling would not have shocked the members of the jury.  With regard to the shackles biasing the jury, Thomas stated, “shackles may undermine the factfinding process only if seeing a convicted murderer in them is prejudicial.”Deck, 544 U.S. at 654 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Thomas writes, "[t]o presume that such a defendant suffers prejudice by appearing in handcuffs at sentencing does not comport with reality." He pointed out that the majority had put forth no evidence to support the claim that the shackles prevented Deck from participating in his defense, including taking the stand, or "that the shackles caused him pain." The dissent stated that, since Deck was convicted of capital crimes, his behavior may not have been predictable. The dissenting justices believed "he could turn that ire on his own counsel, who has failed in defending his innocence."Deck, 544 U.S. at 653 (Thomas, J., dissenting). The dissenting justices also suggested there was a possibility that Deck could have tried to harm a witness or a reporter.
Thomas argued that the opinion of the majority  went against common sense and that the decision paid little attention to courtroom security issues. Later in his opinion, Thomas stated "there was no consensus that supports elevating the rule against shackling to a federal constitutional command." He argued "there is no tradition barring the use of shackles or other restraints at sentencing." He referenced then-recent court rulings which had articulated that the "rule against visible shackled does not apply to sentencing. See, e.g., State v. Young, 853 P.2d 327, 350 (Utah 1993); Duckett v. State, 104 Nev. 6, 11, 752 P.2d 752, 755 (1988) (per curiam); State v. Franklin, 97 Ohio St. 3d 1, 18—19, 776 N. E. 2d 26, 46—47 (2002)" He discussed the three decisions which the majority had cited in their opinion. Thomas stated, "in recent years, more of a consensus regarding the use of shackling has developed, with many courts concluding that shackling is inherently prejudicial. But rather than being firmly grounded in deeply rooted principles, that consensus stems from a series of ill-considered dicta…the current consensus that the court describes is one of its own making. It depends almost exclusively on the dicta in the Courts' opinions in Holbrook, Estelle and Allen." In Deck's case, Thomas posited that due process does not "place limits" on shackling because there is a difference between an accused man and a convicted man.
Thomas then wrote about the notion of courtroom dignity for the convict (Deck), claiming "the power of the courts to maintain order, however, is not a right personal to the defendant, much less one of constitutional proportions…The concern for courtroom decorum is not a concern about defendants, let alone their right to due process. It is a concern about society's need for courts to operate effectively."  Thomas concludes by writing that the prevailing majority opinion in this case does not benefit the defendant but "risks the lives of courtroom personnel …a risk that due process does not require."
 Execution 
Deck was sentenced to death for a third time on November 7, 2008. On April 13, 2017, the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri granted his petition for a writ of habeas corpus and vacated his death sentence, resentencing him to life in prison without the possibility of parole.Deck v. Steele, No. 4:12-CV-1527-CDP (Apr. 13, 2017). On October 19, 2020, the death sentence was reinstated following an appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. 
On January 31, 2022, the Supreme Court of Missouri set Deck's execution date for that May 3. On May 2, the Supreme Court of the United States denied a petition to have his case stayed and Governor Mike Parson said he would allow the execution to proceed. Deck was executed by lethal injection early the next evening at the Eastern Reception, Diagnostic and Correctional Center.
 See also 
 List of people executed in Missouri
 List of people executed in the United States in 2022
 References 
 External links 
 Writ of Certiorari
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Missouri
"""

From "DeFunis v. Odegaard" ==> """
DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U.S. 312 (1974), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the case had become moot and so declined to render a decision on the merits.. American student Marco DeFunis, who had been denied admission to the University of Washington School of Law in the state of Washington before he was provisionally admitted during the pendency of the case, was slated to graduate within a few months of the decision being rendered.Karabel, Jerome. The Chosen: The Hidden History of Admission and Exclusion at Harvard, Yale, and Princeton. Boston: Mifflin, 2005.
The Court rejected the assertion that the case was in one of two exceptions to the mootness doctrine that were raised by the plaintiff. The case did not constitute "voluntary cessation" on the part of the defendant law school, as the plaintiff was now in his final quarter, and the law school could take no action to deny him the ability to graduate. Also, it was not a question that was "capable of repetition, yet evading review" because the plaintiff would never again face the situation, and others who might raise the same complaint in the future might be able to receive the courts' full review.
DeFunis argued that materials brought to light during discovery and entered into evidence in the trial court showed that his initial denial of admission to the law school was the result of the operation of the law school's affirmative action policy, favoring the admission of minority applicants over better-qualified white candidates. Although the Court refused to consider the case on the merits in DeFunis, the issue of affirmative action returned to the Court without any problem of mootness, with an opinion on the merits achieved in Regents of the University of California v. Bakke.
 Background 
In 1970, Marco DeFunis, a Sephardic Jewish man, applied for entry to the law program at the University of Washington. He was denied, but after filing a lawsuit, a state court ordered that he was to be admitted in the fall of 1971. Later, the Supreme Court of Washington reversed the court’s ruling so DeFunis appealed to the US Supreme Court. By the time the Court heard the case in early 1974, it was DeFunis’ final year of the law program. DeFunis, believing he had been rejected because of affirmative action, thought the school had taken applicants who were approved because of not their accomplishments but their race.
He took his case to court and stated that of affirmative action violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
 Lower courts 
The case was first heard in the Superior Court of Washington, in which the University of Washington moved to have the case dismissed on the grounds that relief could not be granted. The court rejected the proposed dismissal and filed an injunction that forced the school to admit DeFunis. The university argued that it used a complex formula to predict applicants' success, the Predicted First-Year Average (PFYA), but it was not the only thing taken into account during the application process.
Applicants with higher PFYA scores were reviewed and were presented by a committee member before the whole committee. The committee member who represented a student was usually up to chance but not in the case of African American and other minority students. Their files were reviewed by three specific board members: Professor Geoffrey Crooks (director of the school's Council on Legal Education Opportunities program), Vincent Hayes (a second-year black law student), and Associate Dean Robert S. Hunt (the sole evaluator of the files of minorities other than African Americans). The court found that in reviewing the files of minority applicants, the committee attached less weight to the PFYA in making a total judgmental evaluation as to the relative ability of the particular applicant to succeed in law school. Also, the chairman testified that although the same standard was applied to all applicants (the relative probability of the individual succeeding in law school), minority applicants were directly compared to one another, but they were not compared to applicants outside of the minority group. As a result, the committee admitted a group of minority applicants, placed a group of such applicants on a waiting list, and rejected other minority applications. The dean of the law school testified that the law school has no fixed admissions quota for minority students but that the committee sought a reasonable representation of such groups in the law school. He added that the school had accepted no unqualified minority applicants but only those whose records indicated that they were capable of successfully completing the law school program. Because of the judgmental factors in the admissions process, as outlined, the ultimate determination of applicants to whom admission was offered did not follow exactly the relative ranking of PFYAs. Of those invited, 74 had lower PFYAs than plaintiff; 36 of them were minority applicants, 22 were returning from military service, and 16 were applicants judged by the committee as deserving invitations on the basis of other information contained in their files. There were 29 applicants with higher PFYAs than plaintiff's that were denied admission. Of the 36 minority group students invited, 18 actually enrolled in the first-year class. The law faculty was, as the court observes, motivated by a laudable purpose: to increase the number of minority students studying law and with the avowed purpose of equalizing opportunities among applicants who come from the lower income and economic groups with those who come from the higher. That policy of ethnic minority selection apparently was not to apply to faculty positions, as the record does not show that any qualified white applicant for the teaching staff was refused or that any faculty member ousted to make room for law teachers with questionable credentials from a minority ethnic group.DeFunis v. Odegaard, 82 Wash. 2d 11, 
The court's reflected heavily on the Supreme Court's ruling on Brown v. Board of Education when it began ruling and so the injunction was filed. The Supreme Court of Washington had strong opinions on the case, with Justice Hale going as far to say, "Preferential treatment under the guise of 'affirmative action' is the imposition of one form of racial discrimination in place of another. The questions that must be asked in this regard are: must an individual sacrifice his right to be judged on his own merit by accepting discrimination based solely on the color of his skin? How can we achieve the goal of equal opportunity for all if, in the process, we deny equal opportunity to some?" Justice Hunter concurred "The majority supports a laudable purpose — to enable students of certain minority races to enter the University of Washington School of Law in order that ultimately there will be a greater representation of practicing lawyers of those races in the legal profession — with which purpose I do not disagree. This must not be accomplished, however, by clear and willful discrimination against students of other races as the Admissions Committee of the University of Washington School of Law has done in this case by denying admission to the respondent, Marco DeFunis, Jr, to this school, as found by the trial court and amply supported by the record."
 Supreme Court 
When the case reached the Supreme Court, DeFunis was already in his final year of law school. The court ruled it was moot since neither party had anything to gain from the court's ruling.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 416
References
External links
 Case Brief at Lawnix.com
 info of DeFunis v. Odegaard
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:University of Washington
Category:University and college admissions in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "DeJonge and Co. v. Breuker & Kessler Co." ==> """
DeJonge and Co. v. Breuker & Kessler Co., 235 U.S. 33 (1914), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held every instance of a copyrighted work must observe copyright notice formalities for the work to maintain copyright, even if the work appears multiple times on the same sheet of paper. Every copy of a copyrighted painting must bear the notice for the painting to maintain copyright.
 References 
External links
Category:1914 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Delaware Tribal Business Committee v. Weeks" ==> """
Delaware Tribal Business Committee v. Weeks, 430 U.S. 73 (1977), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court.
 Background 
On appeal from the United States District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma, the appellants, federally recognized Native American Tribe and the Secretary of the Interior, challenged a judgment of the United States District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma granting appellee, unrecognized Native American tribe, an injunction in an action seeking a declaration that appellee's exclusion from an award violated the United States Fifth Amendment Due Process Clause.
The Delaware Indians, who originally resided in the Northeastern United States, were gradually forced to move westward in the 19th century, and the tribe became geographically scattered. One group, the Cherokee Delawares, which initially had settled on a Kansas reservation as part of the tribe's main body, eventually moved to "Indian Country" in Oklahoma, became assimilated with the Cherokees, and is today a federally recognized tribe. Another group, the Absentee Delawares, which never joined the main body in Kansas but migrated to Oklahoma and settled with the Wichita and Caddo Indians, is also a federally recognized tribe. A third group, the Kansas Delawares, lived with the main body on the Kansas reservation but remained in Kansas when the Cherokee Delawares moved to Oklahoma; under an 1866 treaty, the Kansas Delawares elected to become UScitizens and to receive individual parcels of land in Kansas but had to dissolve their relationship with the tribe and participate in tribal assets only to the extent of a "just proportion" of the tribe's credits "then held in trust by the United States;" and the descendants of this group are not a federally recognized tribe.
The funds were being distributed to redress the breach of a tribal land treaty and appellee alleged that its exclusion violated its equal protection rights under the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment. The district court rendered judgment in favor of appellee and enjoined further distributions. The appellate court affirmed and appellants sought review. The Court reversed, ruling that Congress's omission of appellee from the distribution did not offend due process and but tied rationally to the fulfillment of Congress' unique obligation toward the Indians.
The appellee was not a recognized tribal entity but was simply individual Indians with no vested rights in any tribal property. The statute distributed tribal, not individually-owned, property. The appellee had previously been excluded from a distribution of tribal assets. Congress deliberately limited the distribution under the statute to avoid problems that might attend a wider distribution.
The question was whether the Kansas Delawares were denied equal protection of the laws in violation of the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.
The Kansas Delawares were excluded from the distribution of funds authorized by an Act of Congress, whixhprovided for distribution of funds only to the Absentee Delawares and Cherokee, pursuant to an award by the Indian Claims Commission, to redress a breach by the United States of an 1854 treaty with the Delaware tribe.
 Decision 
"The power of Congress over Indian Affairs may be of a plenary nature, but it is not absolute." US v. Alcea Band of Tillamooks, , 329 U.S. 54.
Since the exclusion of the Kansas Delawares from distribution under the act was "tied rationally to the fulfillment of Congress' unique obligation toward the Indians," 430 U.S. 85-89, the exclusion does not offend the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.
The Kansas Delawares are not a recognized tribal entity and so are individual Indians without vested rights in tribal property. Congress has authority over the distribution of property held by recognized tribes.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Lenape
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Native American history of Oklahoma
"""

From "Delaware v. Pennsylvania" ==> """
Delaware v. Pennsylvania, 598 U.S. 115 (2023), was a United States Supreme Court case related to unclaimed money and the escheatment of checks.Delaware v. Pennsylvania, 598 U.S. 115 (2023) This case was Justice Ketanji Brown Jackson's first opinion on the Supreme Court. It is also the first case the Supreme Court has taken on unclaimed property in over 30 years.
Background
States are entitled to take custody of abandoned personal property via the process of escheatment. The amount of money in dispute that is abandoned from MoneyGram has been reported to be Hundreds of Millions of Unclaimed Dollars. In past years it has been more than $500 million. For the state of Delaware used the escheatment of "like bank and brokerage accounts, unclaimed life insurance policies, uncashed paychecks, traveler's checks, and gift cards" make up 10% of Delaware's third source of revenue. Delaware is home to over 2 million business registered in the state of Delaware.
Several States (30) invoked the Supreme Court's original jurisdiction to get the Supreme Court to resolve a dispute between the states as to the question if abandoned proceeds are subject to the Disposition of Abandoned Money Orders and Travelers Check Act (Federal Disposition Act or FDA) 12 U.S.C. §2503.
MoneyGram is a Delaware corporation that provides prepaid financial instruments which are sold to consumers to pay their own obligations. MoneyGram International, Inc. is the second-largest money transfers business in the world, with revenues of over $1 billion. MoneyGram sells two products "Official Checks" and "Retail Money Orders." The retail money orders are not the instrument in dispute of this case. Images of the disputed items can be viewed in the two Affidavits of Jennifer Whitlock the head of Global Supply Chain for MoneyGram summitted samples.
Under the MoneyGram "Official checks," there are two types "Agent Checks" and "Teller's Check" These checks are sold only by financial institution banks and credit unions and are not sold at retail locations. "Agent Check Money Orders" are not in dispute of the litigation.
Many large companies in the United States incorporate in Delaware for the legal and tax protections that are offered in the state.
Delaware sought to have the Federally created Common law. The Federal Disposition Act covers disputed Instruments in dispute.  The rules came from the case of Texas v. New Jersey, 379 U. S. 674, 675 (1965).
 Supreme Court of the United States Special Master
On May 26, 2016, a motion was filed for leave to file a bill of complaint. The Special Master heard oral arguments on the case on March 10, 2021.
First Interim Order
On July 23, 2021, the Special Master issued the First Interim Report.
The Supreme Court Appointed a special master Pierre N. Leval to the case.  The Special Master ruled in his initial report; Disputed Instruments are covered by the Federal Disposition Act.
The Special Master bifurcated the case into two parts a liability and damage phase.
There are two ways laws that the special master was asked to look at. The Disposition of Abandoned Money Orders and Travelers Check Act (Federal Disposition Act or FDA) 12 U.S.C. §2503 and the Federal common law rule where that debts left unclaimed by creditors would escheat "to the State of the Creditor's last known address as shown by the debtor's books and records"
There are two types of instruments that Moneygram sells/markets.  "Agent Checks" and "Teller's Checks" which are the disputed instruments.  Moneygram is incorporated in the state of Delaware. If the common law of escheatment of the disputed instruments applies the abandoned property escheats to the state of incorporation.  However, if the FDA applies, the abandoned property goes to the state of purchase.
The special master covered the historical precedent of escheatment. Under the common law of England, all land titles and property originated from the Crown.  "“the process by which tenurial land returned to the lord of the fee upon the occurrence of an event obstructing the normal course of descent."
Under American law, escheatment has been justified under the public policy that unclaimed and abandoned should be used for the general good rather than for the chance enrichment of particular individuals or organizations.” Standard Oil Co. v. New Jersey 341 U.S. 428, 436 (1951)."
The special master went on to evaluate the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act drafted by the Uniform Law Commission first published in 1954. The act was not universally adopted and did not resolve claims between the states. The revised Uniform disposition of Unclaimed Property Act was published in 1966, which did include "money orders and traveler's checks."  For some reason, the Uniform Act of 1966 did not define "money order" or "traveler's check."
The FDA applies only to money payable on "a money order, traveler's check or other similar written instruments (excluding third party bank check).
The special master highlighted the Congressional findings in the FDA that noted:
Second Interim Order
The Specials Master held Oral arguments on December 8, 2022. On December 13, 2022, the Special Master issued a Second Interim Report.  In this report the Special Master issued an apology to the Supreme Court stating: "I have concluded that i can no longer stand by the recommendations that i made to the Court in my First interim special Master's report. Because a special Master's responsibility to the Court does not terminate with the submission of a report but is exercised “at all times and in many ways,” Cynthia J. rapp, Guide for Special Masters in Original Cases Before the Supreme Court of the United States 3, i believe it is my obligation to so advise the Court. i therefore respectfully submit this second interim report of the special Master." This was reproted as a Surprise Change of Mind.
The Special Master stated that he read the oral arguments before the Supreme Court, where he felt that Delaware was "emphasizing a circumstance that, if correct, would distinguish between rights and obligations, at least comparing the disputed instruments with those that MoneyGram labels as “money orders.” The Special Master notified the Clerk of the Court and ordered expedited briefing.  After briefing and oral arguments the special master revise his recommendation to the court.
The Special Master concluded that the Disputed Instruments did fall in the category of "other similar written instruments." but were not "money orders." However, because some of the Disputed Instruments are drawn by a bank as the drawer making the bank labile they fell within the exclusion of the "third party bank checks." FDA 12 U.S.C. 2503.
 Delaware exception to Supreme Court of the United States Special Master ruling
Once the Special Masters First Interim report concluded the Disputed Instruments were covered under the FDA, Delaware filed an exception.
The court accepted briefs and oral arguments, the Special Master announced that the proceedings before the court had caused him to 
"reassess his conclusion. He subsequently issued a Second Interim Report that concluded that many of the disputed Instruments were or could be "third party bank checks" and would thereby be excluded from the FDA."
The Special Master recommend to the Supreme Court any of the that the "Disputed Instruments  that are checks issued by banks as drawers (on which banks are thus liable are "third party bank checks," which are excluded from the scope of the "other similar written instrument" clause and from the disposition of the act."
The Special master concluded the Teller's Checks marked by MoneyGram are teller's checks, however the "So labeled Agent Checks" and "unlabeled Agent checks  are not not drawers.
 Supreme Court of the United States
The court held that the disputed instruments are "sufficiently "similar" to money orders to fall under the FDA".  The court did not decide if the disputed instruments "are" money orders.  The court ruled were similar to money orders under 12 U.S.C. 2503. They fall into the "other similar written instrument" category of the FDA.
The Supreme court opinion addresses the first phase of the bifurcated process from the Special Masters liability phases. The Court left the Special Master to decide the damages in the second phase.
The court looked at the common-law it created in by the court's own case law of two rules.
Primary rule (default) the proceeds of abandoned financial produce should escheat "to the State of the creditor's last known address as shown by the debtor's books." The secondary rule did not resolve the question of escheatment when the creditor's addresses were unknown or because the State did not have a law allowing escheatment. Thus the secondary rule was to allow the abandoned property to default to the State of incorporation.
The court acknowledged the reason it created the default rule to escheat to the state of the creditor's last known address it "tend[ed] to distribute escheats amount States in the proportion of the commercial activities of their residents." The court went on to note the rules it created were causing inequitable distribution with some instruments. They highlighted that Western union was not keeping records of addresses of consumers that bought its financial products.
The court discussed the case of Pennsylvania v. New York, 407 U. S. 206 (1972). In Pennsylvania was asking for the Supreme Court to change its rules for escheatment because it was creating a "windfall" unfair to states where money orders are purchased, moving money to the state of New York. in the Pennsylvania case, the court refused to change its rule for escheatment.
In a direct response by congress to the courts holding in Pennsylvania v. New York, Congress created a more equitable rule and passed the FDA. Congress stated "as a matter of equity among the several States, he States “wherein the purchasers of money orders and traveler's checks reside should . . . be entitled to the proceeds of such instruments in the event of abandonment.”  §2501(3)"
Congress noted, and the court admitted that the common-law rules created by the court were not creating an equitable distribution amount the states.
" a variety of dictionary definitions contemporaneous with the Act's passage universally define a “money order” as a prepaid financial instrument used to transmit a specified amount of money to a named payee.  And this Court's common-law precedents—the backdrop against which the FDA was enacted—are in accord with that definition."
The court noted that the FDA was passed to change the court's prior common-law rule on the escheatment of these instruments.  The court went on to note one reason that the FDA was passed was to "prevent [...] a "windfall" to the State of incorporation by instead adopting a place-of-purchase escheatment rule."  This was done as a matter of equity between the states.
The court dismissed Delaware's argument the Special Masters reading and the court's view of section 2503 would "creat[e] surplusage and sweeping in all sorts of unintended financial product [would] go too far."
The court looked at Delaware and the Special Master's view that "even if the Disputed Instruments qualify as “other similar written instrument[s]” under the FDA, they are also “third party bank check[s],” which are expressly excluded from the FDA."  However, the court noted that the FDA does not define the term "third party bank check" nor does it have a commonly accepted meaning.
Section IV B
The majority opinion held that Nothing in the legislative history supported Delaware's view that the Disputed Instruments were "third party bank checks."  The court acknowledged that the term "third party bank check" has a "myriad [of] alternative definitions and is generally unknown."
The court looked at the view of the Treasury Department letter sent to Congress on the bill.   The letter warned that the proposed wording of the FDA prior to passage could be interpreted to cover "third party payment bank checks." and thus recommended excluding "third party payment bank checks from the FDA.  Congress adopted this recommendation.   The court even looked at the stated of Com. Chair Sen. Sparkman which reviewed the addition of the "third party payment bank check" exclusion as a "minor" change.
The court held that based on the history and text of the FDA "it would be strange to interpret the "third party bank check" language to exempt from the statute entire swaths of prepaid financial instruments that are otherwise similar to money orders in that they operate in generally the same fashion and would likewise escheat inequitably pursuant to the common law due to the business practice of company holding the funds."
The Court adopted the Special Master's First Interim Report and the proposed order, and overruled Delaware's exception to the First Interim report, and sent it back to the Special Master.
 Reaction Aftermath 
Pennsylvania Treasurer Stacy Garrity believes that Delaware may owe up to $400 million to the states that sued as result of the Courts ruling.   “This ruling means that Pennsylvania residents will have a real opportunity to reclaim millions of dollars in unclaimed property. The Supreme Court rejected Delaware's attempt to gain an unfair windfall and struck a strong blow in favor of consumers. I'm eager to get to the business of returning this money to the hardworking people it rightfully belongs to.”  Pennsylvania State Treasurer, Stacy GarrityThe case now goes back to the Special Master for the second part of the bifurcated action to assess damages.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
"""

From "Delaware v. Prouse" ==> """
Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that police may not stop motorists without any reasonable suspicion to suspect crime or illegal activity to check their driver's license and auto registration..
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1979 in United States case law
"""

From "DeLima v. Bidwell" ==> """
DeLima v. Bidwell, 182 U.S. 1 (1901), was one of a group of the first Insular Cases decided by the US Supreme Court.
The case was argued on January 8–11, 1901 and was decided on May 27, 1901.
The case is widely considered racist.
Background
The DeLima Sugar Importing Company sued the New York City collector of customs to recover duties on sugar imported from Puerto Rico after 1899, when Puerto Rico was ceded to the United States. DeLima argued that the Port of New York City had no jurisdiction to collect duties since Puerto Rico had been annexed by the United States.
The lower appellate court held the following:
 Although the collector had the right to challenge the factual sufficiency, he was barred from challenging federal jurisdiction on the basis of wrongful removal where the case was removed upon his own petition.
 The Customs Administrative Act did not decide whether the sugar was imported from a foreign country and so the court case was a proper legal action.
 Puerto Rico was not a foreign country for tariff purposes but was a United States territory because by the Treaty of Paris, the district was ceded to and in the possession of the United States. It was not necessary for an Act of Congress to embrace the territory for the purpose of tariff laws. Therefore, the duties on sugar were illegal, and DeLima Sugar Importing Company was entitled to a refund of its duties on sugar.
Decision
The Supreme Court ruled 5–4 that Puerto Rico, since its cession to the United States by the Treaty of Paris (1898), was not a foreign country for the purposes of US tariff laws, which required payment of duties on goods moving into the United States from a foreign country. In the absence of congressional legislation, the US government could not collect customs duties on sugar from Puerto Rico shipped to other parts of the United States by classifying Puerto Rico as a foreign country.Torruella, Juan. The Supreme Court and Puerto Rico: The Doctrine of Separate and Unequal. Editorial UPR, 1985 . P.47
The majority opinion was authored by Justice Henry Billings Brown and joined by Justices Melville Fuller, John Marshall Harlan, Rufus Wheeler Peckham and David Josiah Brewer.
Justice Joseph McKenna authored a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justices George Shiras, Jr., and Edward Douglass White. Justice Horace Gray authored a separate dissenting opinion.
The decision is similar to Downes v. Bidwell, 182 U.S. 244 (1901), which was decided on the same date.
See also
 Insular Cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 182
References
External links
Category:Sugar industry in Puerto Rico
Category:History of sugar
Category:Law of insular areas of the United States
Category:Legal history of Puerto Rico
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1901 in United States case law
Category:1901 in Puerto Rico
"""

From "Dennis v. Sparks" ==> """
Dennis v. Sparks, 449 U.S. 24 (1980), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that individuals who bribed a judge for an injunction were not protected by judicial immunity and therefore could be held liable for the damages resulting from the injunction.. 
The case
In January 1973, a judge of the 229th District Court of Duval County, Tex., enjoined the production of minerals from certain oil leases owned by respondents. In June 1975, the injunction was dissolved by an appellate court as having been illegally issued. Respondents then filed a complaint in the United States District Court purporting to state a cause of action for damages under 42 U.S.C. § 1983.. Defendants were the Duval County Ranch Co., Inc., which had obtained the injunction, the sole owner of the corporation, the judge who entered the injunction, and the two individual sureties on the injunction bond, one of whom is now petitioner in this Court. Essentially, the claim was that the injunction had been corruptly issued as the result of a conspiracy between the judge and the other defendants, thus causing a deprivation of property, i.e., two years of oil production, without due process of law.
All defendants moved to dismiss, the judge asserting judicial immunity and the other defendants urging dismissal for failure to allege action "under color" of state law, a necessary component of a § 1983 cause of action. The District Court concluded that, because the injunction was a judicial act within the jurisdiction of the state court, the judge was immune from liability in a § 1983 suit, whether or not the injunction had issued as the result of a corrupt conspiracy. Relying on Haldane v. Chagnon, the District Court also ruled that, with the dismissal of the judge, the remaining defendants could not be said to have conspired under color of state law within the meaning of § 1983. The action against them was accordingly dismissed "for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted."
In a per curiam opinion, a panel of the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed, agreeing that the judge was immune from suit and that, because "the remaining defendants, who are all private citizens, did not conspire with any person against whom a valid § 1983 suit can be stated," existing authorities in the Circuit required dismissal of the claims against these defendants as well.  The case was reconsidered en banc, prior Circuit authority was overruled and the District Court judgment was reversed insofar as it had dismissed claims against the defendants other than the judge. The court ruled that there was no good reason in law, logic, or policy for conferring immunity on private persons who persuaded the immune judge to exercise his jurisdiction corruptly. Because the judgment below was inconsistent with the rulings of other Courts of Appeals and involves an important issue, the Supreme Court granted the petition for certiorari.
 Trivia 
Dennis v. Sparks was the first opinion of the Court since the early 19th century where members of the Court were not referred to as "Mr. Justice."  In February 1979, Justice John Paul Stevens participated in a moot court at the University of Notre Dame.  Joining him on the bench were two lower court judges, including Judge Cornelia G. Kennedy, then chief judge of the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan.  As was custom, the arguing counsel addressed him as “Mr. Justice” Stevens.  When participants addressed Judge Kennedy as “Madame Justice,” she replied, “Why do you address me as ‘Madame Justice?’  The word ‘Justice’ is not a sexist term.”  Justice Stevens later discussed this with his all-male colleagues.  Justice Potter Stewart observed that women would inevitably join them on the Court someday, and thus suggested that they drop “Mr.” from the title.  On November 14, 1980, the Justices agreed by a vote of 8-1. The lone dissenter was Justice Harry A. Blackmun, who felt they should wait until a woman joined the Court so she could participate in the decision.  The following year, Sandra Day O'Connor became the first woman nominated and the first confirmed to the Court.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 449
References
External links
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Dennis v. United States" ==> """
Dennis v. United States, 341 U.S. 494 (1951), was a United States Supreme Court case relating to Eugene Dennis, General Secretary of the Communist Party USA. The Court ruled that Dennis did not have the right under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution to exercise free speech, publication and assembly, if the exercise involved the creation of a plot to overthrow the government.. In 1969, Dennis was de facto overruled by Brandenburg v. Ohio.
Background of the case
In 1948, eleven Communist Party leaders were convicted of advocating the violent overthrow of the US government and for the violation of several points of the Smith Act. The party members who had been petitioning for socialist reforms claimed that the act violated their First Amendment rights to freedom of speech and that they served no clear and present danger to the nation. The eleven petitioners were:Belknap (1994), p 211.Belknap (1977), p 51.Belknap (1994), p 207.Lannon, p 122.Morgan, p 314.
 Benjamin J. Davis – Chairman of the CPUSA's Legislative Committee
 Eugene Dennis – General Secretary
 John Gates – Leader of the Young Communist League
 Gil Green – Member of the National Board
 Gus Hall – Member of the National Board
 Irving Potash –  Furriers Union official
 Jack Stachel
 Robert G. Thompson – Lead of the New York organization
 John Williamson – Member of the Central Committee
 Henry Winston – Member of the National Board
 Carl Winter  – Lead of the Michigan organization
The 1949 trial was presided over by S.D.N.Y. Judge Harold Medina, a former Columbia University professor who had been a judge for only 18 months when the trial began.Morgan, p 314.Sabin, p 41.  The trial was held in the Foley Square federal courthouse in New York City, and opened on November 1, 1948; preliminary proceedings and jury selection lasted until January 17, 1949; the defendants first appeared in court on March 7; and the trial concluded on October 14, 1949.Morgan, p 315.  Although later trials surpassed it, in 1949 it was the longest federal trial in US history.Longer trials have been held since then, for example a 20-month trial in 1988.
Prosecutor John McGohey did not assert that the defendants had a specific plan to violently overthrow the US government, but rather alleged that the CPUSA's philosophy generally advocated the violent overthrow of governments.Belknap (1994), p 214. To prove this, the prosecution proffered articles, pamphlets and books (such as The Communist Manifesto) written by authors such as Karl Marx.Belknap (1994), p 214.Belknap (1994), p 209.  The prosecution argued that the texts advocated violent revolution, and that by adopting the texts as their political foundation, the defendants were also personally guilty of advocating violent overthrow of the government.Belknap (1994), p 209.
The five attorneys who volunteered to defend the communists were familiar with leftist causes and personally supported the defendants' rights to espouse communist views. They were Abraham Isserman, George W. Crockett, Jr., Richard Gladstein, Harry Sacher, and Louis F. McCabe.Sabin, p 42.Attorney Maurice Sugar participated in an advisory role."Communist Trial Ends with 11 Guilty", Life, October 24, 1949, p 31.  Defendant Eugene Dennis represented himself. The ACLU was dominated by anti-communist leaders during the 1940s, and did not enthusiastically support persons indicted under the Smith Act. However, the ACLU did provide an amicus brief for the Foley Square defendants, endorsing a motion for dismissal.Walker, pp 185–187. However, many local affiliates of the ACLU supported communist defendants.
The defense employed a three-pronged strategy: First, portraying the CPUSA as a conventional political party, which promoted socialism by peaceful means; second, employing the "labor defense" tactic to attack the trial as a capitalist venture which could never provide a fair outcome to proletarian defendants; and third, using the trial as an opportunity to publicize CPUSA policies.Walker, p 185.Belknap (1994), p 217.Sabin, pp 44–46.
The defense deliberately antagonized the judge by making a large number of objections and motions, which led to numerous bitter engagements between the attorneys and Judge Medina.Redish, p 82.Sabin, p 46. Out of the chaos, an atmosphere of "mutual hostility" arose between the judge and attorneys.Sabin, p 46. Medina came to believe that the defense attorneys were using the trial as an opportunity to publicize communist propaganda, and that they deliberately disrupted the trial using any means they could.Redish, p 82. Judge Medina attempted to maintain order by removing defendants who were out of order. In the course of the trial, Medina sent five of the defendants to jail for outbursts. Several times in July and August, the judge held defense attorneys in contempt of court, and told them their punishment would be meted out upon conclusion of the trial.Martelle, p 190.
On October 14, 1949, after the defense rested their case, the judge gave the jury instructions to guide them in reaching a verdict. After deliberating for seven and a half hours, the jury returned guilty verdicts against all eleven defendants.Belknap (1994), p 221. The judge sentenced ten defendants to five years' imprisonment and a $10,000 fine each.
Appeal
Petitioners were found guilty by the trial court and the decision was affirmed by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. The Supreme Court granted writ of certiorari, but limited it to whether section two or three of the Smith Act violated the First Amendment and whether the same two sections violated the First and Fifth Amendments because of indefiniteness.
George W. Crockett, Jr., Abraham J. Isserman and Harry Sacher argued the cause for petitioners. With them on the brief was Richard Gladstein.
Solicitor General Philip B. Perlman and Irving S. Shapiro argued the cause for the United States. With them on the brief were U.S. Attorney General James Howard McGrath, U.S. Assistant Attorney General McInerney, Irving H. Saypol, Robert W. Ginnane, Frank H. Gordon, Edward C. Wallace, and Lawrence K. Bailey.
The court's decision
Handed down as a 6-2 decision by the Court on June 4, 1951, the judgment and a plurality opinion was delivered by Chief Justice of the United States Fred M. Vinson, who was joined by Justices Stanley Forman Reed, Sherman Minton, and Harold H. Burton. Separate concurring opinions were delivered by Justices Felix Frankfurter and Robert H. Jackson. Justices Hugo Black and William O. Douglas wrote separate dissenting opinions. Justice Tom C. Clark did not participate in this case.
The Court rule affirmed the conviction of the petitioner, a leader of the Communist Party in the United States. Dennis had been convicted of conspiring and organizing for the overthrow and destruction of the United States government by force and violence under provisions of the Smith Act. In affirming the conviction, a plurality of the Court adopted Judge Learned Hand's formulation of the clear and probable danger test, an adaptation of the clear and present danger test:
In each case [courts] must ask whether the gravity of the "evil", discounted by its improbability, justifies such invasion of free speech as necessary to avoid the danger.
In his dissent, Black wrote:
These petitioners were not charged with an attempt to overthrow the Government. They were not charged with overt acts of any kind designed to overthrow the Government. They were not even charged with saying anything or writing anything designed to overthrow the Government. The charge was that they agreed to assemble and to talk and publish certain ideas at a later date: The indictment is that they conspired to organize the Communist Party and to use speech or newspapers and other publications in the future to teach and advocate the forcible overthrow of the Government. No matter how it is worded, this is a virulent form of prior censorship of speech and press, which I believe the First Amendment forbids. I would hold 3 of the Smith Act authorizing this prior restraint unconstitutional on its face and as applied....
So long as this Court exercises the power of judicial review of legislation, I cannot agree that the First Amendment permits us to sustain laws suppressing freedom of speech and press on the basis of Congress' or our own notions of mere "reasonableness." Such a doctrine waters down the First Amendment so that it amounts to little more than an admonition to Congress. The Amendment as so construed is not likely to protect any but those "safe" or orthodox views which rarely need its protection....
There is hope, however, that in calmer times, when present pressures, passions and fears subside, this or some later Court will restore the First Amendment liberties to the high preferred place where they belong in a free society.
Aftermath
In 1957, the Court in Yates v. United States restricted the holding in Dennis, ruling that the Smith Act did not prohibit advocacy of forcible overthrow of the government as an abstract doctrine.  While Yates did not overrule Dennis, it rendered the broad conspiracy provisions of the Smith Act unenforceable. Finally, in 1969, Brandenburg v. Ohio held that "mere advocacy" of violence was per se protected speech.  Brandenburg was a de facto overruling of Dennis, defining the bar for constitutionally unprotected speech to be incitement to "imminent lawless action".
See also
Clear and present danger
Imminent lawless action
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 341
Shouting fire in a crowded theater
Threatening the president of the United States
Abrams v. United States, 
Brandenburg v. Ohio, 
Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 
Feiner v. New York, 
Hess v. Indiana, 
Korematsu v. United States, 
Kunz v. New York, 
Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten, (1917)
Sacher v. United States,  
Schenck v. United States, 
Terminiello v. Chicago, 
Whitney v. California, 
Communist Party of Germany v. the Federal Republic of Germany (1957)
References
Bibliography
Auerbach, Jerold S., Unequal Justice: Lawyers and Social Change in Modern America, 	Oxford University Press, 1977, 
Belknap, Michal R., Cold War Political Justice: the Smith Act, the Communist Party, and American civil liberties,	Greenwood Press, 1977, 
Belknap, Michal R., "Foley Square Trial", in American political trials, (Michal Belknap, Ed.), Greenwood Publishing Group, 1994, 
Belknap, Michal R., "Cold War, Communism, and Free Speech", in  Historic U.S. Court Cases: An Encyclopedia (Vol 2),  (John W. Johnson, Ed.), Taylor & Francis, 2001, 
Martelle, Scott, The Fear Within: Spies, Commies, and American Democracy on Trial, 	Rutgers University Press, 2011, 
Morgan, Ted, Reds: McCarthyism in Twentieth-Century America,  Random House Digital, Inc., 2004, 
O'Brien, David M., Congress Shall Make No Law: the First Amendment, Unprotected Expression, and the Supreme Court, Rowman & Littlefield, 2010, 
Navasky, Victor S., Naming Names, 	Macmillan, 2003, 
Redish, Martin H., The Logic of Persecution: Free Expression and the McCarthy Era, Stanford University Press, 2005, 
Sabin, Arthur J., In Calmer Times: the Supreme Court and Red Monday, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999, 
Starobin, Joseph R., American Communism in Crisis, 1943–1957,	University of California Press, 1975, 
Walker, Samuel, In Defense of American Liberties: A History of the ACLU,  Oxford University Press, 1990, 
External links
 First Amendment Library entry on Dennis v. United States
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States due process case law
Category:McCarthyism
Category:Communist Party USA litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Dent v. West Virginia" ==> """
Dent v. West Virginia, 129 U.S. 114 (1889), was an important United States Supreme Court case involving the reputable practice of physicians and state laws in the late 19th century.  It was a direct challenge to West Virginia having passed "the nation's first genuinely restrictive physician licensing law in the early 1880s." 
The Case
Frank Dent was a physician who practiced with his father and grandfather in Newburg, West Virginia. Frank had only apprenticed with his father and practiced for six years when West Virginia passed its Board of Health Act in 1881 requiring either a diploma from a reputable medical college, a certificate showing ten years' practice, or successful passing of a state-administered exam. In 1882 Dent submitted a diploma from the American Eclectic Medical College in Cincinnati, which the Board of Health determined to be a fraudulent eclectic institution. Dent continued practicing and the Board's President, James Reeves, had Dent arrested. Frank Dent turned to his cousin Marmaduke H. Dent, Grafton West Virginia attorney and first graduate of the University of West Virginia for his defense. At his trial in 1883 Frank Dent was found guilty of practicing without a medical license. Marmaduke Dent appealed the decision to the West Virginia Supreme Court on the grounds that the state could not interfere with a citizen's right to practice a lawful trade.
The West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals heard Dent's case in 1884 and rejected Marmaduke's arguments. M.H. Dent then filed an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court in 1885 claiming a violation of his cousin's rights under the due process clause of the 14th Amendment. The Supreme Court had a considerable backlog and did not hear the case until 1889.
The Decision
thumb|alt=The Fuller Court.|The Fuller Court.
Justice Stephen J. Field delivered the Court's unanimous opinion on January 14, 1889, which upheld the West Virginia statute. Field noted that each citizen had a right to follow any lawful calling, subject to natural restraints such as age, sex, etc., as well as state restrictions, as long as those state restrictions were reasonable. In addition, the Court ruled that medicine, because of the careful nature of its training, the large knowledge of the human body required of doctors, and nature of life-and-death circumstances with which doctors dealt, reliance needed to be placed on the assurance of a license. Certain circumstances might prompt states to exclude people without licenses from practicing medicine.
Aftermath
Later, the Court would extend its decision in the case Hawker v. New York, 170 U.S. 189 (1898) when it ruled that character was also an important qualification for doctors wishing to obtain a license. As in any Supreme Court case, Dent has been cited numerous times, particularly in defining the legitimate role of state regulation versus Constitutional prohibitions on Bills of Attainder. See, for example SBC Communications, Inc. v. FCC.
See also
 Hawker v. New York, 170 U.S. 189 (1898)
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 129
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:Legal history of West Virginia
Category:Medical regulation in the United States
Category:1889 in United States case law
Category:1889 in West Virginia
Category:Eclectic medicine
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Department of Agriculture v. Moreno" ==> """
Department of Agriculture v. Moreno, 413 U.S. 528 (1973), was a United States Supreme Court case that declared a provision of the Food Stamp Act denying food stamps to households of "unrelated persons" to be a violation of the U.S. Constitution. The Court held that provision to be irrelevant to the stated purpose of the statute and in violation of the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.
Background
The case was brought by several groups of individuals; they alleged that they satisfied the income eligibility requirements for federal food assistance, but they were excluded from the program solely because the persons in each group were not all related to one another.
Eligibility for participation in the federal food stamp program was based on households rather than individuals. Under Section 3(e) of the Food Stamp Act (7 USC 2012(e)), the term "household" was defined to include only groups whose members were all related to one another.
The plaintiffs were members of groups of individuals with the need for food stamp assistance who were denied food stamps because the groups included members who were not all related to one another. For example, one plaintiff, a 56-year-old diabetic woman, lived with, shared common living expenses with, and received medical care from another woman with three children, each woman receiving a small monthly income from public assistance. Another plaintiff, an indigent married woman with three children, took in a 20-year-old girl, who was unrelated to them, because they felt that she had emotional problems. Another plaintiff, whose daughter had an acute hearing deficiency and required special instruction in a school for the deaf, decided that to make the most of her limited resources, she would share an apartment near the school with another woman, each woman being a recipient of public assistance.
Procedural history
In a class action in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, the plaintiffs sought declaratory and injunctive relief against the enforcement of the unrelated person provision of §3(e).
A three-judge District Court was convened and held that §3(e) violated the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment because it created a classification that achieved apparently unintended results and was not relevant to the stated purpose of the Act or justifiable by reference to an independent purpose (345 F Supp 310). The US District Court for the District of Columbia held that the "related household" limitation of §3 of the Food Stamp Act of 1964, 7 U.S.C.S. § 2012(e), was invalid as violative of the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment as it created an irrational classification, in violation of the equal protection component of that clause.
Decision
Majority opinion
In an opinion by Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., the Supreme Court affirmed the lower courts' ruling that the statutory classification was invalid.
Under traditional equal protection analysis, a legislative classification must be sustained if the classification itself is "rationally related to a legitimate governmental interest." However, the Court held that the challenged classification, which excludes unrelated household members, did not rationally further the goal of preventing fraud.
While the Fifth Amendment contains no equal protection clause, it forbids discrimination that is so unjustifiable as to be violative of due process; hence, it nonetheless imposes various equal protection requirements on the federal government. That doctrine is commonly referred to as "reverse incorporation," as it is essentially the opposite of "incorporation", or the application of parts of the Bill of Rights (otherwise applicable only to the Federal government) to the states via the Fourteenth Amendment.
There was little legislative history to indicate the purposes of "unrelated person" provision of §3(e). What legislative history that did exist showed that this was intended to prevent "hippies" and "hippie communes" from participating in the food stamp program.See H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 91 — 1793, p. 8; 116 Cong. Rec. 44439 (1970) (Sen. Holland) However, a purpose to discriminate against hippies cannot, on its own, be a sufficient justification. Aside from this purpose, the Government argued that there was a legitimate government interest in minimizing fraud in the administration of the food stamp program. However, the classification acted to exclude not only those who were likely to abuse the program but also those who were in need of the aid but could not afford to alter their living arrangements so as to retain their eligibility.
The Court held that the "unrelated person" provision was irrelevant to the stated purpose of the Food Stamp Act. Because it did not operate to rationally further the prevention of fraud, it was not rationally related to furthering any legitimate government interest.
Concurring opinion
Justice William O. Douglas wrote a concurring opinion. He believed that since the unrelated-person provision of Section 3(e) affected people's First Amendment rights of association, the classification could be sustained only on a showing of compelling governmental interests. He did not believe that the standard was satisfied.
In addition, Section 3(e) was unconstitutional because of its invidious discrimination between one class composed of needy people, all related to one another, and another class composed of households that have one or more persons unrelated to the others but with the same degree of need.
Dissenting opinion
Justice William H. Rehnquist dissented from the Court's decision. In an opinion joined by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, he believed the limitation that Congress enacted in §3(e) could, in the judgment of reasonable men, conceivably deny food stamps to members of households formed solely for the purpose of taking advantage of the food stamp program.
When the Court makes this "rational basis" evaluation, its goal is limited to determining whether there is any rational basis on which Congress could have made this decision. Making arguments against its purported rational basis is a responsibility for Congress.
Since the food stamp program was not intended to be a subsidy for every individual who desired low-cost food, it was a permissible congressional decision, consistent with the underlying policy of the Act. The fact that the limitation would have unfortunate, perhaps unintended, consequences beyond that did not make it unconstitutional. Because there is a rational basis, the law should be upheld as constitutional.
See also
Lyng v. Castillo, 477 U.S. 635 (1986)
References
Department of Agriculture v. Moreno, 413 U.S. 528 (1973)
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:United States Department of Agriculture
Category:Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
"""

From "Department of Commerce v. New York" ==> """
Department of Commerce v. New York, No. 18–966, 588 U.S. ___ (2019), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States dealing with the 2020 United States Census. The case concerned the decision of the United States Census Bureau under the Trump administration to include a question asking whether respondents are United States citizens or not, on the standard census questionnaire sent to all households. That question had been purposely omitted from this "short form" since the 1950 Census because officials and sociologists thought it would reduce participation in the census. It has been used on the "long form" American Community Survey sent to a subset of households and used for statistical estimation.
The Supreme Court case was a culmination of three separate cases decided between September 2018 and March 2019, with the earliest being heard under New York District Court Judge Jesse M. Furman. While the Census Bureau stated that the question was requested by the Justice Department to assist in enforcing the Voting Rights Act of 1965, lower courts have found that explanation to be pretense. Additionally, many state and city officials have raised concerns that inclusion of the question would significantly depress response rates, which in turn would reduce the quality of Census data, which is used, in part, to draw redistricting maps, which influence the results of future elections. Due to the urgency of printing the Census forms, the government expedited the case to the Supreme Court.
On June 27, 2019, the Court decided that the Enumeration clause allows for a citizenship question to be added., 139 S. Ct. 2551 (2019). However, it also stated that such additions can be reviewed by courts under the Administrative Procedure Act, and judged that the administration's explanation for adding the question "appears to have been contrived" and was pretextual. Unable to meet certain legal deadlines when the case was remanded to the District Court, the Trump administration announced it would instead issue an Executive Order to collect existing data from the Department of Commerce to tally immigration numbers. Furman issued a final order in July 2019 barring the administration from adding the question to the 2020 Census or delaying the Census any further.
Background
The United States Census Bureau, which operates out of the United States Department of Commerce, conducts a nationwide Census every decade to determine the population and its distribution within the United States, as required by Article I of the Constitution. The population numbers are used to distribute the number of members of the United States House of Representatives, as well as internally by each state to draw up their congressional and legislative redistricting maps.
From the first Census in 1790 up through 1950, the Census is directed to be answered by all members of a household, regardless of their citizenship. The census thus included a question related to declaring one's citizenship. Starting in 1940, the Census Bureau began evaluating new methods of using reduced sample sizes to obtain additional information, and by the 1960 Census, had moved several questions to a separate "questionnaire form" that was only sent to a small sample of households as to reduce the burden of the main "long form". The citizenship question was one of those moved to the questionnaire form. Eventually the questionnaire form would evolve to the American Community Survey introduced in 2005.
2020 Census
Wilbur Ross, the United States Secretary of Commerce within the Trump administration following the 2016 presidential election, stated that the Bureau intended to add the question related to citizenship back to the "short form" sent to all households for the 2020 United States Census. Ross cited the need to add the question to prevent voter discrimination under the Voting Rights Act of 1965 as determined by the Commerce Department, and he approved the addition of the question.
Ross' decision was shortly met with criticism from state and local governments. These officials feared that the citizenship question would scare away up to 6.5 million people from completing the Census, particularly in geographic locations with large numbers of immigrants (legal or otherwise). Research suggests that the addition of a citizenship question to the census will likely lead to greater non-responses and incomplete responses from Hispanics and immigrants who fear the information from the census, which is intended to be kept private by the Census Bureau, may be used by law enforcement officials to arrest and deport undocumented immigrants and potentially even legal ones. Separate analyses, made from a combination of surveys and Census Bureau estimates over the past few years, show that the addition of the citizenship question is likely to lead to an undercount of approximately 5.8-5.9% of Hispanics and undocumented immigrants. An upper end estimate puts the undercount at 10% of households with undocumented immigrants. If the Census undercounted these areas, the states' representation in the federal government may be reduced, with upwards of eight states losing or gaining one or more seats by these analyses. The undercounting would further influence the required redistricting based on the Census prior in upcoming elections. This also would impact federal funding that is driven by Census data, estimated to be about  for schools, infrastructure, and other services.
District Court proceedings
A lawsuit led by the state of New York's Barbara Underwood with the support of sixteen other states, fifteen cities, and other civil advocacy groups was filed in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York. During the discovery phase, it was discovered that Ross' reasons to add the question may not have come from the Justice Department but from discussions with Steve Bannon, President Trump's chief strategist during the first seven months of his presidency, along with Kris Kobach, a Kansas Republican known for strong anti-immigration views. The states argued that if this was the true basis for the question, rather than from a Commerce department decision, it would make the addition of the question unconstitutional.
This led to Judge Jesse M. Furman of the district court to request the government set aside time for Ross for a deposition in September 2018, prior to the planned start of the trial in November 2018. The government opposed this action via a writ of mandamus to the United States Supreme Court, stating that requiring Ross to depose before the trial was not proper procedure, while also seeking to delay the trial. The Supreme Court refused to allow a delay, but did agree that Ross should not be deposed until after the trial's start. They also agreed to hear oral arguments related to early deposition, but not on the citizen question, with oral hearings for Department of Commerce v. U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York (Docket 18-557) planned on February 19, 2019.
Judge Furman ruled on the citizenship question on January 15, 2019, finding that "the decision to add a citizenship question to the 2020 Census — even if it did not violate the Constitution itself — was unlawful for a multitude of independent reasons and must be set aside." Furman vacated Ross's decision and enjoined the Census Bureau from adding a citizenship question on the 2020 Census. A few days later, the Supreme Court stated they would no longer hear the oral arguments related to the deposition issue, but did not rule out reviewing the case at a later time.
Supreme Court
On January 25, 2019, the government petitioned the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari before judgment, bypassing the normal appeal process through the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, as the deadline for printing the 2020 census forms was June 2019, also the end of the Supreme Court term. The government asked two questions in its petition, the first again asking about the deposition of a government official before the start of a trial, and the second to review Judge Furman's decision. The Supreme Court agreed to hear the case on February 15, 2019, fast-tracking it to hold oral arguments in April 2019 allowing them to rule on the matters by the end of term. February 22, 2019, the court set the case for oral argument April 23, 2019 at 10 a.m.
Concurrent to New York's challenge, a separate case related to the census question was brought by the state of California and several local and city governments against Ross and the Commerce Department, challenging the question's addition as a violation of the Enumeration Clause of Article I of the Constitution. The case was heard by Judge Richard Seeborg at the United States District Court for the Northern District of California. In early March 2019, Seeborg ruled in favor of the state and local governments, agreeing that the question's addition would be unconstitutional. On March 15, 2019, the Supreme Court ordered both sides in the New York case to prepare to discuss the potential constitutionality of the question in light of Seeborg's decision. Yet another separate case related to the Census citizenship question was decided by Judge George J. Hazel in the United States District Court for the District of Maryland a few weeks before the Supreme Court's oral hearings. Hazel also found cause for the citizenship question to be unconstitutional given the political climate surrounding immigration, and questions the process that was claimed for how Ross came to add the question. However, this decision was not considered by the Supreme Court due to the late stage in the process.
Oral argument
thumb|Audio of oral argument
During oral arguments, observers to the court felt that the decision would fall along ideological lines favoring retaining the citizenship question. While the court's more liberal justices followed Justice Sonia Sotomayor in fearing the question would supress responses and thus impact the final numbers, the conservative members including Justices Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh felt the question asked was fair, had been on the questionnaire for the majority of the Census' history, and was similar to questions asked by other countries during their census-taking. The conservative Justices also believed that laws relating to the content of the Census were deferent to the decisions made by the Secretary of Commerce, so Ross was in his authority to add the question regardless of its origins.
 Hofeller documents 
In late May 2019, following oral arguments but before the Court gave its decisions, The New York Times published documents recovered from a hard drive owned by Thomas B. Hofeller, a political strategist for the Republican party who died in August 2018. The documents indicated that Hofeller may have had a significant role in framing the need for the citizenship question, driven by the Republican goal of partisan gerrymandering to assure long-term control of Congress and state legislative bodies. The American Civil Liberties Union filed a motion in light of this evidence, asserting that assistants to Ross obfuscated Hofeller's role in how the question was added. At the time of this case, the Supreme Court had dealt with the question of partisan gerrymandering in the previous and sitting terms. Alongside this action, the New York Immigration Coalition sought injunctions in Furman's District Court over these findings within the week of their discovery; Furman delayed his decision pending the ruling of the Supreme Court.
 Decision 
The Court issued its decision on June 27, 2019, affirming and reversing the District Court's decision in parts. The majority decision was written by Chief Justice John Roberts, with the other justices split among concurring and dissenting in part. The majority decision upheld that the Enumeration Clause allows a citizenship question in the Census but stated that the decision to add this question is a reviewable action under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). The Supreme Court also agreed that the explanation provided by the Commerce Department for the question was insufficient. Roberts wrote that under the APA, they were expecting that Commerce would "offer genuine justifications for important decisions, reasons that can be scrutinized by courts and the interested public", and that the reason provided by Commerce "appears to have been contrived" and was pretextual. Roberts was joined by the four liberal Justices, Ginsburg, Kagan, Breyer, and Sotomayor, in affirming the District Court's injunction against adding the question until Commerce is able to provide a satisfactory explanation.
Subsequent actions
The decision left the matter of whether the citizenship question would be included on the 2020 census unresolved. Whether it would ultimately be included depended on if the Department of Commerce could present a "non-pretextual" rationale for the question's inclusion to the District Court before the printing deadline. On July 2, 2019, the Trump administration stated that it will go ahead and print the census forms without the citizenship question. However, the next day, President Trump countered this, stating that the administration was still exploring options to include the question, which was later confirmed by the Justice Department. Under demand of Judge Hazel from the Maryland District Court, the Department affirmed July 5 that it still intended to add the question, requesting Judges Hazel and Furman to begin scheduling of discovery hearings to the two District cases, with Hazel refusing to delay this phase further at the Department's request. On July 7 the DOJ announced that it was replacing its entire legal team dealing with that question, but on July 9 Furman rejected the DOJ action, saying that reasons must be given for the withdrawal of each attorney, and pointing out that the administration had been insisting for months that the question needed to be settled by July 1.
On failure to replace the legal team, Trump announced on July 11, 2019, he had instructed the DOJ to no longer seek action on the census question, and instead issued Executive Order 13880 to request that the Department of Commerce provide the administration with all the data it had on citizenship and immigration status. Furman issued his order on July 16, 2019, that permanently barred the government from including the immigration question on the 2020 Census or to further delay preparations for the Census. Further, Furman's order stated the court would retain jurisdiction on the matter until the conclusion of the census, on December 31, 2020, when the results are to be delivered to the President.
Plaintiffs in the District Court case continued to seek motions for sanctions on the Trump administration for providing false or misleading statements during the case. Their claims were further backed by emails and additional evidence released in November 2019 by the House Committee on Oversight and Reform, who had concurrently been investigating the census question's addition since 2018. The new emails showed stronger evidence that Hofeller had worked closely with Mark Neuman, the administration's former adviser on the Census, for the immigration questions than previously established.
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Census Bureau
Category:Trump administration controversies
Category:Immigration to the United States
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
"""

From "Department of Homeland Security v. Regents of the University of California" ==> """
Department of Homeland Security v. Regents of the University of California, 591 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a 2017 U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) order to rescind the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) immigration program was "arbitrary and capricious" under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) and reversed the order.Dep't of Homeland Sec. v. Regents of Univ. of Cal., .
DACA was established in 2012 under President Barack Obama to allow children brought into the United States without proper immigration authorization to defer deportation and maintain good behavior to receive a work permit to remain in the U.S.; such children were also called "Dreamers" based on the failed DREAM Act. On his election, President Donald Trump vowed to end the DACA, and the DHS rescinded the program in June 2017. Numerous lawsuits were filed, including one by the University of California system, which many "Dreamers" attended, asserting that the rescission violated rights under the APA and the right to procedural due process under the Fifth Amendment. The University sought and received an injunction from District Court Judge William Alsup to require DHS to maintain the DACA until the case was decided. DHS challenged this order to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which upheld Judge Alsup's ruling in November 2018, and ordered the DHS to maintain the DACA throughout the U.S.
DHS petitioned to the Supreme Court, which accepted the case in June 2019, joining it with two other DACA-related lawsuits, Trump v. NAACP (Docket 18-588), which had been filed by the NAACP who challenged that rescinding the DACA had a disproportionate impact on minorities, and Wolf v. Vidal (Docket 18-589), which had been filed by a DACA recipient. Oral arguments were heard in November 2019, and the 5–4 decision given on June 18, 2020. While all nine Justices concurred in part on the judgement, the five in majority, with Chief Justice John Roberts writing for the majority, focused only on the application of the due process of the APA in the DHS's decision to rescind the DACA and found it unlawful. Justice Clarence Thomas, in his dissent in part and joined by others, argued that the Court should have further evaluated the legality of the original DACA program as part of their review.
 Background 
Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) was first announced by President Barack Obama in 2012. The DACA program allowed certain individuals who entered the United States as minors to receive deferred action from deportation. Since the implementation of DACA, about 690,000 individuals have received deferred action under the program.
During his campaign for president, Donald Trump indicated that he intended to rescind DACA if he was elected. On September 5, Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced that DACA would be phased out, with DACA recipients whose DACA status expiring on or before March 5, 2018, allowed to apply to renew their DACA status by October 5, 2017. Later, President Trump indicated support for a law to protect DACA recipients.
 Lawsuit 
On September 8, 2017, three days after the announcement of DACA's termination, the University of California and its president, Janet Napolitano, announced that they had filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California seeking to prevent the administration from terminating the DACA program. In a statement, the University of California expressed that it was suing "for wrongly and unconstitutionally violating the rights of the university and its students" because the rescission of the DACA program was "unconstitutional, unjust, and unlawful". Napolitano, who served as Secretary of Homeland Security from 2009 to 2013, noted that "Neither I, nor the University of California, take the step of suing the federal government lightly, especially not the very agency that I led", but that "It is imperative, however, that we stand up for these vital members of the UC community."
 Discovery dispute 
On October 17, 2017, the District Court ordered the government to provide "internal deliberative documents" behind the decision to rescind DACA to the Court by October 27, 2017. On October 20, 2017, the government filed a petition for mandamus in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit seeking to prevent the district court from forcing the government to provide the documents in question. On November 16, 2017, the Court of Appeals refused, by a vote of 2–1, to stop the district court's order requiring the government to provide the records.In re United States,  On December 1, 2017, the government filed a petition for mandamus and application for stay with the Supreme Court, seeking to prevent the district court from considering the documents. On December 8, 2017, the Supreme Court, by 5–4 vote, granted the application and temporarily halted the district court's order to provide the documents, and on December 20, 2017, the Supreme Court unanimously laid out guidelines for access to the documents in question., 138 S. Ct. 443 (2017).
 Temporary relief 
On January 9, 2018, U.S. District Judge William Alsup ordered the government to maintain the DACA program while the lawsuit was pending. Judge Alsup wrote that "the agency's decision to rescind DACA was based on a flawed legal premise" and noted that plaintiffs "have clearly demonstrated that they are likely to suffer serious, irreparable harm". The ruling ordered the government to renew deferred action for existing DACA recipients. However, Judge Alsup limited his ruling to those who have already been granted DACA, and did not order the government to accept applications from those who had not previously received DACA.
In response to Judge Alsup's ruling, on January 13, 2018, the government indicated in a statement that it would immediately begin accepting DACA renewal applications using the same forms as before the program had been rescinded.
On January 16, 2018, the government announced that it had filed an appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, and on January 18, the government filed a petition for certiorari before judgement with the Supreme Court, asking it to decide the case before the Ninth Circuit ruled on the appeal.
On February 26, 2018, the Supreme Court denied the government's petition, ordering that the Ninth Circuit should hear the appeal first. The Supreme Court's order had the effect of preventing the government from terminating DACA on March 5, 2018, as originally directed.
On May 15, 2018, the Ninth Circuit heard oral arguments in the case. However, on October 17, 2018, the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) informed the Circuit that the DOJ intended to seek certiorari from the Supreme Court if the Ninth Circuit did not issue a decision by October 31, 2018. After the Ninth Circuit failed to make a decision by that date, the DOJ, on November 5, 2018, for a second time filed a petition for certiorari before judgement with the Supreme Court.https://www.supremecourt.gov/DocketPDF/18/18-587/71000/20181105133146916_DHS%20v%20Regents%20-Pet.pdf  The Supreme Court took the unusual stance of taking no action on the request for many months. The court's inaction meant that the case will have to be heard during the following October 2020 term.
The Ninth Circuit ruled on November 8, 2018, upholding the injunction set by the District Court that blocked the government from rescinding DACA while the legal challenge continued in lower courts. The Circuit Court ruled that "plaintiffs are likely to succeed on their claim that the rescission of DACA—at least as justified on this record—is arbitrary, capricious, or otherwise not in accordance with law."Regents of the Univ. of California, 908 F.3d at 486. Shortly thereafter, the Justice Department petitioned the Supreme Court to review the Ninth Circuit's decision.
Supreme Court
On June 28, 2019, the Supreme Court granted certiorari, consolidating the case with Trump v. NAACP and McAleenan v. Vidal.Dep't of Homeland Security v. Regents of the Univ. of California, 139 S. Ct. 2779 (2019); Granted & Noted List October 2019. Following Kevin McAleenan's departure as the acting Secretary of Homeland Security in November 2019 and replacement by Chad Wolf, the latter case was renamed Wolf v. Vidal.
The Court heard oral argument on November 12, 2019. Observers at the hearing stated that the Justices appeared to stay to their ideological lines, with the conservative majority likely to side with the Trump administration.
Decision
The Court delivered its opinion on June 18, 2020. In the 5–4 decision, the Court's majority determined that the decision to rescind the DACA program was "arbitrary and capricious" under the APA, and thus reversed the order.
The majority opinion was written by Chief Justice John Roberts and joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, and Elena Kagan in full and by Sonia Sotomayor in part. In the majority opinion, Roberts wrote "We do not decide whether DACA or its rescission are sound policies. 'The wisdom' of those decisions 'is none of our concern.' We address only whether the agency complied with the procedural requirement that it provide a reasoned explanation for its action. Here the agency failed to consider the conspicuous issues of whether to retain forbearance and what if anything to do about the hardship to DACA recipients. That dual failure raises doubts about whether the agency appreciated the scope of its discretion or exercised that discretion in a reasonable manner."
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote an opinion that joined the judgement in part and dissented in part, which was joined by Justices Samuel Alito and Neil Gorsuch. Thomas wrote that the majority decision "must be recognized for what it is: an effort to avoid a politically controversial but legally correct decision." Thomas further added "Today the majority makes the mystifying determination that this rescission of DACA was unlawful. In reaching that conclusion, the majority acts as though it is engaging in the routine application of standard principles of administrative law. On the contrary, this is anything but a standard administrative law case."
The Court's judgement remanded the three enjoined cases back to their respective lower courts for further review after either affirming, vacating or reversing the various decisions or orders as consistent with the Court's opinion. Roberts wrote "The appropriate recourse is therefore to remand to DHS so that it may reconsider the problem anew." The DHS would still be able to write an order or regulation to rescind DACA but would have to provide the necessary justification as required by the APA to validate its application.
Subsequent actions
In a separate challenge to the rescinding of the DACA, Casa De Maryland v. U.S. Dep't of Homeland Sec., the Fourth Circuit ruled in May 2019, also finding that the rescinding order was arbitrary and capricious and had vacated the order but remanded the case back to the United States District Court for the District of Maryland on matters of further review. While in jurisdiction there, the Supreme Court decision in Regents was issued. Because of the decision, District Court judge Paul W. Grimm issued orders on July 17, 2020, that required DHS to restore the DACA program to its pre-rescission status, prior to September 2017, which includes accepting new applicants, a step that DHS has not, as of July 2020, yet taken since the rescinding order had been issued. Acting Secretary of DHS, Chad Wolf, issued a memo at the end of July 2020 stating that the department should refuse all new requests under the project and other actions while the department evaluated the Supreme Court's ruling. As a result of an accounting action by the Government Accounting Office, Wolf's position as Acting Secretary was brought into question, and in November 2020, Judge Garaufis ruled that Kevin McAleenan, who had been named as Acting Secretary prior to Wolf, was never properly named to the title, and thus lacked the authority to pass that to Wolf in October 2019. Judge Garaufis thus ruled that Wolf's July memo was invalid, and ordered the DHS to resume the DACA program as it was, and to provide relief to those adversely affected by the temporary actions.
Impact
John Yoo wrote in the National Review after the decision that from the majority opinion in this case, "the Constitution makes it easy for presidents to violate the law, but reversing such violations difficult — especially for their successors." Yoo argued in the essay that the original DACA and DAPA programs violated the president's authority over immigration law under the Constitution as it gave this power solely to Congress, but Obama had been able to push these into practice quickly, and the only way to reverse these was through the "slow Administrative Procedure Act" that lasted through much of Trump's term, even though Trump was trying, in Yoo's estimation, to return to the Constitutionally-appropriate status. Because of this, such a maneuver could be used by any president to implement procedures quickly that may be illegal or unconstitutional but would take several years to fully undo.
Trump since stated in interviews in July about pending immigration plan changes, including "We're working out the legal complexities right now, but I'm going to be signing a very major immigration bill as an executive order, which the Supreme Court now, because of the DACA decision, has given me the power to do that." Axios reported that they were told by White House staff that Trump and his advisors were very interested in Yoo's essay after its publication and which may be tied to the pending immigration orders.
 See also 
New York v. Trump (DACA)
Presidency of Donald Trump
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
 Memorandum on Rescission Of Deferred Action For Childhood Arrivals (DACA)
 University of California lawsuit
 Order granting preliminary relief
  Biskupic, Joan (July 29, 2020): "EXCLUSIVE: How Brett Kavanaugh tried to sidestep abortion and Trump financial docs cases". A background article written by CNN's legal analyst & Supreme Court biographer Joan Biskupic who details the decision-making process leading to the court decision in Department of Homeland Security v. Regents of the University of California. Archived from the original on November 15, 2020. Retrieved on February 19, 2020.
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:Donald Trump litigation
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:University of California litigation
Category:United States equal protection case law
"""

From "Department of Homeland Security v. Thuraissigiam" ==> """
Department of Homeland Security v. Thuraissigiam, 591 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case involving whether the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996, which limits habeas corpus judicial review of the decisions of immigration officers, violates the Suspension Clause of Article One of the U.S. Constitution. In the 7–2 opinion, the Court ruled that the law does not violate the Suspension Clause.
The Department of Homeland Security placed Vijayakumar Thuraissigiam into "expedited removal" proceedings after Thuraissigiam was apprehended  from the southern U.S. border after crossing it illegally. Thuraissigiam, a Tamil former resident of Sri Lanka, pled for asylum asserting that he fled his country to "escape torture, beatings, and likely death". An immigration officer did not find his fear of persecution credible, and an immigration judge agreed with the officer's findings.
Thuraissigiam, represented by the American Civil Liberties Union, then filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus, which a U.S. district court dismissed for lack of jurisdiction because of a section in the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 that limits the judicial review of decisions made by immigration officers. On appeal, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed, holding the section of the Act was unconstitutional because it violated the Suspension Clause.
On June 25, 2020, the Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit. In a majority opinion authored by Justice Samuel Alito, the Court found that Thuraissigiam's claim for habeas corpus, to seek additional administrative review of his asylum claim, was beyond the scope established for habeas corpus in the Constitution, to secure release from unlawful detention. The majority opinion further rejected the argument that the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment also compels judicial review of Thuraissigiam's claim.
 Background 
 Federal immigration statute 
The Suspension Clause of Article One of the United States Constitution states that the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended except when a suspension may be required in cases of invasion or rebellion. In 1996, Congress passed the  Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act, which designated certain undocumented immigrants as subject to "expedited removal". According to Linda Greenhouse, writing in The New York Times, expedited removal is intended for immigrants (or "aliens" in American terms) "who are deemed inadmissable upon arrival". Immigrants are entitled to claim they are entitled to refugee status, if they say they have a “credible fear of persecution or torture”, if returned home.
A single immigration officer will then make a determination as to whether the fear is credible.  If he or she determines it is credible, a panel will hold a hearing to explore the immigrant's refugee claim, in detail.  However, under the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act,Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996, , Div. C. if the single frontline officer's initial assessment is that the fear is not credible, there is no route of appeal. Specifically, the part of the act codified as  limits habeas corpus proceedings to the following determinations: 
 whether the petitioner is an alien,
 whether the petitioner was ordered removed under such section, and
 whether the petitioner can prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the petitioner is an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence, has been admitted as a refugee, or has been granted asylum.
 Facts of the case 
The respondent, Vijayakumar Thuraissigiam, is an "inadmissible alien who was apprehended almost immediately after illegally crossing the U.S. border and was placed into expedited removal proceedings". According to the American Civil Liberties Union, which represented Thuraissigiam in the Supreme Court, Thuraissigiam is a Tamil former resident of Sri Lanka, who fled from Sri Lanka in order to "escape torture, beatings, and likely death". An asylum officer interviewed Thuraissigiam and concluded that he lacked a "credible fear of persecution on a protected ground or a credible fear of torture".
 Lower court proceedings 
After reviewing Thuraissigiam's case, an immigration judge agreed with the immigration officer's conclusions, and ordinarily, this would have been a final decision not subject to appeal. Nevertheless, Thuraissigiam filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of California, which dismissed the petition for lack of jurisdiction under the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act, specifically §1252(e)(2). Thuraissigiam then appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which reversed, holding that §1252(e)(2) was unconstitutional because it violated the Suspension Clause.
 Supreme Court 
thumb|Justice Samuel Alito wrote the opinion of the U.S. Supreme Court in Department of Homeland Security v. Thuraissigiam
The Department of Homeland Security filed a petition for a writ of certiorari in the Supreme Court of the United States, which granted certiorari on October 18, 2019, in order to review "whether, as applied to respondent, Section 1252(e)(2) is unconstitutional under the Suspension Clause". Oral arguments were heard on March 2, 2020.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court issued its decision on June 25, 2020. In a 7–2 opinion on judgment, the majority ruled that as under §1252(e)(2), the limits of review that a federal court may conduct on a petition for a writ of habeas corpus do not violate the Suspension Clause, reversing the Ninth Circuit's decision and remanding the case back for further review. The majority opinion was written by Justice Samuel Alito and joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Clarence Thomas, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh. Alito wrote that the habeas corpus claim made by Thuraissigiam failed as "it would extend the writ of habeas corpus far beyond its scope 'when the Constitution was drafted and ratified.'" as "Habeas has traditionally been a means to secure release from unlawful detention, but respondent invokes the writ to achieve an entirely different end, namely, to obtain additional administrative review of his asylum claim and ultimately to obtain authorization to stay in this country." Alito further addressed the claims of due process would only be extended to those "who have established connections in this country" and not to a situation like Thuraissigiam who had just entered the country. 
 Concurrence and dissent 
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a concurring opinion "to address the original meaning of the Suspension Clause."
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote an opinion concurring only in the judgment, which was joined by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Breyer agreed with the majority opinion that the Suspension Clause was not violated in this specific case but would have ruled no further than that.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote a dissent joined by Justice Elena Kagan. Sotomayor wrote that the majority opinion "handcuffs the Judiciary's ability to perform its constitutional duty to safeguard individual liberty and dismantles a critical component of the separation of powers" and that "It will leave significant exercises of executive discretion unchecked in the very circumstance where the writ's protections 'have been strongest'".
References
 Further reading 
External links
 Department of Homeland Security v. Thuraissigiam on the Supreme Court docket
 Text of 8 U.S.C. § 1252. Judicial review of orders of removal on Legal Information Institute
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Sri Lanka–United States relations
Category:Right of asylum case law
Category:Right of asylum in the United States
Category:Sri Lankan Tamil diaspora
"""

From "Department of Justice v. House Committee on the Judiciary" ==> """
Department of Justice v. House Committee on the Judiciary (2020), No. 19-1328 (previously In re Application of the Committee on the Judiciary, No. 19-5288), was a court decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. The case weighs whether a committee of the House of Representatives can assert the House's "sole power of impeachment" to subpoena materials gathered as part of a federal grand jury investigation which are ordinarily secret. Due to changes in the government by the time of the 2020 election, many of the aspects leading to the case have become unnecessary, and the Supreme Court ruled the case moot in orders released in July 2021.
Background
Robert Mueller had been appointed as Special Counsel by United States Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein to investigate possible Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections. The investigation ran from 2017 to 2019. During the investigation, Mueller assembled a grand jury empowered to subpoena documents, require witnesses to testify under oath, and issue indictments for targets of criminal charges if probable cause was found. Proceedings of the grand jury were kept in confidence.
Mueller delivered his final report, Report on the Investigation into Russian Interference in the 2016 Presidential Election, informally called the Mueller Report, to United States Attorney General William Barr on March 22, 2019. A heavily redacted version of the Mueller Report was released on April 18, 2019, which President Donald Trump stated later was due to executive privilege. The redacted report omitted much of the grand jury proceedings. While Mueller's Report concluded there was no evidence of Russian interference, and while there was no conclusive evidence of any crime committed by Trump, it "does not exonerate him".
The Mueller Report findings formed the basis for the Democratic-controlled House of Representatives to consider starting impeachment proceedings against President Trump. Mueller testified to several House committees on July 24, 2019, on details of the report, but still limited to what he could speak because of the President's claim of executive privilege.
On July 26, 2019, the House Judiciary Committee filed an application with the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit to release certain grand jury materials associated with Mulluer's investigation. In October 2019, based on precedent established during the impeachment of Richard Nixon, the court granted the application. However, the Department of Justice immediately sought a stay for the subpoena.
Case history
On December 13, 2019, the D.C. Circuit's panel of Judith W. Rogers, Thomas B. Griffith, and Neomi Rao ordered a briefing to address whether the House Judiciary Committee has Article III standing.
On December 16, House General Counselor Douglas Letter filed a brief outlining the importance of obtaining the grand jury materials.
On December 18, the D.C. Circuit ordered the parties involved to file supplemental briefings by December 23, addressing whether articles of impeachment render the case moot and whether expedited consideration is still necessary. The D.C. Circuit also suggested the House Judiciary Committee address whether it still seeks the materials from Robert Mueller's grand jury.
On December 23, the House Judiciary Committee and Justice Department filed supplemental briefings explaining their positions on standing and mootness.
The case was argued earlier before the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit on January 3, 2020. The case was heard by a panel of three Circuit Judges: Judith W. Rogers, Thomas B. Griffith, and Neomi Rao.
On March 10, 2020, the court ruled 2–1 in favor of the Judiciary Committee, ordering the release of the grand jury materials; Judge Rogers wrote the opinion, and was joined by Judge Griffith, with Judge Rao dissenting.
 Supreme Court  
Shortly before the deadline set by the Circuit Court for the production of the material, the Justice Department petitioned the Supreme Court to stay the ruling and review the case. The Supreme Court stayed the Circuit's mandate on May 8, 2020, and in June, the Justice Department filed a petition for a writ of certiorari which was opposed by the House Judiciary Committee. On July 2, 2020, the Supreme Court granted the Justice Department request for a writ of certiorari appealing the decision of the Circuit Court, and scheduled arguments for December 2, 2020.
In late November 2020, the House requested that the Supreme Court postpone oral arguments until after the 117th United States Congress convenes and Joe Biden is inaugurated as president in January 2021, at which point the reconstituted Committee can determine if it still wishes to pursue the matter. The Supreme Court agreed to the delay, removing the oral hearings from the schedule. Subsequently, the Supreme Court deemed the case moot in orders released on July 2, 2021, and ordered the Circuit court to vacate its decision, as per the Munsingwear vacatur.
See also
In re Grand Jury Subpoena (2019)
Trump v. Deutsche Bank AG
Trump v. Mazars USA, LLP
Trump v. Vance
Timeline of investigations into Trump and Russia (2019–2020)
References
Further reading
External links
DOJ petition for a writ of certiorari, June 1, 2020
Judiciary Committee brief in opposition, June 15, 2020
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:Donald Trump litigation
Category:Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit cases
Category:United States Department of Justice
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Department of Justice v. Landano" ==> """
Department of Justice v. Landano, 508 U.S. 165 (1993), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Government is not entitled to a presumption that a source is confidential within the meaning of Exemption 7(D) of the Freedom of Information Act whenever the source provides information to the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the course of a criminal investigation.United States Dep't of Justice v. Landano, .
 Background 
Murder of Officer Snow
On August 13, 1976, during a robbery by two gunmen of the Hi-Way Check Cashing Service in Kearny, New Jersey, one of the gunman killed Newark police officer John Snow.Matthew J. Salzman, Exemption 7(d) of the Freedom of Information Act - the Evidentiary Showing the Government Must Make to Establish a Source is Confidential, United States Department of Justice v. Landano, 113 S. Ct. 2014 84  1041, 1050 (1993).  A Hudson County Grand Jury indicted Allen Roller, Victor Forni, Bruce Reen, and Vincent James Landano for felony murder and armed robbery, along with other offenses.State v. Landano, 637 A.2d 1270, 1271 (N.J. Super. Ct. L. Div. 1994).
The trials of Forni and Reen were severed from the trial of Roller and Landano.  Roller entered into a plea deal with the Hudson County Prosecutor and gave damaging testimony against Landano during the trial.  The state believed that Roller and Forni planned the robbery, but that only Landano and Roller actually participated in the crime.Landano, 637 A.2d at 1272.
An unindicted co-conspirator, David Lee Clyburn, testified that Roller and Forni planned the robbery, and that they planned to "take care of" a police officer who usually delivered large amounts of cash.  Clyburn stated that he withdrew from the plan as he did not want to kill a police officer, and was concerned that as the only black, the others would turn on him.  Roller's testimony was different from Clyburn's.  Roller stated that while planning the robbery, Forni offered to recruit "Jimmy" and that later Landano agreed to participate.  Roller stated that Forni drove Landano and him to a parking lot, where they stole a car, and then Landano and Roller went to the site of the robbery.
Roller testified that after waiting 
they then robbed the Hi-Way Check Cashing Service.  A customer, Colin McCormick identified Roller, but was unable to reliably identify Landano, stating that he never saw his face.Landano, 637 A.2d at 1273.  The owner, Jacob Roth, and his son, Jonathan, also testified.  Jacob stated that when the business was being robbed, he activated the silent alarm and "hit the deck", never looking up as the robbers took the cash.  He tentatively identified Landano, saying that he "resembled" one of the robbers.  Jonathan also identified Landano with uncertainty, noting that he only saw the robber for a second or two.  John De Maritz, another customer, testified that Roller was the individual that entered the business and that he heard shots from outside.Landano, 637 A.2d at 1273-74.
Another man, Joseph Pascuitti, also testified against Landano.  Pascuitti was the only one to witness the killing of Officer Snow, from his job adjacent to Hi-Way Check Cashing.  Pascuitti stated that the shooter came towards the police car and shot Officer Snow without warning from two to three feet away.  Prior to the trial, Pascuitti selected Forni's photograph as being the shooter, but that he was not certain.Landano, 637 A.2d at 1274.
Physical evidence found in the stolen car included a bloodstained jacket or vest, two pair of gloves, a blue hat, $60 in coins, a shell casing, and a partially filled coffee container.  The blood type on the jacket matched that of Officer Snow, and was a relatively rare type.  Two handguns were found in the river.  Roller identified one of those as belonging to him, and the other as having been used by Landano.  That handgun was registered to Forni.  At the trial, Landano tried on the jacket, but it did not fit.Landano, 637 A.2d at 1275.
Landano testified in his own defense, and denied participating in the robbery.  This was corroborated by his fiancé and her friend.  In addition, Landano entered evidence that at 6:00 A.M., he was at a Staten Island methadone clinic and could not have made it back in time to help steal the car at 6:35 A.M.
Evidence showed that a motorcycle gang called "the Breed" planned the robbery, and that Landano was recruited for the crime.Salzman, at 1050. In May 1977, Landano was convicted on all counts and sentenced to imprisonment for life plus fifteen years.,  29-30 (1992).
Appeals
In June 1977, Landano filed an appeal. In October 1978, Landano obtained a court order for the consideration of a motion for a new trial based on newly discovered evidence. Judge Maurice A. Walsh, Jr. found the knowledge of evidence of prior robberies by Roller and  Forni could have been important in the trial and that the knowledge of such evidence had been suppressed. If this knowledge had been revealed, Judge Walsh stated, then it "would have been probative in demonstrating, if Roller denied Forni's participation [in those robberies], that Roller was protecting Forni." However, the court decided that the suppression of this evidence did not violate Brady v. Maryland. because the evidence wasn't "material," meaning that the evidence would not have changed the trial's outcome.Landano, 637 A.2d at 1276.
After various petitions from Landano and various hearings, a federal judge released Landano from prison in 1989 after Landano served 13 years of his life sentence on the grounds that the prosecution had systematically withheld evidence. On March 12, 1992, a New Jersey Court of Appeals ordered an evidentiary hearing to consider claims stemming from documents that two people, including a witness at the trial, failed to identify a photo of Landano, the police department's report that a witness identified Victor Forni as the driver of the getaway car and not Landano, and the failure to submit this information to Landano and his defense team before the trial began. The New Jersey Court of Appeals also ordered the hearing to investigate any impact that any potentially lost or damaged materials could have had on the trial.
After the evidentiary hearing discovered that evidence was withheld at the trial, Landano believed that the Court's ruling in Brady v. Maryland (373 U.S. 83) was violated when the prosecution in his murder trial withheld "material exculpatory evidence" (i.e. evidence extremely important for the defendant's case) during his trial. Landano filed FOIA requests with the FBI who had compiled evidence related to Landano's murder trial because, under the FOIA, anyone can request documents from any government agency to be released for whatever reason. However the FBI withheld some documents and redacted other documents without giving any reasons for doing so. Believing that this violated the FOIA, Landano brought his case to the Federal District Court in order to get the requested documents released. The FBI claimed that its withholding and redacting of documents was completely legal due to Exemption 7(D) of the Freedom of Information Act. Exemption 7(D) states that the government can withhold information if "records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes could reasonably be expected to disclose the identity of a confidential source --including a State, local, or foreign agency or authority or any private institution which furnished information on a confidential basis." The Federal District Court stated that the FBI had to give a legitimate reason for the withholding of information given by anyone other than a regular law enforcement agency informant. The Court of Appeals agreed and rejected the FBI's argument that confidentiality can be presumed whenever an individual provides information to the FBI during a criminal investigation. The Court of Appeals also rejected the FBI's argument that confidentiality can be presumed based on an investigation's subject matter. Instead, the Court of Appeals held that the FBI had to provide a detailed explanation for each and every confidentiality claim it makes on a case-by-case basis instead of using a general guideline for what qualifies as confidential as it had done in response to Landano's requests.
Another Court of Appeals also rejected the FBI's claim that the documents were confidential in terms of Exemption 7(D). However, this second court stated that the FBI's claim to confidentiality for the purposes of Exemption 7(D) had backing from a number of previous court decisions. This Court of Appeals considered itself bound by a previous court's decision in Lame v. United States Department of Justice 654 F.2d 917 (CA3 1981) and decided that the FBI could not presume confidentiality on the terms of the investigation's subject matter or on the fact that an informant is giving information to the FBI for a criminal case, but rather the FBI had to provide "detailed explanations related to each alleged confidential source"
The Supreme Court decided to grant a writ of certiorari in order "to resolve the conflict among the Courts of Appeals over the nature of the FBI's evidentiary burden under Exemption 7(D)."
 Historical context 
The FBI had a long history of releasing and then redacting various records and claiming that this was completely legal according to exemption sections in the FOIA Sometimes, these redactions interfered with court cases and research. According to Athan Theoharis, an American historian who wanted to research FBI files, the FBI "so heavily redacted the released records as to preclude needed research." About two-thirds of the files Theoharis asked for in relation to his research were withheld from him. This gives an example of the extent to which the FBI used the exemptions in the Freedom of Information Act. The FBI was notorious for such redactions and withholdings, and many believed that it interfered with justice being carried out. With the advent of Landano's case before the Supreme Court, the FBI's excessive use of the exemptions in the FOIA were finally being questioned.
 Arguments 
Vincent James Landano argued that the evidence he requested should not have been withheld according to Exemption 7(D) because the FBI might have been obliged to reveal the names of sources according to Brady v. Maryland. Landano also believed that a source is considered "confidential" (for purposes of Exemption 7(D)) only if the source can be completely assured, either explicitly through the actually stating of such assurance or implicitly (implied) that the source's cooperation with the FBI will not be disclosed to anyone.Department of Justice v. Landano "Landano argues..will be disclosed to no one"  The FBI, however, argued that "confidentiality" in terms to Exemption 7(D) can be presumed based on either an investigation's subject matter or the simple fact that an informant is giving information to the FBI.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court ruled unanimously in favor of Vincent James Landano. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor delivered the opinion of the Court.
O'Connor rejected the FBI's argument that confidentiality can be presumed based on the fact that an informant is giving information to the FBI. Justice O'Connor also rejected most forms of categorical presumptions of confidentiality that the FBI often used, such as automatic confidentiality for the purposes of Exemption 7(D) for all documents that are collected for a criminal investigation (which is one of the categorical presumptions the FBI used in this specific case). Justice O'Connor sarcastically stated that, under the way the FBI declared the confidentiality of documents, the FBI would expect that every single one of its documents can be withheld or redacted and that it can use Exemption 7(D) for all of its documents.
O'Connor did, however, state that the Court accepts certain forms of categorical presumptions of confidentiality. But these categorical presumptions are a lot more narrowly defined than what the FBI had previously used. Justice O'Connor gave the scenario of a paid informant as an example of an accepted categorical presumption of confidentiality. She stated that a paid informant can expect that his/her cooperation with the FBI will be kept secret, and that this makes documents related to a paid informant subject to being withheld or redacted in accordance with Exemption 7(D). She also stated that, in murder cases like this one, informants may also expect to have their interactions with the FBI be confidential. Justice O'Connor said that the Court would accept the FBI's presumption of the confidentiality of any documents related to an informant for a murder case.
Finally, O'Connor rejected the FBI's argument that all its sources must be confidential in order to maintain effective law enforcement. The presumption of confidentiality that the FBI makes of presuming that a source and documents related to a source are confidential simply based on the fact that a source gave information to the FBI in the course of a criminal investigation was also rejected by Justice O'Connor. She stated that any source related to any type of criminal case the FBI handles should not be considered confidential simply because information was given for a criminal case. While she believed that murder cases would warrant an accurate presumption of confidentiality, she opposed the view that the FBI can presume confidentiality for every type of criminal case it deals with.
The Court concluded by stating that, when the nature of the crime investigated and when a source's relation to the crime lead to a safe inference of confidentiality, confidentiality can be presumed. This is a much more narrow approach to what can be defined as confidential in terms of Exemption 7(D) than the FBI's approach. The Supreme Court thus rejected the decisions of the courts of appeal and declared them inaccurate. The Court remanded the case back to a court of appeals, ordering such a court to rule according to the new guidelines the Supreme Court had just laid out in its decision.
Subsequent developments
This case was the first time the Supreme Court dealt with Exemption 7(D) of the Freedom of Information Act and the United States government's use of it. The United States Department of Justice now uses more rigorous standards in determining what can be withheld under Exemption 7(D) and now uses more detailed and case-specific proofs for why a document cannot be released to the public. Even at the administrative level, Landano decision must be and is followed.
Vincent James Landano received the documents he requested in accordance with the Supreme Court's decision. In 1994, a court of appeals voided Landano's murder conviction and returned the case to Hudson County, New Jersey for a retrial. Landano was acquitted of murder in the retrial in 1998. He died on November 11, 2002 at the age of 63 at a hospital in Toms River, New Jersey.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 508
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Footnotes
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:Freedom of information in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Kearny, New Jersey
"""

From "Department of Revenue of Kentucky v. Davis" ==> """
Department of Revenue of Kentucky v. Davis, 553 U.S. 328 (2008), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld a Kentucky law that provides a preferential tax break to Kentucky residents who invest in bonds issued by the state and its municipalities (municipal bonds). The Court held in a 7-2 vote that the State of Kentucky does not engage in unconstitutional discrimination against interstate commerce by exempting the interest on its bonds from residents' taxable income while taxing the interest earned on the bonds of other states.
The case has national implications because thirty-six (36) states have tax schemes similar to the one at issue in Kentucky.Department of Revenue of Kentucky v. Davis 553 U.S. ____, pg 5.
Background
George and Catherine Davis sued the State of Kentucky under the legal theory that the State of Kentucky violated the Dormant Commerce Clause, a legal implication of the Commerce Clause, by providing a differential tax treatment to gains earned from investments in municipal bonds from Kentucky versus other states.Department of Revenue of Kentucky v. Davis 553 U.S. ____, pg 6.
Opinion of the Court
The majority opinion stated that the Kentucky tax scheme benefited a clearly public issuer, while treating all private issuers exactly the same. There was no forbidden discrimination because Kentucky, as a public entity, did not have to treat itself as  being "substantially similar" to the other bond issuers in the market. The Kentucky tax scheme was constitutional because the Commonwealth's direct participation favored, not local private entrepreneurs, but the Commonwealth and local governments.
Footnotes
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:2008 in United States case law
"""

From "Department of the Interior v. Klamath Water Users Protective Ass'n" ==> """
Department of Interior v. Klamath Water Users Protective Assn., 532 U.S. 1 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned whether Exemption 5 of the Freedom of Information Act, which applies to "intra agency memoranda or letters", is applicable to documents within the Department of the Interior which discussed plans for the allocation of water in the Klamath River Basin. The Court held unanimously that the exemption did not apply.
Background
The Department of the Interior's Bureau of Reclamation administered the Klamath Irrigation Project, which uses water from the Klamath River Basin to irrigate parts of Oregon and California. In order for the Department to provide water allocations among competing uses and users, it asked the Klamath and other Indian Tribes to consult with the Bureau of Reclamation over future allocations. A memorandum of understanding solidified this relationship. When the Department's Bureau of Indian Affairs filed claims on behalf of the Klamath Tribe in Oregon to allocate water rights, the two exchanged written memoranda on the appropriate scope of the claims submitted by the Government for the benefit of the Tribe. Afterwards, the Klamath Water Users Protective Association, a nonprofit group whose members receive water from the Project and, generally, have interests adverse to the tribal interest because of the scarcity of water, filed requests with the Bureau under the Freedom of Information Act to gain access to communications between the Bureau and the Basin Tribes. Some documents were turned over, but the Bureau held other documents under the deliberative process privileges incorporated in Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Exemption 5, which exempts from disclosure "inter-agency or intra-agency memorandums or letters which would not be available by law to a party other than an agency in litigation with the agency." The Association sued to compel release of the documents. The District Court granted the government summary judgment, rejecting the attempt to attain the documents. 
In reversing, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled out any application of Exemption 5 on the ground that the Tribes with whom the Department had consultations with have a direct interest in the subject matter of the consultations. The ultimate decision by the Supreme Court took less than three months from oral argument to the opinion being released.531 U.S. at 4.
Opinion of the Court
Justice David Souter wrote the unanimous opinion of the Court which affirmed the Ninth Circuit. The Court agreed with the appellate court that there is no exemption under FOIA for the internal documents between the Klamath tribe and the Bureau which dealt with the water allocation issue.531 U.S. at 12. This is because in the correspondence the Bureau did not act in the role that their personnel usually fulfils, in that personnel do not represent their own interests. The Bureau officials were working with the Tribe, advocating their interests which meant the documents were not exempt from public disclosure of intra-agency communications. Souter wrote that "all of this boils down to requesting that we read an 'Indian trust' exemption into the statute, a reading that is out of the question". In concluding, Souter noted that Congress realized that not every secret under the previous version of FOIA would be kept secret under the newer version.
See also
 Ninth Amendment
 List of FOIA Exemptions
References
External links
 Decision of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Department of the Interior
Category:Klamath River
Category:Klamath
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Native American history of Oregon
"""

From "Department of Transportation v. Association of American Railroads" ==> """
Department of Transportation v. Association of American Railroads, 575 U.S. 43 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held "for purposes of determining the validity of the metrics and standards, Amtrak is a governmental entity.".
Opinion of the Court
Associate Justice Anthony Kennedy authored the Opinion of the Court, remanding the case back to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
Associate Justice Samuel Alito authored a concurring opinion, while Associate Justice Clarence Thomas authored an opinion concurring in the judgment.
Thomas's opinion focuses on the separation of executive and legislative powers.  He goes on to state that "Section 207 therefore violates the Constitution. Article I, §1, vests the legislative power in Congress, and Amtrak is not Congress. The procedures that §207 sets forth for enacting the metrics and standards also do not comply with bicameralism and presentment. Art. I, §7. For these reasons, the metrics and standards promulgated under this provision are invalid."
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 575
 Lebron v. National Railroad Passenger Corp.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:Amtrak
Category:United States nondelegation doctrine case law
"""

From "Department of Transportation v. Public Citizen" ==> """
Department of Transportation v. Public Citizen, 541 U.S. 752 (2004), is a case argued in the Supreme Court of the United States on 21 April 2004. The question the case presented relates to Presidential foreign affairs and foreign trade Actions exempt from environmental-review requirements under the National Environmental Policy Act and the Clean Air Act. Specifically, the question is whether those Actions are subject to those requirements as a result of a rulemaking action concerning motor carrier safety by the federal agency with responsibility for that type of safety.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 541
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:2004 in the environment
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States Department of Transportation
Category:Public Citizen
"""

From "Department of Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco & Firearms v. Galioto" ==> """
Department of Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms v. Galioto, 477 U.S. 556 (1986), was a United States Supreme Court case.
 Background 
Generally, convicted felons and mental patients are prohibited from purchasing firearms in the United States. A federal statute,  allowed some felons to appeal to the BATF to restore their rights to purchase firearms. At that time, prior mental patients did not have a similar route to restore their right to purchase firearms. The appellee argued that this was unreasonable and discriminatory.
Between the time that the Court agreed to hear Galioto, and the time that the case was heard, PL 99-308 was signed into law, allowing former mental patients to appeal to restore their rights to purchase firearms, rendering the case moot.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Second Amendment case law
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
Category:Mental health case law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "DePierre v. United States" ==> """
DePierre v. United States, 564 U.S. 70 (2011), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the use of the term "cocaine base" in 21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1). refers to cocaine in its chemically basic form.DePierre v. United States Opinion p. 1 "This case requires us to decide whether 
the term "cocaine base" as used in [21 U.S.C. §841(b)(1)] refers generally to cocaine in its chemically basic form or exclusively to what is colloquially known as "crack cocaine."  We conclude that "cocaine base" means the former." The decision of the Court was unanimous, except with respect to Part III–A.
Background
A federal court found Frantz DePierre guilty of distributing cocaine in April 2008. Additionally, DePierre was found guilty of distributing more than 50 grams of "cocaine base, which carries a 10-year minimum sentence." Following this conviction, DePierre was sentenced to 10 years in a federal prison followed by 5 years of supervised release. Two years later, the US Court of Appeals upheld the sentencing,
Question Before the Court
Does the term "cocaine base" cover a broad spectrum of cocaine defined chemically as a base, or is the term specifically limited to the use and distribution of "crack" cocaine?
Decision of the Court
In a unanimous decision, Justice Sotomayor wrote the opinion of the Court defining cocaine base as not just crack cocaine, but any substance that contains "cocaine in its chemically basic form."
Concurring Opinion
Justice Scalia wrote a brief, humorous concurring opinion arguing that the Court's look into legislative history is unneeded and potentially harmful.
 See also 
 Cocaine in the United States
 References 
External links
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Cocaine in the United States
"""

From "Descamps v. United States" ==> """
Descamps v. United States, 570 U.S. 254 (2013), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court clarified standards for evaluating potential prior offenses under the Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA).. In an 8–1 decision written by Justice Elena Kagan, the Supreme Court held that judges may only look at the statutory elements of a crime, rather than the facts associated with that particular crime, "when the crime of which the defendant was convicted has a single, indivisible set of elements."Descamps, slip op. at 2. In his review of the case for SCOTUSblog, Daniel Richman opined that following the Court's decision, "[w]hether or not a prior conviction is going to 'count' will have to be determined as mechanically as possible."Daniel Richman, Opinion analysis: When is a burglary not a burglary?,  (Jun. 20, 2013).
See also
Taylor v. United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 570
2012 term United States Supreme Court opinions of Elena Kagan
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States criminal case law
Category:Armed Career Criminal Act case law
"""

From "DeShaney v. Winnebago County" ==> """
DeShaney v. Winnebago County, 489 U.S. 189 (1989), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States on February 22, 1989. The court held that a state government agency's failure to prevent child abuse by a custodial parent does not violate the child's right to liberty for the purposes of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Background
In 1980, a divorce court in Wyoming gave custody of Joshua DeShaney, born in 1979, to his father Randy DeShaney, who moved to Neenah, Winnebago County, Wisconsin.  A police report of child abuse and a hospital visit in January 1983, prompted the county Department of Social Services (DSS) to obtain a court order to keep the boy in the hospital's custody. Three days later, "On the recommendation of a 'child protection team,' consisting of a pediatrician, a psychologist, a police detective, the county's lawyer, several DSS caseworkers, and various hospital personnel, the juvenile court dismissed the case and returned the boy to the custody of his father.".  The DSS entered an agreement with the boy's father, and five times throughout 1983, a DSS social worker visited the DeShaney home and recorded suspicion of child abuse and that the father was not complying with the agreement's terms.  No action was taken; the DSS also took no action to remove the boy from his father's custody after a hospital reported child abuse suspicions to them in November 1983.  Visits in January and March, 1984, in which the worker was told Joshua was too ill to see her, also resulted in no action. Following the March 1984, visit, "Randy DeShaney beat 4-year-old Joshua so severely that he fell into a life-threatening coma. Emergency brain surgery revealed a series of hemorrhages caused by traumatic injuries to the head inflicted over a long period of time. Joshua suffered brain damage so severe that he was expected to spend the rest of his life confined to an institution for the profoundly mentally disabled." After the conclusion of this case, Joshua died Monday, November 9, 2015 at the age of 36. Randy DeShaney was subsequently tried and convicted of child abuse." DeShaney served less than two years in jail.
Case history
Joshua DeShaney's mother filed a lawsuit on his behalf against Winnebago County, the Winnebago County DSS, and DSS employees under 42 U.S.C. § 1983.  The lawsuit claimed that by failing to intervene and protect him from violence about which they knew or should have known, the agency violated Joshua's right to liberty without the due process guaranteed to him by the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Ruling
The court ruled 6–3 to uphold the appeals court's grant of summary judgment.  The DSS's actions were found not to constitute a violation of Joshua DeShaney's due process rights.
Court opinion
The court opinion, by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, held that the due process clause protects against state action only, and as it was Randy DeShaney who abused Joshua, a state actor (the Winnebago County Department of Social Services) was not responsible.
Furthermore, they ruled that the DSS could not be found liable, as a matter of constitutional law, for failure to protect Joshua DeShaney from a private actor.  Although there exist conditions in which the state (or a subsidiary agency, like a county department of social services) is obligated to provide protection against private actors, and failure to do so is a violation of Fourteenth Amendment rights, the court reasoned,
Since Joshua DeShaney was not in the custody of the DSS, the DSS was not required to protect him from harm. In reaching this conclusion, the court opinion relied heavily on its precedents in Estelle v. Gamble and Youngberg v. Romeo.
Rehnquist's opinion stated that although the DSS's failure to act may have made it liable for a tort under Wisconsin state law, the Fourteenth Amendment does not transform every tort by a state actor into a violation of constitutional rights.  Specifically, the act of creating a Department of Social Services to investigate and respond to allegations of child abuse may have meant that Winnebago County assumed a duty to prevent what Randy DeShaney did to Joshua DeShaney, and failure to fulfil that duty may have constituted a tort.
Dissents
The court's ruling generated two dissents.  The first, by Associate Justice William Brennan, asserted that whether or not the Due Process Clause gave Joshua DeShaney a constitutional right to protection against abuse was a non-sequitur, since it was not an argument presented to either of the lower courts or even to the Supreme Court and "no one, in short, has asked the Court  to proclaim that, as a general matter, the Constitution safeguards positive as well as negative liberties."DeShaney, 489 U.S. at 204 (Brennan, J., dissenting)  He went on to say that Rehnquist used a flawed interpretation of the Estelle and Youngberg precedents, which Brennan held "to stand for the much more generous proposition that, if a State cuts off private sources of aid and then refuses aid itself, it cannot wash its hands of the harm that results from its inaction."DeShaney, 489 U.S. at 207 (Brennan, J., dissenting).  Finally, Brennan argued that the Wisconsin child-protection laws created a regime in which private citizens and government bodies other than a Department of Social Services had no power or role to intervene with child abuse other than notifying the DSS.  As such, Brennan held that the child-protection laws constituted the same custodial "deprivation of liberty" that Rehnquist's opinion held necessary for a Due Process violation.
A second, shorter but more famous dissent was written by Associate Justice Harry Blackmun, who had (along with Associate Justice Thurgood Marshall) joined Brennan's dissent.  In the first of his opinion's four paragraphs, Blackmun reiterated Brennan's contention that there had been state action in establishing a DSS that promised to provide protection against child abuse and absolved all other state and non-state actors of the responsibility or authority to act.  He went on to compare the Court's ruling to the Dred Scott case, saying that in both cases the court upheld an injustice by choosing a restrictive interpretation of the Constitution and then denying that choice.
Poor Joshua lament
Blackmun's dissent is famous due to its fourth paragraph which is as follows:
Poor Joshua! Victim of repeated attacks by an irresponsible, bullying, cowardly, and intemperate father, and abandoned by respondents who placed him in a dangerous predicament and who knew or learned what was going on, and yet did essentially nothing except, as the Court revealingly observes, ante, at 193, "dutifully recorded these incidents in [their] files." It is a sad commentary upon American life, and constitutional principles – so full of late of patriotic fervor and proud proclamations about "liberty and justice for all" – that this child, Joshua DeShaney, now is assigned to live out the remainder of his life profoundly retarded. Joshua and his mother, as petitioners here, deserve – but now are denied by this Court – the opportunity to have the facts of their case considered in the light of the constitutional protection that 42 U.S.C. 1983 is meant to provide.DeShaney, 489 U.S. at 213 (Blackmun, J., dissenting).
President Bill Clinton quoted the "Poor Joshua!" paragraph in his remarks on Blackmun's retirement, and the DeShaney v. Winnebago dissent was, along with his authorship of the Roe v. Wade decision and the first part of his Flood v. Kuhn majority opinion, the most widely referenced element of Blackmun's career in obituaries following his death. It was also quoted as the headline for Time magazine's article on the decision."'Poor Joshua!'", Time, March 6, 1989.
Subsequent attention to ruling
Cornell law professor Michael C. Dorf has written that "DeShaney was a legitimately difficult case about the point at which state indifference to private action that the Constitution does not regulate becomes unconstitutional 'state action.'"Dorf, Michael (2007-01-15) The Big News in the Rehnquist FBI File: There is None, FindLaw
In the lead-up, in June 2010, to confirmation hearings for Solicitor General Elena Kagan's appointment to the Supreme Court by President Barack Obama, Linda Greenhouse in The New York Times summarized:
Two decades later, the DeShaney decision remains a subject of contention. It has prompted a large literature, including at least one book (The DeShaney Case: Child Abuse, Family Rights and the Dilemma of State Intervention, by Lynne Curry) and many law review articles. Lower courts have cited it hundreds of times. The Supreme Court is regularly asked to revisit the issue and regularly declines, without comment, to do so.
The case had entered the confirmation process because Kagan was a law clerk to Justice Marshall when the appeal first arrived at the Court and wrote a memo to Marshall cautioning against taking the case (a) without a signal of wider support on the Court (the "Join 3" response: an agreement conditioned on another three justices first agreeing; Kagan called it the "Join 4" and was corrected by the Justice) and (b) because the Court was likely to rule, as it ultimately did, against the extension of the due process protection to find for the plaintiff in the case."A Second Chance for Joshua", by Linda Greenhouse, Opinionator blog, The New York Times, June 17, 2010. Retrieved 2010-06-18.
See also
 Town of Castle Rock v. Gonzales
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 489
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States children's rights case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:Winnebago County, Wisconsin
Category:Child abuse case law
"""

From "Devenpeck v. Alford" ==> """
Devenpeck v. Alford, 543 U.S. 146 (2004), was a United States Supreme Court decision dealing with warrantless arrests and the Fourth Amendment. The Court ruled that even if an officer wrongly arrests a suspect for one crime, the arrest may still be "reasonable" if there is objectively probable cause to believe that the suspect is involved in a different crime..
 Background 
On the night of November 22, 1997, Jerome Alford was driving on Washington State Route 16 when he stopped to assist a stranded vehicle. Alford's vehicle had "wig-wag" headlights, giving it the appearance of a police car. These lights drew the attention of Officer Joi Haner. As Haner approached the stopped vehicles, Alford hurried back to his car and drove off. Officer Haner was concerned that Alford was impersonating a police officer. Haner pursued Alford's vehicle and pulled it over. Haner's suspicions were bolstered when he observed a pair of handcuffs and a police scanner in Alford's car.
Officer Haner's supervisor, Sergeant Devenpeck, arrived on the scene and began questioning Alford. Devenpeck noticed that Alford was covertly recording the conversation using a tape recorder. Believing that the recording was illegal, Devenpeck arrested Alford, citing the Washington Privacy Act.
In fact, recording an officer during a traffic stop is not illegal in Washington, and the charges against Alford were dropped. Alford then brought a civil suit against Devenpeck under §1983, claiming his arrest violated the Fourth Amendment.
The Ninth Circuit ruled that there was no probable cause for Alford's arrest. Taping an officer during a traffic stop was legal, and while there may have been probable cause to arrest Alford for other offenses, including impersonating a police officer or obstructing a public servant, the Court of Appeals ruled that these offenses were not "closely related" to the tape recording, which was Devenpeck's sole stated reason for arresting Alford. In the words of the Ninth Circuit, "probable cause to arrest for other unrelated offenses ... does not cure the lack of probable cause here."
 Opinion of the Court 
In an 8–0 decision, the Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit. The Court rejected the idea that "the offense establishing probable cause must be 'closely related' to ... the offense identified by the arresting officer."Devenpeck, 543 U.S. at 153.
Justice Scalia's majority opinion stressed that probable cause is an objective standard based on the facts known to the officer, not the officer's reasons for acting. Citing Whren v. United States as precedent, Scalia wrote, "An arresting officer's state of mind (except for the facts that he knows) is irrelevant to the existence of probable cause." As long as probable cause existed to arrest Alford for some crime, Sergeant Devenpeck's explanation of why he was arresting Alford was irrelevant.
The Court remanded the case for the lower courts to determine whether there was probable cause to arrest Alford for impersonating a law-enforcement officer or obstructing a law-enforcement officer.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 543
 References 
External links
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Dewhurst v. Coulthard" ==> """
Dewhurst v. Coulthard, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 409 (1799), was a United States Supreme Court case that initiated with a civil suit brought by Isaac Coulthard (owner of Coulthard's Brewery) against John Dewhurst which reached the Court by a convoluted process. The Court refused to hear the case: "This court will not take cognizance of any suit, or controversy not brought before them by regular process of law."Reports of decisions in the Supreme Court of the United States: with notes, and a digest, Volume 1 (Little, Brown, and Co., 1870) pg. 290 https://books.google.com/books?id=NEQPAAAAYAAJ
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
Category:1799 in United States case law
"""

From "Dial v. Fontaine" ==> """
redirectGunn v. University Committee to End the War in Viet Nam#Aftermath
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Diamond v. Chakrabarty" ==> """
Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303 (1980), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with whether living organisms can be patented.  Writing for a five-justice majority, Chief Justice Warren E. Burger held that human-made bacteria could be patented under the patent laws of the United States because such an invention constituted a "manufacture" or "composition of matter". Justice William J. Brennan Jr., along with Justices Byron White, Thurgood Marshall, and Lewis F. Powell Jr., dissented from the Court's ruling, arguing that because Congress had not expressly authorized the patenting of biological organisms, the Court should not extend patent law to cover them.
In the decades since the Court's ruling, the case has been recognized as a landmark case for U.S. patent law, with industry and legal commentators identifying it as a turning point for the biotechnology industry.
Background
thumb|left|Pseudomonas bacteria as seen in a petri dish.
Genetic engineer Ananda Mohan Chakrabarty, working for General Electric, developed a bacterium (derived from the Pseudomonas genus and now known as Pseudomonas putida) capable of breaking down crude oil, which he proposed to use in treating oil spills. General Electric filed a patent application for the bacterium in the United States listing Chakrabarty as the inventor, but the application was rejected by a patent examiner, because under patent law at that time, living things were  generally understood to not be patentable subject matter under 35 U.S.C. § 101.
General Electric and Chakrabarty appealed the examiner's decision to the Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences.  The Board however agreed with the examiner that the bacterium was not patentable under current law.  General Electric and Chakrabarty thereafter appealed the Board's decision to the United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals.  This time, General Electric and Chakrabarty prevailed with the court overturning the examiner's decision and holding "the fact that micro-organisms are alive is without legal significance for purposes of the patent law."  The Patent Office, in the name of its Commissioner, Sidney A. Diamond, appealed this decision to the Supreme Court.
Supreme Court opinion
thumb|Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, who authored the majority opinion.
The Supreme Court heard oral argument from the parties on March 17, 1980 and issued its decision on June 16, 1980.  In a 5–4 ruling, the Court ruled in favor of Chakrabarty and affirmed the decision of the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals.
Writing for the majority, Chief Justice Warren E. Burger began by noting that 35 U.S.C. § 101 allowed inventors to obtain patents for a "manufacture" or "composition of matter".  The majority noted that while these words indicated that Congress intended for the patent laws to be given a "broad scope",  this scope was not unlimited and that, under the Court's precedents, "laws of nature, physical phenomena, and abstract ideas" were not patentable.  However, the Court held that these precedents were inapplicable to Chakrabarty's case as he was not trying to patent a "natural phenomena" but rather a human-made bacterium that he, himself, had developed.  The majority contrasted this outcome with the one reached nearly 50 years prior in Funk Bros. Seed Co. v. Kalo Inoculant Co., where the Court had rejected a patent application for the discovery of a naturally occurring bacterium that could be used to improve crops.  Unlike the patentee in Funk Bros., the Supreme Court here held that Chakrabarty had not merely discovered the bacteria's existence, he had created it himself and adapted it to a particular purpose.
thumb|Justice William J. Brennan Jr., who authored the dissenting opinion.
Justice William J. Brennan Jr., joined by Justices Byron White, Thurgood Marshall, and Lewis F. Powell Jr., dissented from the Court's ruling.  Looking at the legislative history of the patent laws, Justice Brennan concluded that Congress had demonstrated an intent to exclude living organisms from the scope of the country's patent laws.  Justice Brennan also expressed concern that the Court was extending patent protections into areas not expressly authorized by Congress and that this constituted an inappropriate extension of monopoly patent power.
Impact
In the decades following the Supreme Court's ruling, commentators have classified Diamond v. Chakrabarty as an important legal decision, particularly with respect to the patent laws and the biotechnology industry.  In 2018, Time identified the decision as one of 25 important moments in American history, with Professor Gerardo Con Diaz remarking that the decision allowed "inventors at private and public institutions alike to obtain patents for genetically modified organisms — from plants and animals for laboratory research, to many foods available in supermarkets today" and allowed biotechnology firms to protect their developments in new ways. Writing for IP Watchdog on the decision's 30th anniversary, Gene Quinn called the decision a "turning point for the biotech industry" and praised the Court's ruling as "emblematic of the need for an expansive view of what is patentable subject matter." Likewise, the Biotechnology Innovation Organization praised the decision as being "instrumental in spurring the creation of a dynamic and flourishing biotech industry." Nature similarly noted that, at least according to industry participants, “without Diamond v. Chakrabarty, commercial biotechnology based on recombinant DNA technologies would not exist today.”	
However, the Supreme Court's ruling has also attracted some criticism from scholars who believe the Court extended patent law in a way that Congress did not authorize.  Writing in the Ohio State Law Journal, Frank Darr criticized the Court's decision as containing "serious interpretive problems" and "reflect[ing] a policy choice" by the majority rather than a neutral legal analysis.
Further criticisms
George Mason University's Center for Intellectual Property and Innovation Policy has pointed out that, in the wake of Diamond v. Chakrabarty, the courts have continued to affirm the right of biotech industry developers to continue to claim ownership of altered biological life, while clarifying some limits in Mayo v. Prometheus and AMP v. Myriad. The Center has expressed concern over what may be interpreted as judicial activism, with this ambitious legal thrust in advance of Congressional ability to thoughtfully consider appropriate legislation.
While cases subsequent to Chakrabarty have provided some safeguards, such as forbidding the patenting of "limited DNA sequences," concerns have arisen that these safeguards do not go far enough, and that "biopiracy" of the human genome could take place, especially in an era of global health crisis demanding a rapid pharmaceutical response. A legal collaboration at the University of Pittsburgh suggests that it "is a stretch" to label such presumptuous genomic editing as outright slavery.  However, in view of the fact that such editing in its most contemporary form may include the insertion of what has been termed by the industry as an entire "operating platform," concerns may continue.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 447
Genetic engineering in the United States
References
Further reading
.
.
External links
Category:United States biotechnology case law
Category:Genetically modified organisms
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1980 in the environment
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:Genetic engineering in the United States
Category:General Electric litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Biological patent law
Category:Oil spill remediation technologies
Category:Bacteria and humans
"""

From "Diamond v. Charles" ==> """
Diamond v. Charles, 476 U.S. 54 (1986), was a United States Supreme Court case that determined that citizens do not have Article III standing to challenge the constitutionality of a state statute in federal court unless they possess a "direct stake" in the outcome.
Background
Four physicians who provided abortion services in Illinois filed a class action lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois to challenge a 1979 amendment to the Illinois Abortion Law of 1975 which required doctors to provide a "parental consultation" before performing an abortion. This regulation added to the Illinois Abortion Parental Consent Act of 1977, which required written consent from both parents or the guardian of an unmarried minor before obtaining an abortion and imposed a 48-hour waiting period. If parental consent could not be obtained or was refused, the minor could seek court-authorized consent upon showing that "the pregnant minor fully understands the consequences of an abortion to her and her unborn child." Notice of the hearing was required to be sent to the parents by registered or certified mail.
On October 31, 1979, the district court granted the physicians' motion for a temporary restraining order in Charles v. Carey, 627 F.2d 772 (7th Cir. 1980), barring enforcement of the amended law. The State of Illinois did not appeal the finding that the amendment was unconstitutional. Eugene Diamond, on the basis of his conscientious objection to abortions, his status as a pediatrician, and as a parent of a minor daughter, filed a motion to intervene as a defendant of the law.
The U.S. Supreme Court, in dismissing the appeal, said "because the State alone is entitled to create a legal code, only the State has the kind of 'direct stake' identified in the Court's standing doctrine in defending the standards embodied in that code." The Court also said that Article III standing "is not to be placed in the hands of 'concerned bystanders,' who will use it simply as a 'vehicle for the vindication of value interests.'"
See also
 Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973)
 External links 
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:United States standing case law
"""

From "Diamond v. Diehr" ==> """
Diamond v. Diehr, 450 U.S. 175 (1981), was a United States Supreme Court decision which held that controlling the execution of a physical process, by running a computer program did not preclude patentability of the invention as a whole.. The high court reiterated its earlier holdings that mathematical formulas in the abstract could not be patented, but it held that the mere presence of a software element did not make an otherwise patent-eligible machine or process patent ineligible. Diehr was the third member of a trilogy of Supreme Court decisions on the patent-eligibility of computer software related inventions.The other two cases were , and . The Supreme Court's most recent decisions on patent eligibility of software-related inventions are  and , both of which are cases concerning business methods.
 Background 
The problem and its solution
The inventors, respondents, filed a patent application for a "[process] for molding raw, uncured synthetic rubber into cured precision products." The process of curing synthetic rubber depends on a number of factors including time, temperature and thickness of the mold.  Using the Arrhenius equation
which may be restated as ln(v) = CZ + x 
it is possible to calculate when to open the press and to remove the cured, molded rubber.  The problem was that there was, at the time the invention was made, no disclosed way to obtain an accurate measure of the temperature without opening the press. In the traditional method the temperature of the mold press, which was apparently set at a fixed temperature and was controlled by thermostat, fluctuated due to the opening and closing of the press.
The invention solved this problem by using embedded thermocouples to constantly check the temperature, and then feeding the measured values into a computer. The computer then used the Arrhenius equation to calculate when sufficient energy had been absorbed so that the molding machine should open the press.
The claims
Independent claim 1 of the allowed patent is representative. It provides:
1. A method of operating a rubber-molding press for precision molded compounds with the aid of a digital computer, comprising:
Proceedings before Office and CCPA
The patent examiner rejected this invention as unpatentable subject matter under 35 U.S.C. 101.. He argued that the steps performed by the computer were unpatentable as a computer program under Gottschalk v. Benson.  The Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences of the USPTO affirmed the rejection.  The Court of Customs and Patent Appeals (CCPA), the predecessor to the current Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, reversed, noting that an otherwise patentable invention did not become unpatentable simply because a computer was involved.
The U.S. Supreme Court granted the petition for certiorari by the Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks to resolve this question.
 The Supreme Court's opinion 
The Court repeated its earlier holding that mathematical formulas in the abstract are not eligible for patent protection. But it also held that a physical machine or process which makes use of a mathematical algorithm is different from an invention which claims the algorithm, as such, in the abstract.  Thus, if the invention as a whole meets the requirements of patentability—that is, it involves "transforming or reducing an article to a different state or thing"—it is patent-eligible, even if it includes a software component.
The CCPA's reversal of the patent rejection was affirmed. But the Court carefully avoided overruling Benson or Flook. It did criticize the analytic methodology of Flook, however, by challenging its use of analytic dissection, which the Flook Court based on Neilson v. Harford. The Diehr Court cited the Senate Report and the CCPA Decision in In re Bergy, 596 F.2d 952, 961 (CCPA 1979) to hold that (a) claims must be considered "as a whole," just as they are for all other patentability determinations, without extracting a "gist" or "point of novelty" to be considered in isolation, and (b) section 101 governs the kind of subject matter that can be patented, while concerns for novelty and non-obviousness are considered separately under sections 102 and 103:Diehr, 450 U.S. at 188-189.Section 103, which concerns obviousness, states that the obviousness or non-obviousness of what is claimed to be an invention must be determined by considering whether "the differences between the subject matter sought to be patented and the prior art are such that the subject matter as a whole would have been obvious at the time the invention was made." (Emphasis supplied.) No comparable language is found in section 101, which has retained substantially the same form since the first patent act in 1790.
In determining the eligibility of respondents' claimed process for patent protection under § 101, their claims must be considered as a whole. It is inappropriate to dissect the claims into old and new elements and then to ignore the presence of the old elements in the analysis. This is particularly true in a process claim, because a new combination of steps in a process may be patentable even though all the constituents of the combination were well known and in common use before the combination was made. The "novelty" of any element or steps in a process, or even of the process itself, is of no relevance in determining whether the subject matter of a claim falls within the § 101 categories of possibly patentable subject matter.
It has been urged that novelty is an appropriate consideration under § 101. Presumably, this argument results from the language in § 101 referring to any “new and useful” process, machine, etc. Section 101, however, is a general statement of the type of subject matter that is eligible for patent protection “subject to the conditions and requirements of this title.” Specific conditions for patentability follow and § 102 covers in detail the conditions relating to novelty. The question therefore of whether a particular invention is novel is “wholly apart from whether the invention falls into a category of statutory subject matter.”
The patent
The patent that issued after the decision was U.S. Patent 4,344,142, "Direct digital control of rubber molding presses.". The patent includes 11 method claims, three of which are independent. All method claims relate to molding of physical articles. The only diagrams in the patent are flowcharts. There are no diagrams of machinery. As the dissenting opinion in Diehr noted, the patent specification "teaches nothing about the chemistry of the synthetic rubber-curing process, nothing about the raw materials to be used in curing synthetic rubber, nothing about the equipment to be used in the process, and nothing about the significance or effect of any process variable such as temperature, curing time, particular compositions of material, or mold configurations."Diehr, 450 U.S. at 206.
Subsequent developments
For many years, it was believed that Diehr effectively overruled Flook, despite the majority opinion's avoiding any such statement.See Diehr, 450 U.S. at 209-215 (Stevens, J., dissenting, contending that the fact patterns in both cases are indistinguishable).
In 2012, in Mayo v. Prometheus,. the unanimous opinion of the Supreme Court interpreted Diehr so as to harmonize it with Flook. The Court "found the overall process patent eligible because of the way the additional steps of the process [besides the equation] integrated the equation into the process as a whole."Mayo, 132 S. Ct. at 1298. The Court "nowhere suggested that all these steps, or at least the combination of those steps, were in context obvious, already in use, or purely conventional."Mayo, 132 S. Ct. at 1299. "These other steps apparently added to the formula something that in terms of patent law’s objectives had significance—they transformed the process into an inventive application of the formula."
The Court interpreted Diehr slightly differently in Alice v. CLS Bank, another unanimous opinion, but without taking issue with the Mayo interpretation. The Alice Court said:
In Diehr, by contrast [with Flook], we held that a computer-implemented process for curing rubber was patent eligible, but not because it involved a computer. The claim employed a "well-known" mathematical equation, but it used that equation in a process designed to solve a technological problem in "conventional industry practice." The invention in Diehr used a "thermocouple" to record constant temperature measurements inside the rubber mold — something "the industry ha[d] not been able to obtain." The temperature measurements were then fed into a computer, which repeatedly recalculated the remaining cure time by using the mathematical equation. These additional steps, we recently explained, "transformed the process into an inventive application of the formula." Mayo, supra, at ___, 132 S.Ct., at 1299. In other words, the claims in Diehr were patent eligible because they improved an existing technological process, not because they were implemented on a computer.134 S. Ct. at 2358 (citations omitted).
These two opinions state the current Supreme Court interpretation of what the Diehr case holds.
See also
 Gottschalk v. Benson, 409 U.S. 63 (1972).
 Parker v. Flook, 437 U.S. 584 (1978).
 Bilski v. Kappos, 561 U.S. 593 (2010).
References
External links
The Patentability of Computer Programs
Category:Software patent case law
Category:United States computer case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1981 in United States case law
"""

From "Dice v. Akron, Canton & Youngstown R. Co." ==> """
Dice v. Akron, Canton & Youngstown R. Co., 342 U.S. 359 (1952), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that federal court rules apply when an action is brought pursuant to a federal right and where the substance of a state's rules would necessarily have an adverse effect on the protection of an individual's rights under federal law.
Background
After an engine owned by the Akron, Canton & Youngstown R. Co. jumped the tracks, striking and injuring a railroad employee named Dice, he brought a negligence claim in Ohio state court under the Federal Employers' Liability Act against the railroad. The railroad produced a document in which Dice purportedly released it from all liability beyond what they had already paid him. Dice responded by asserting that the railroad had him sign it under false pretenses and that he had not read it before signing it. After the jury found in favor of Dice, the trial court judge reverses the judgment notwithstanding the verdict because it ruled that Dice could not avoid the obligations created by signing the release. Ohio state law imposed a duty on him to read the document before signing it. However, federal law would have held that the railroad's fraud precluded the enforcement of the release, and so the state appellate court reversed on this basis, which was then again reversed by the state supreme court, thus Dice appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States.
Decision of the Court
The federal right given an individual under the Federal Employers Liability Act and the parameters of such must be determined by federal law because under federal law, a release is not valid if it has been procured by false or misleading statements. Applying Ohio law, which would thus make the release valid if Plaintiff was negligent in not reading it, would defeat the purpose of FELA of giving employees a right to recover damages against their employers. In addition, there is a federal policy of not allowing individuals to escape liability through fraudulently obtained releases. Plaintiff has a right under FELA and the Seventh Amendment to a trial by jury. This cannot be taken away by Ohio's law giving the judge permission to decide the issue of fraud in the context of a release.
The majority decision illustrates the supremacy of federal law in state court action when the action is brought pursuant to a federal right, such as under FELA. In the case at hand, the Ohio rule permitting state court judges to determine if fraud had occurred was a substantive rule which would necessarily affect the claim of the Plaintiff based on federal law. Because the effect of the application of the state court rule regarding judicial finding of fraud is to preclude the Plaintiff's federal law claim, the state court rule may not be applied.
 See also 
 Erie Doctrine
 Jurisdiction
 U.S. Supreme Court
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:1952 in United States case law
Category:Conflict of laws case law
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Erie Doctrine
Category:Railway litigation in 1952
"""

From "Dickerson v. United States" ==> """
Dickerson v. United States, 530 U.S. 428 (2000),.  upheld the requirement that the Miranda warning be read to criminal suspects and struck down a federal statute that purported to overrule Miranda v. Arizona (1966).
Dickerson is regarded as a significant example of a rare departure by the Court from the principle of party presentation.  The Court noted that neither party in the case advocated on behalf of the constitutionality of 18 U.S.C. § 3501,.  the specific statute at issue in the case. Accordingly, it invited Paul Cassell, a former law clerk to Antonin Scalia and Warren E. Burger, to argue that perspective. Cassell was then a professor at the University of Utah law school; he was later appointed to, and subsequently resigned from, a federal district court judgeship in that state.
 Background 
In Miranda v. Arizona, the Supreme Court held that statements of criminal suspects made while they are in custody and subject to interrogation by police may not be admitted in court unless the suspect first had certain warnings read to them beforehand. By now, these warnings are familiar to most Americans: that the suspect has the right to remain silent during the interrogation, that anything they say to the police may be used against them in a court of law, that they have the right to legal counsel, and that if they cannot afford legal counsel a lawyer will be provided for them.
In 1968, two years after the Miranda decision, Congress passed a law that purported to overrule it as part of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968. This statute, 18 U.S.C. § 3501, directed federal trial judges to admit statements of criminal defendants if they were made voluntarily, without regard to whether they had received the Miranda warnings. Under § 3501, voluntariness depended on such things as (1) the time between arrest and arraignment, (2) whether the defendant knew the crime for which they had been arrested, (3) whether they had been told that they did not have to talk to the police and that any statement could be used against them, (4) whether the defendant knew prior to questioning that they had the right to the assistance of counsel, and (5) whether they actually had the assistance of counsel during questioning. However, the "presence or absence of any of" these factors "need not be conclusive on the issue of voluntariness of the confession." Because § 3501 was an act of Congress, it applied only to federal criminal proceedings and criminal proceedings in the District of Columbia.
Charles Dickerson had been arrested for bank robbery and for using a firearm during a crime of violence, both federal crimes. He moved to suppress statements he made to the FBI because he had not received the Miranda warnings before he spoke to the FBI. The district court suppressed the statements, and so the government appealed. The Fourth Circuit reversed the district court, reasoning that § 3501 had supplanted the requirement that the police give the Miranda warnings because Miranda was not a constitutional requirement and therefore Congress could overrule that decision by legislation. The Supreme Court then agreed to hear the case.
Opinion of the Court
Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote the majority opinion, and began by briefly describing the historical backdrop against which the Miranda ruling had emerged. A suspect's confession had always been inadmissible if it had been the result of coercion or otherwise given involuntarily. This was true in England, from where American law inherited that rule.
However, as time went on, the Supreme Court recognized that the Fifth Amendment was an independent source of protection for statements made by criminal defendants in the course of police interrogation. "In Miranda, we noted that the advent of modern custodial police interrogation brought with it an increased concern about confessions obtained by coercion." Custodial police interrogation by its very nature "isolates and pressures the individual" so that he might eventually be worn down and confess to crimes he did not commit in order to end the ordeal. In Miranda, the Court had adopted the now-famous four warnings to protect against this particular evil.
Congress, in response, enacted § 3501. That statute clearly was designed to overrule Miranda because it expressly focused solely on voluntariness of the confession as a touchstone for admissibility. Did Congress have the authority to pass such a law? On the one hand, the Court's power to craft nonconstitutional supervisory rules over the federal courts exists only in the absence of a specific statute passed by Congress. However, if on the other hand the Miranda rule was constitutional, Congress could not overrule it, because the Court alone is the final arbiter of what the Constitution requires. As evidence of the fact that the Miranda rule was constitutional in nature, the Court pointed out that many of its subsequent decisions applying and limiting the requirement arose in decisions from state courts, over which the Court lacked the power to impose supervisory nonconstitutional rules. Furthermore, although the Court had previously invited legislative involvement in the effort to devise prophylactic measures for protecting criminal defendants against overbearing tactics of the police, it had consistently held that these measures must not take away from the protections Miranda had afforded.
Finally, 34 years after the original decision, the Court was loath to overrule Miranda. Typically, the Court overrules constitutional decisions only when their doctrinal underpinnings have eroded. The Court felt that this was not the case in Miranda. "If anything, our subsequent cases have reduced the impact of the Miranda rule on legitimate law enforcement while reaffirming the decision's core ruling that unwarned statements may not be used as evidence in the prosecution's case in chief." The Miranda rule did not displace the voluntariness inquiry.
Dissent
Justice Scalia, joined by Justice Thomas, disagreed with the majority's decision not to overrule Miranda. He disputed the notion that Miranda was a constitutional rule, pointing to several cases in which the Court had declined to exclude evidence despite the absence of warnings.
Justice Scalia described the majority's decision as an unprincipled compromise between justices who believed Miranda was a constitutional requirement and those who disagreed. He noted that the majority did not state outright that the Miranda warning is a constitutional requirement, but merely that it is "constitutionally based." Justice Scalia further criticized the majority for implying that Congress has no power to override judicially imposed safeguards of constitutional rights (Marbury v. Madison (1803) having settled that Congress may not override judicial interpretations of the Constitution).
References
External links
 Brief of the Criminal Justice Legal Foundation
 Brief of the ACLU
 Brief of the United States
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:Miranda warning case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Dickinson v. United States" ==> """
Dickinson v. United States, 346 U.S. 389 (1953), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held there was no basis for denying a petitioner's (a Jehovah's Witness) claim to ministerial exemption from military service, and his conviction for refusing to submit to his local board's induction order was reversed.. 
Decision of the Court
Justice Clark delivered the opinion of the Court. 
The Court ruled that classification as minister is not available to all members of a sect notwithstanding doctrine that all are ministers; but part-time secular work does not, without more, disqualify member from satisfying the ministerial exemption.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 346
References
External links
Category:1953 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:1953 in religion
Category:Conscription in the United States
Category:Conscription law
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Dickinson v. Zurko" ==> """
Dickinson v. Zurko, 527 U.S. 150 (1999), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that appeals from the USPTO Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences are to be reviewed for whether the Board's conclusions are supported by "substantial evidence" under the APA.
The Court was asked by the United States Patent and Trademark Office to decide whether the Office's reviewing court, the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, should review the agency's factual determinations for whether the Office's decisions were supported with substantial evidence (under the Administrative Procedures Act), or whether the evidence was clearly erroneous (such as how a lower court would be reviewed).  Agreeing with the PTO, the Supreme Court ruled 6-3 that the Office need only have substantial evidence.
External links
Final Court of Appeals opinion after Supreme Court review, In re Zurko et al, 258 F.3d 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2001)
Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit opinion II, reversed by Supreme Court, 142 F.3d 1447 (Fed. Cir. 1998) (en banc)
Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit panel opinion, vacated by rehearing en banc, 111 F.3d 887 (Fed. Cir. 1997)
Appendix to Dickinson brief before the Supreme Court (includes opinion of the Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences) (pp. 35a-45a)
Application status available through Public PAIR (search for application 07/479,666 or patent 6,507,909)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Patent and Trademark Office
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Dietz v. Bouldin" ==> """
Dietz v. Bouldin, 579 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a federal district court may rescind a discharge order and recall jurors for further service in the same case.SCOTUSblog coverageDietz v. Bouldin, No. 15–458, 579 U.S. ___ (2016).
 Background 
Hillary Bouldin's vehicle collided with Rocky Dietz's in 2009 in Bozeman, Montana, and Dietz sued Bouldin for damages. Bouldin removed the case to a federal district court. During the trial, Bouldin admitted that he was negligent, and was willing to cover Dietz's medical expenses ($10,136). The point of contention was whether Dietz was entitled for more compensation. During the course of deliberation, the jury sent the judge a note whether the damages have been paid or is covered by someone else; after consulting with the lawyers in both sides, the judge informed the jury that the answer to that question does not matter. The jury ruled in favour of Dietz but awarded $0 in damages. The judge thanked and discharged the jury. However, minutes later, the judge realized that it is impossible for the damages to be $0 while Dietz won – the jury returned an invalid verdict. The judge instructed the clerk of the court to re-empanel the jury. All except for one jurors have been in the hallway; the one juror only went back to a hotel to pick up his hotel receipt; no one discussed the case with any outsider. The judge collectively questioned the jury, was satisfied with the response, and gave out clarifying instructions. The re-empaneled jury returned a verdict in favour of Dietz, with $15,000 in damages. Dietz's counsel objected to re-empanelling and pushed for a new trial. The judge objected, saying that he did not want all the resources that the court spent wasted as a result of a new trial. Dietz appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit arguing that a judge does not have the authority to re-empanel the already-discharged jury. The Ninth Circuit ruled in favour of Bouldin. Dietz appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States and the Court granted certiorari.
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor authored the majority opinion affirming the Ninth Circuit's judgment. The court ruled 6-2 that a judge may recall an already-discharged jury, but has limited authority to do so. They also ruled that this power should be used with caution. The Court noted that since in the era of smartphones and the internet it is not uncommon for people to instinctively check their phones. Thus it is possible for a discharged juror to develop potential prejudice while communicating about the case with someone else via text messages, or quickly Googling about the case to obtain more information about the case. Finally, the Court ruled that in this particular case, the trial judge did not abuse his authority.
 Dissent 
Justice Clarence Thomas, joined by Justice Anthony Kennedy, dissented. In his dissent, Thomas argued that the common law rule preventing an already-discharged jury to be re-empaneled should control the case. After surveying the history of jury's sequestration, Thomas argued that while the jury is no longer strictly sequestrated, such bright-line rule guarantees that jury will not be biased in any way and ensures that every trial is decided in a fair manner.
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:United States jury case law
Category:Bozeman, Montana
"""

From "Digital Realty Trust, Inc. v. Somers" ==> """
Digital Realty Trust, Inc. v. Somers, 583 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that "whistleblower" status and associated protections as defined by Sarbanes-Oxley and Dodd-Frank only apply in cases where the whistleblower has reported malfeasance directly to the Securities and Exchange Commission.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 583
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States class action case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States securities case law
"""

From "Dillon v. Gloss" ==> """
Dillon v. Gloss, 256 U.S. 368 (1921), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that Congress, when proposing a constitutional amendment under the authority given to it by Article V of the Constitution, may fix a definite period for its ratification, and further, that the reasonableness of the seven-year period, fixed by Congress in the resolution proposing the Eighteenth Amendment is beyond question. Additionally, the Court, upon taking judicial notice that the Eighteenth Amendment became a part of the Constitution on January 16, 1919, when its ratification in the state legislatures was consummated, held that the National Prohibition Act, known informally as the Volstead Act, entered into force on January 16, 1920.
Background
Dillon had been arrested pursuant to the National Prohibition Act, title 2, § 3, and was in custody under § 26.  He was denied his petition for a writ of habeas corpus, and appealed the denial. Dillon claimed that the Eighteenth Amendment, which Title 2 of the act was adopted to enforce, was invalid, because the Congress, in declaring that it should be inoperative unless ratified within seven years, had acted outside its constitutional authority; and, secondly, that, in any event, the law he was charged with violating, and under which he was arrested, had not gone into effect at the time of the asserted violation nor at the time of his arrest on January 17, 1920.
Syllabus
 Article V of the Constitution implies that amendments submitted thereunder must be ratified, if at all, within some reasonable time after their proposal. This was modified in 1939 by Coleman v. Miller, which ruled that proposed amendments with no specified expiration pend ratification before the States indefinitely.
 Under Article V, Congress, in proposing an amendment, may fix a reasonable time for its ratification.
 The period of seven years, fixed by Congress in the resolution proposing the Eighteenth Amendment was reasonable.
 The Eighteenth Amendment became a part of the Constitution on January 16, 1919, when, as the Court notices judicially, its ratification in the state legislatures was consummated, not on January 29, 1919, when the ratification was proclaimed by the Secretary of State.
 As the Eighteenth Amendment, by its own terms, was to go into effect one year after being ratified, §§ 3 and 26, Title II, of the National Prohibition Act, which, by § 21, Title III, were to be in force from and after the effective date of the Amendment, were in force on January 16, 1920. P. 256 U. S. 376.
The lower court's ruling was upheld.
See also
Coleman v. Miller
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 256
References
External links
Category:1921 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States Constitution Article Five case law
Category:Prohibition in the United States
Category:United States Eighteenth Amendment case law
"""

From "Direct Marketing Ass'n v. Brohl" ==> """
Direct Marketing Association v. Brohl, 575 U.S. 1 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a lawsuit by the Direct Marketing Association trade group about a Colorado law regarding reporting the state's tax requirements to customers and to the Colorado Department of Revenue is not barred by the Tax Injunction Act. While the case was reheard and found in favor of Colorado, the concurrence of Justice Anthony Kennedy provided a means for states to bring a challenge the ruling of Quill Corp. v. North Dakota, which has prevented states from collecting taxes from out-of-state vendors.
 Background 
The 1992 Supreme Court decision in Quill Corp. v. North Dakota, , established that states could not collect sales taxes from out-of-state vendors if the vendors did not have a physical presence in the state, unless the United States Congress passed legislation giving them that right. This decision had allowed electronic business, including e-Commerce over the Internet, to grow greatly, but had hurt states financially due to their inability to legally require out-of-state vendors to collect and remit sales taxes, and states struggled to get people to honestly report untaxed purchases on personal tax returns.
In 2010, the state of Colorado passed a law that required out-of-state vendors to collect and provide information to its citizens regarding their total purchases, so that the residents could determine their tax liability for the state. The Direct Marketing Association (DMA, and now known as the Data & Marketing Association) filed a lawsuit in the federal Colorado District Court, Direct Marketing Ass'n v. Brohl, challenging the law. The District Court ruled in favor of the DMA, based on the principle of Quill. The state appealed to Tenth Circuit Appeals Court, which ruled that under the Tax Injunction Act, the case could not be heard at the federal level. The Appeals Court argued that the act of collecting the information on taxes is not the same as tax collection, so Quill did not apply, and the Tax Injunction Act set that legal challenges to such state laws should be heard in state courts.
 Supreme Court 
The DMA took a separate challenge to the Colorado state court via Direct Marketing Ass'n v. Brohl II, but simultaneously filed an appeal with the Supreme Court to challenge the Appeals Court ruling. By March 2015, in a unanimous decision, Associate Justice Clarence Thomas held that "the relief sought by petitioner [Direct Marketing Association] would not 'enjoin, suspend or restrain the assessment, levy or collection' of Colorado's sales and use taxes."https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/14pdf/13-1032_8759.pdf  The case was remanded to the Appeals Court.
 Post-decision 
The Appeals Court reviewed the case following the Supreme Court's decision, but still found in favor of the state. In their opinion, the Appeals Court stated that the state law "does not violate the dormant Commerce Clause because it does not discriminate against or unduly burden interstate commerce", and remanded the case to the District Court.
The DMA tried to appeal this decision back to the Supreme Court, but the Court refused to hear the case in December 2016. By February 2017, the DMA and the state of Colorado had reached a settlement, with the DMA agreeing to drop the state and federal lawsuits in exchange for the state ignoring the penalty fees during the intervening years for non-compliance of the reporting requirements.
 Impact 
A core facet of the Supreme Court's decision in Direct Marketing Ass'n came from Justice Anthony Kennedy's concurrence. Kennedy specifically wrote about Quills "tenuous nature", and the "serious, continuing injustice faced by Colorado and many other States" of being able to only collect sales taxes from brick-and-mortar stores, and offered "it is unwise to delay any longer a reconsideration of the Court's holding in Quill". Kennedy's concurrence was taken by many analysts and states that Kennedy was inviting a case to force the Supreme Court to review Quill. This led to at least twenty states to develop so-called "kill Quill" legislation, forcing out-of-state vendors to collect state sales tax, as to provide a legal vehicle to bring to the Supreme Court for a formal review of Quill. South Dakota was the first state to have passed its laws, filed lawsuits against out-of-state vendors, and progressed their case through the state courts to appeal to the Supreme Court for this purpose. On June 21, 2018, Quill was overruled by South Dakota v. Wayfair, Inc..
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 575
 Miller Bros. Co. v. Maryland (1954)
 National Bellas Hess v. Illinois (1967)
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:E-commerce in the United States
Category:Legal history of Colorado
Category:Sales taxes
"""

From "Director of Revenue of Missouri v. CoBank ACB" ==> """
Director of Revenue of Mo. v. CoBank ACB, 531 U.S. 316 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned whether CoBank is exempt from state income tax requirements. A unanimous Court held that they are not exempt.
Background
The Farm Credit Act of 1933 created various lending institutions, including banks for cooperatives, which are designated as federally chartered instrumentalities of the United States. CoBank ACB is the successor to all rights and obligations of the National Bank for Cooperatives. In 1996, CoBank filed amended returns on behalf of that bank, requesting an exemption from all Missouri corporate income taxes and refunds on the taxes it paid for 1991 through 1994. CoBank asserted that the Supremacy Clause accords federal instrumentalities immunity from state taxation unless Congress has expressly waived this immunity, which the Act did not expressly do. The state of Missouri denied the request, but the Missouri State Supreme Court reversed, stating that because the Act's current version is silent as to the banks' tax immunity, Congress cannot be said to have expressly consented to state income taxation and, thus, the banks are exempt.
Opinion of the Court
90px|left|thumb|Thomas penned the CoBank decision
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote the decision of the Court, which unanimously reversed the Missouri Supreme Court. The Court held that banks for cooperatives are subject to taxation. Thomas wrote for the Court that nothing in the 1985 amendments to the Farm Credit Act indicated a repeal of the previous express approval of state taxation and that the structure of the Act indicated by negative implication that banks for cooperatives were not entitled to immunity. The Court rejected further claims by CoBank that they were entitled to immunity under McCulloch v. Maryland, stating that that doctrine was expressly not invoked by Congress in this instance.
There was also discussion of the specific wording of the statute. Thomas wrote, "Had Congress simply deleted the final sentence of §2134 that limited the exemption while retaining the sentence granting the exemption, we would have no trouble concluding that Congress had eliminated the States’ ability to tax banks for cooperatives. Short of this act, however, we find Congress’ silence insufficient to disrupt the 50-year history of state taxation of banks for cooperatives." 
With this decision, the Missouri Supreme Court had erred in finding an exemption, and the case was remanded to them to alter their previous determination.
See also
 Supremacy Clause
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Supremacy Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Farm Credit System
"""

From "DIRECTV, Inc. v. Imburgia" ==> """
DIRECTV, Inc. v. Imburgia, 577 U.S. ___ (2015), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States clarified when arbitration provisions in contracts are governed by the Federal Arbitration Act. In a 6–3 opinion written by Justice Stephen Breyer, the Court reversed a decision by the California Court of Appeal that refused to enforce an arbitration agreement between DIRECTV and its customers., slip op. at 1, 11 (2015). The California Court had ruled that the arbitration agreement was unenforceable because, under applicable California law, a class action arbitration waiver between DIRECTV and its customers was unenforceable.DIRECTV, slip op. at 3–4. However, the Supreme Court of the United States held that the California Court of Appeal's interpretation was preempted by the Federal Arbitration Act, and the California Court of Appeal was therefore required to enforce the arbitration agreement.DIRECTV, slip op. at 5, 11.
Justice Clarence Thomas filed a dissent, restating his view that the Federal Arbitration Act does not apply to proceedings in state courts.DIRECTV, slip op. at 1 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, joined by Justice Sonia Sotomayor, also filed a dissent, writing that the majority's decision "again expanded the scope of the FAA, further degrading the rights of consumers and further insulating already powerful economic entities from liability for unlawful acts".DIRECTV, slip op. at 14 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:DirecTV
Category:AT&T litigation
Category:United States arbitration case law
"""

From "District Attorney's Office v. Osborne" ==> """
District Attorney's Office for the Third Judicial District v. Osborne, 557 U.S. 52 (2009),.  was a case in which the United States Supreme Court decided that the Constitution's due process clause does not require states to turn over DNA evidence to a party seeking a civil suit under 42 U.S.C. § 1983..
Background
The case concerned the conviction of William G. Osborne on charges related to the rape and beating of a prostitute. The prostitute had been beaten with an axe handle, shot in the head, and left in an Alaskan snowbank. On a combination of eyewitness testimony and DNA evidence from a condom found at the scene, Osborne was convicted of kidnapping and sexual assault. He was sentenced to 26 years in prison for these offenses. The testing method used on the condom, DQ Alpha, was a relatively inexact form of DNA testing that generally cannot narrow the perpetrator down to less than 5% of the population.
After his conviction, Osborne sought for the state's evidence to be put to Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) testing according to his rights under Alaska Statute §12.72.010(4) (2008) for postconviction relief, and according to his State and Federal Constitution rights. The Alaska Court of Appeals ruled Osborne had neither Federal constitutional right to postconviction testing, due to lack of precedent, nor a State constitutional right, on the basis that the other evidence of his guilt was too strong and RFLP testing was not likely to be conclusive. Alaska prosecutors do not dispute that advanced DNA testing could potentially prove Osborne's innocence beyond any doubt, but refused to allow him additional testing despite a decade-old request.
Following the refusal, Osborne filed suit, claiming the state violated his right to due process.See 42 U.S.C. §1983 In this suit, Osborne challenged the state's "deprivation of any rights . . . secured by the Constitution" and requested the DNA evidence against him be tested at his personal expense by Short Tandem Repeat (STR) analysis, a method more discriminating than both RFLP and DQ Alpha, and unavailable at the time of his trial. The State instead insisted that Osborne's claim must be brought under 28 U.S.C. §2254, which allows a prisoner to seek "a writ of habeas corpus . . . on the ground that he is in custody in violation of the Constitution." Osborne argued against this approach, as access to evidence, or even vindication through said access, would not automatically invalidate his conviction. The case was ultimately brought before the Supreme Court, which overturned a Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals judgement in Osborne's favor and ruled that "assuming Osborne’s claims can be pursued using §1983, he has no constitutional right to obtain postconviction access to the State’s evidence for DNA testing."
Opinion of the Court
Chief Justice Roberts delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Justices Scalia, Kennedy, Thomas, and Alito joined. Justice Alito filed a concurring opinion, in which Justice Kennedy joined, and in which Justice Thomas joined as to Part II. In the majority opinion, the Supreme Court found that Alaska provided for discovery in postconviction proceedings, and has through judicial decision, specified that such discovery is available to those seeking access to evidence for DNA testing. The Court decided these procedures are similar to those provided by federal law and the laws of other States, and they satisfy due process. Osbourne brought this case under section 1983 without ever using procedures in filing a state or federal habeas claim relying on actual innocence. The Court found he had not tried to use the process provided to him by the State or attempted to vindicate the liberty interest that was disputed in this case. As such, the Court found no substantive due process rights infringed.
Justice Stevens filed a dissenting opinion, in which Justices Ginsburg and Breyer joined, and in which Justice Souter joined as to Part I. Justice Stevens found Osborne made full use of available state procedures in his efforts to secure access to evidence for DNA testing so that he might avail himself of the postconviction relief afforded by the State of Alaska, but that he was repeatedly rebuffed in a manner which left doubt about the adequacy of the procedural protections afforded to litigants under Alaska Stat. §12.72.010(4), and which proved contrary to the majority assertion that Osborne could gain access to the evidence were he simply to seek it through the State's discovery procedures. Justice Souter filed a separate dissenting opinion on procedural grounds, arguing that while Alaska had facially reasonable conditions guaranteeing access to DNA evidence, the way it went about applying those conditions added up to procedural unfairness that violated the Due Process Clause.
Analysis and commentary
Some consider the decision to be a rebuke of the Innocence Project, which offered to fund Osborne's DNA testing and exonerated 240 prisoners as of the date of the decision. Additionally, former FBI Director William S. Sessions was among those who sought to have the evidence revealed, arguing the Justice Department should intervene and demand testing since the department's very name implies "justice". He wrote "Why should our criminal justice system be afraid?"
 See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 557
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
 District Attorney's Office for the Third Judicial District, et al. v. Osborne (SCOTUS wiki)
District Attorney’s Office v. Osborne (Cornell University Law School)
Justices Reject Inmate Right to DNA Tests (NYT)
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Alaska
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "District of Columbia Court of Appeals v. Feldman" ==> """
District of Columbia Court of Appeals v. Feldman, 460 U.S. 462 (1983), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court in which the Court enunciated a rule of civil procedure known as the Rooker-Feldman doctrine (also named for the earlier case of Rooker v. Fidelity Trust Co.).. The doctrine holds that lower United States federal courts may not sit in direct review of state court decisions..
Facts
The U.S. Congress enacted several pieces of legislation with respect to Washington, D.C.'s local judicial system. One required final judgments from the District of Columbia Court of Appeals to be treated like final judgments from the high court of any state; another permitted that Court of Appeals to create rules governing the qualifications and admissions of attorneys to practice in the D.C. courts. The Court of Appeals then passed rules requiring applicants to the D.C. bar to have graduated from an ABA-accredited law school.
The plaintiffs - Feldman and Hickey - were practicing attorneys from other states, but neither had graduated from ABA-accredited law schools. Feldman had been admitted to the Virginia bar through an apprenticeship, and had been admitted to the Maryland bar through a waiver of their requirements, based on his personal experience. Feldman was denied admission by the Committee on Admissions of the District of Columbia Bar, so he sought a similar waiver of the D.C. rule, sending a letter to the D.C. Court of Appeals that suggested that their absolute prohibition of lawyers who had not attended certain schools was a violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act, and of the Fourteenth Amendment. Nevertheless, the D.C. Courts issued an opinion confirming that they would not waive their requirement. Hickey had a similar background, but did not suggest that the D.C. Court of Appeals was in violation of any laws.
The plaintiff then filed an action in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, which denied jurisdiction based on Rooker'''s prohibition against federal courts hearing appeals of state court judgments. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia reversed, saying that this was not the kind of judicial determination that a federal court would be barred from hearing on appeal from a decision of a state court.
Issue
The Supreme Court considered in this case whether the district court had jurisdiction to review this decision, which required an inquiry into whether the decision to be reviewed is a "judicial" decision, or one that is merely administrative.
Result
The Supreme Court, in an opinion by Justice Brennan, held that the District Court had properly dismissed the case for lack of jurisdiction to hear an appeal of the highest court in a state. The denial of a waiver for admission to the bar, an evaluation of specific facts in light of an existing rule of law, was a judicial determination, only appealable to the Supreme Court.
The Court noted, however, that a facial challenge to the constitutionality of the law would not be considered a review of anything that had been decided by the D.C. Court of Appeals, and remanded this question to the lower court.
Dissent
Justice Stevens dissented, noting that each plaintiff had asked the Court of Appeals to exercise administrative'' discretion by waiving the requirements, but neither plaintiff had actually sought review of the rule of law itself. Although Feldman had suggested that the rule was in violation of the law, he had not asked for the Court of Appeals to rule that it was, but had merely indicated a challenge that he might bring in the federal district court.
See also
Admission to the bar in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 460
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Rooker–Feldman doctrine case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of the District of Columbia
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:American Bar Association
Category:Professional certification in law
"""

From "District of Columbia v. Heller" ==> """
District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S. 570 (2008), is a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States. It ruled that the Second Amendment to the U.S. Constitution protects an individual's right to keep and bear arms—unconnected with service in a militia—for traditionally lawful purposes such as self-defense within the home, and that the District of Columbia's handgun ban and requirement that lawfully owned rifles and shotguns be kept "unloaded and disassembled or bound by a trigger lock" violated this guarantee.. It also stated that the right to bear arms is not unlimited and that certain restrictions on guns and gun ownership were permissible. It was the first Supreme Court case to decide whether the Second Amendment protects an individual right to keep and bear arms for self-defense or whether the right was only intended for state militias.
Because of the District of Columbia's status as a federal enclave (it is not in any U.S. state), the decision did not address the question of whether the Second Amendment's protections are incorporated by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution against the states. This point was addressed two years later by McDonald v. City of Chicago (2010), in which it was found that they are.
On June 26, 2008, the Supreme Court affirmed by a vote of 5 to 4 the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit in Heller v. District of Columbia.478 F.3d 370 (D.C. Cir. 2007), cert. denied, 128 S. Ct. 2994 (2008)Misc. order Certiorari Denied p.2; Court: A constitutional right to a gun The Supreme Court struck down provisions of the Firearms Control Regulations Act of 1975 as unconstitutional, determined that handguns are "arms" for the purposes of the Second Amendment, found that the Regulations Act was an unconstitutional ban, and struck down the portion of the Act that requires all firearms including rifles and shotguns be kept "unloaded and disassembled or bound by a trigger lock". Prior to this decision, the law at issue also restricted residents from owning handguns except for those registered prior to 1975.
Lower court background
In 2002, Robert A. Levy, a senior fellow at the Cato Institute, began vetting plaintiffs with Clark M. Neily III for a planned Second Amendment lawsuit that he would personally finance. Although he himself had never owned a gun, as a constitutional scholar, he had an academic interest in the subject and wanted to model his campaign after the legal strategies of Thurgood Marshall, who had successfully led the challenges that overturned school segregation. They aimed for a group that would be diverse in terms of gender, race, economic background, and age and selected six plaintiffs from their mid-20s to early 60s: three men and three women; four white and two black:
Shelly Parker A software designer and former nurse who had been active in trying to rid her neighborhood of drugs. Parker is a single woman whose life had been threatened on numerous occasions by drug dealers who had sometimes tried to break into her house.
Tom G. Palmer A colleague of Robert A. Levy at the Cato Institute and the only plaintiff that Levy knew before the case began. Palmer, who is gay, defended himself with a 9mm handgun in 1982. While walking with a friend in San Jose, California, he was accosted by a gang of about 20 young men who used profane language regarding his sexual orientation and threatened his life. When he produced his gun, the men fled. Palmer believes that the handgun saved his life.
 Gillian St. Lawrence A mortgage broker who lives in the Georgetown section of D.C. and who owns several legally registered long guns that she uses for recreation in nearby Chantilly, Virginia. It had taken St. Lawrence two years to complete the registration process. She wanted to be able to use these guns to defend herself in her home and to be able to register a handgun.
 Tracey Ambeau (now Tracey Hanson) An employee of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Originally from St. Gabriel, Louisiana, she lives in the Adams Morgan neighborhood of D.C. with her husband, Andrew Hanson, who is from Waterloo, Iowa. They live in a high-crime neighborhood near Union Station in D.C. She grew up around guns and wanted one to defend her home.
 George Lyon A communications lawyer who had previously contacted the National Rifle Association (NRA) about filing a lawsuit to challenge the gun laws in the District of Columbia. Lyon held D.C. licenses for a shotgun and a rifle, but wanted to have a handgun in his home.
 Dick Anthony Heller A licensed special police officer for the District of Columbia. For his job, Heller carried a gun in federal office buildings, but was not allowed to have one in his home. Heller had lived in southeast D.C. near the Kentucky Courts public housing complex since 1970 and had seen the neighborhood "transformed from a child-friendly welfare complex to a drug haven". Heller had also approached the National Rifle Association about a lawsuit to overturn the D.C. gun ban, but the NRA declined.
Previous federal case law pertaining to the question of an individual's right to bear arms included United States v. Emerson, 270 F.3d 203 (5th Cir. 2001), which supported the right and Silveira v. Lockyer, 312 F.3d 1052 (9th Cir. 2002), which opposed the right. The Supreme Court ruling in United States v. Miller, 307 U.S. 174 (1939) was interpreted to support both sides of the issue.
District Court
In February 2003, the six residents of the District of Columbia filed a lawsuit in the District Court for the District of Columbia, challenging the constitutionality of provisions of the Firearms Control Regulations Act of 1975, a local law (part of the District of Columbia Code) enacted pursuant to District of Columbia home rule. This law restricted residents from owning handguns, excluding those grandfathered in by registration prior to 1975 and those possessed by active and retired law enforcement officers. The law also required that all firearms including rifles and shotguns be kept "unloaded and disassembled or bound by a trigger lock." They filed for an injunction pursuant to , 2202, and . District Court Judge Emmet G. Sullivan dismissed the lawsuit on March 31, 2004.
Court of Appeals
On appeal, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit reversed the dismissal in a 2-1 decision. The Court of Appeals struck down provisions of the Firearms Control Regulations Act as unconstitutional. Judges Karen L. Henderson, Thomas B. Griffith and Laurence H. Silberman formed the Court of Appeals panel, with Senior Circuit Judge Silberman writing the court's opinion and Circuit Judge Henderson dissenting.
The court's opinion first addressed whether appellants have standing to sue for declaratory and injunctive relief in section II (slip opinion, at 5–12). The court concluded that of the six plaintiffs, only Heller – who applied for a handgun permit but was denied – had standing.
The court then held that the Second Amendment "protects an individual right to keep and bear arms", that the "right existed prior to the formation of the new government under the Constitution", also stating that the right was "premised on the private use of arms for activities such as hunting and self-defense, the latter being understood as resistance to either private lawlessness or the depredations of a tyrannical government (or a threat from abroad)." They also noted that though the right to bear arms also helped preserve the citizen militia, "the activities [the Amendment] protects are not limited to militia service, nor is an individual's enjoyment of the right contingent upon his or her continued or intermittent enrollment in the militia." The court determined that handguns are "Arms" and concluded that thus they may not be banned by the District of Columbia.
The court also struck down the portion of the law that requires all firearms including rifles and shotguns be kept "unloaded and disassembled or bound by a trigger lock." The District argued that there is an implicit self-defense exception to these provisions, but the D.C. Circuit rejected this view, saying that the requirement amounted to a complete ban on functional firearms and prohibition on use for self-defense:Parker Opinion, Opinion of the Court, p. 57. "He simply contends that he is entitled to the possession of a 'functional' firearm to be employed in case of a threat to life or limb. The District responds that, notwithstanding the broad language of the Code, a judge would likely give the statute a narrowing construction when confronted with a self-defense justification. That might be so, but judicial lenity cannot make up for the unreasonable restriction of a constitutional right. Section 7-2507.02, like the bar on carrying a pistol within the home, amounts to a complete prohibition on the lawful use of handguns for self-defense. As such, we hold it unconstitutional."
In her dissent, Circuit Judge Henderson stated that Second Amendment rights did not extend to residents of District of Columbia, writing:
In April 2007, the District and Mayor Adrian Fenty petitioned for rehearing en banc, arguing that the ruling created inter- and intra-jurisdictional conflict. On May 8, the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit denied the request to rehear the case, by a 6–4 vote.
Supreme Court
The defendants petitioned the United States Supreme Court to hear the case. The Supreme Court granted certiorari on November 20, 2007.Cert. granted, District of Columbia v. Heller 128 S. Ct. 645 (2007). The court rephrased the question to be decided as follows:
This represented the first time since the 1939 case United States v. Miller that the Supreme Court had directly addressed the scope of the Second Amendment.
Amicus curiae briefs
Because of the controversial nature of the case, it garnered much attention from many groups on both sides of the gun rights issue. Many of those groups filed amicus curiae (friend of the court) briefs, about 47 urging the court to affirm the case and about 20 to remand it.
A majority of the members of Congress signed the brief authored by Stephen Halbrook advising that the case be affirmed overturning the ban on handguns not otherwise restricted by Congress. Vice President Dick Cheney joined in this brief, acting in his role as President of the United States Senate, and breaking with the George W. Bush administration's official position. Arizona Senator John McCain, Republican, also signed the brief. Then-Illinois Senator Barack Obama did not.
A majority of the states signed the brief of Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott, authored by Abbott's solicitor general, Ted Cruz, advising that the case be affirmed, while at the same time emphasizing that the states have a strong interest in maintaining each of the states' laws prohibiting and regulating firearms. Law enforcement organizations, including the Fraternal Order of Police and the Southern States Police Benevolent Association, also filed a brief urging that the case be affirmed.
A number of organizations signed friend of the court briefs advising that the case be remanded, including the United States Department of Justice and Attorneys General of New York, Hawaii, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, and Puerto Rico. Additionally, friend of the court briefs to remand were filed by a spectrum of religious and anti-violence groups, a number of cities and mayors, and many police chiefs and law enforcement organizations.
A collection of organizations and prominent scholars, represented by attorney Jeffrey Teichert, submitted an "errors brief" arguing that many of the common historical and factual "myths and misrepresentations" generally offered in favor of banning handguns were in error. Teichert's brief argued from a historical perspective that the Second Amendment protected an individual right to keep and bear arms.
Oral arguments
thumb|right|Robert A. Levy (left) and Alan Gura, counsel for Heller
The Supreme Court heard oral arguments in the case on March 18, 2008. Both the transcript and the audio of the argument have been released. Each side was initially allotted 30 minutes to argue its case, with U.S. Solicitor General Paul D. Clement allotted 15 minutes to present the federal government's views. During the argument, however, extra time was extended to the parties, and the argument ran 23 minutes over the allotted time.
Walter E. Dellinger of the law firm O'Melveny & Myers, also a professor at Duke University Law School and former Acting Solicitor General, argued the District's side before the Supreme Court. Dellinger was assisted by Thomas Goldstein of Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld, Robert Long of Covington & Burling and D.C. Solicitor General Todd Kim. The law firms assisting the District worked pro bono.
Alan Gura, of the D.C.-based law firm Gura & Possessky, was lead counsel for Heller, and argued on his behalf before the Supreme Court. Robert Levy, a senior fellow at the Cato Institute, and Clark Neily, a senior attorney at the Institute for Justice, were his co-counsel.
Decision
thumb|Justice Antonin Scalia wrote the majority opinion.
The Supreme Court held:Heller Opinion, Opinion of the Court, pp. 1–3.
(1) The Second Amendment protects an individual right to possess a firearm unconnected with service in a militia, and to use that arm for traditionally lawful purposes, such as self-defense within the home. Pp. 2–53.
(a) The Amendment's prefatory clause announces a purpose, but does not limit or expand the scope of the second part, the operative clause. The operative clause's text and history demonstrate that it connotes an individual right to keep and bear arms. Pp. 2–22.
(b) The prefatory clause comports with the Court's interpretation of the operative clause. The "militia" comprised all males physically capable of acting in concert for the common defense. The Antifederalists feared that the Federal Government would disarm the people in order to disable this citizens' militia, enabling a politicized standing army or a select militia to rule. The response was to deny Congress power to abridge the ancient right of individuals to keep and bear arms, so that the ideal of a citizens' militia would be preserved. Pp. 22–28.
(c) The Court's interpretation is confirmed by analogous arms-bearing rights in state constitutions that preceded and immediately followed the Second Amendment. Pp. 28–30.
(d) The Second Amendment's drafting history, while of dubious interpretive worth, reveals three state Second Amendment proposals that unequivocally referred to an individual right to bear arms. Pp. 30–32.
(e) Interpretation of the Second Amendment by scholars, courts and legislators, from immediately after its ratification through the late 19th century also supports the Court's conclusion. Pp. 32–47.
(f) None of the Court's precedents forecloses the Court's interpretation. Neither United States v. Cruikshank, 92 U.S. 542 (1876), nor Presser v. Illinois, 116 U.S. 252 (1886), refutes the individual-rights interpretation. United States v. Miller, 307 U.S. 174 (1939), does not limit the right to keep and bear arms to militia purposes, but rather limits the type of weapon to which the right applies to those used by the militia, i.e., those in common use for lawful purposes.
(2) Like most rights, the Second Amendment right is not unlimited. It is not a right to keep and carry any weapon whatsoever in any manner whatsoever and for whatever purpose: For example, concealed weapons prohibitions have been upheld under the Amendment or state analogues. The Court's opinion should not be taken to cast doubt on longstanding prohibitions on the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill, or laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive places such as schools and government buildings, or laws imposing conditions and qualifications on the commercial sale of arms. Miller's holding that the sorts of weapons protected are those "in common use at the time" finds support in the historical tradition of prohibiting the carrying of dangerous and unusual weapons. Pp. 54–56.
(3) The handgun ban and the trigger-lock requirement (as applied to self-defense) violate the Second Amendment. The District's total ban on handgun possession in the home amounts to a prohibition on an entire class of "arms" that Americans overwhelmingly choose for the lawful purpose of self-defense. Under any of the standards of scrutiny the Court has applied to enumerated constitutional rights, this prohibition – in the place where the importance of the lawful defense of self, family, and property is most acute – would fail constitutional muster. Similarly, the requirement that any lawful firearm in the home be disassembled or bound by a trigger lock makes it impossible for citizens to use arms for the core lawful purpose of self-defense and is hence unconstitutional. Because Heller conceded at oral argument that the D.C. licensing law is permissible if it is not enforced arbitrarily and capriciously, the Court assumes that a license will satisfy his prayer for relief and does not address the licensing requirement. Assuming he is not disqualified from exercising Second Amendment rights, the District must permit Heller to register his handgun and must issue him a license to carry it in the home. Pp. 56–64.
The Opinion of the Court, delivered by Justice Scalia, was joined by Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr. and by Justices Anthony M. Kennedy, Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito.Heller Opinion, Opinion of the Court, p. 3.
Second Amendment findings and reasoning
The Illinois Supreme Court in People v. Aguilar (2013), summed up the Hellers findings and reasoning:
Issues addressed by the majority
The core holding in D.C. v. Heller is that the right to keep and bear arms is an individual right intimately tied to the natural right of self-defense.
The Scalia majority invokes much historical material to support its finding that the right to keep and bear arms belongs to individuals; more precisely, Scalia asserts in the Court's opinion that the "people" to whom the Second Amendment right is accorded are the same "people" who enjoy First and Fourth Amendment protection: "' The Constitution was written to be understood by the voters; its words and phrases were used in their normal and ordinary as distinguished from technical meaning. United States v. Sprague, 282 U.S. 716, 731 (1931); see also Gibbons v. Ogden, 9 Wheat. 1, 188 (1824). Normal meaning may, of course, include an idiomatic meaning, but it excludes secret or technical meanings ... ."
With that finding as an anchor, the Court ruled a total ban on operative handguns in the home is unconstitutional, as the ban runs afoul of both the self-defense purpose of the Second Amendment – a purpose not previously articulated by the Court – and the "in common use at the time" prong of the  Miller decision: Since handguns are in common use, their ownership is protected.
The Court applies as the remedy that "[a]ssuming that Heller is not disqualified from the exercise of Second Amendment rights, the District must permit him to register his handgun and must issue him a license to carry it in the home." The Court, additionally, hinted that other remedy might be available in the form of eliminating the license requirement for carrying in the home, but that no such relief had been requested: "Respondent conceded at oral argument that he does not 'have a problem with ... licensing' and that the District's law is permissible so long as it is 'not enforced in an arbitrary and capricious manner.' Tr. of Oral Arg. 74–75. We, therefore, assume that petitioners' issuance of a license will satisfy respondent's prayer for relief and do not address the licensing requirement."
In regard to the scope of the right, the Court wrote, in an obiter dictum, "Although we do not undertake an exhaustive historical analysis today of the full scope of the Second Amendment, nothing in our opinion should be taken to cast doubt on longstanding prohibitions on the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill, or laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive places such as schools and government buildings, or laws imposing conditions and qualifications on the commercial sale of arms."Heller Opinion, Opinion of the Court, p. 54.
The Court also added dicta regarding the private ownership of machine guns. In doing so, it suggested the elevation of the "in common use at the time" prong of the Miller decision, which by itself protects handguns, over the first prong (protecting arms that "have some reasonable relationship to the preservation or efficiency of a well regulated militia"), which may not by itself protect machine guns: "It may be objected that if weapons that are most useful in military service – M16 rifles and the like – may be banned, then the Second Amendment right is completely detached from the prefatory clause. But as we have said, the conception of the militia at the time of the Second Amendment's ratification was the body of all citizens capable of military service, who would bring the sorts of lawful weapons that they possessed at home."Heller Opinion, Opinion of the Court, p. 55.
The Court did not address which level of judicial review should be used by lower courts in deciding future cases claiming infringement of the right to keep and bear arms: "[S]ince this case represents this Court's first in-depth examination of the Second Amendment, one should not expect it to clarify the entire field." The Court states, "If all that was required to overcome the right to keep and bear arms was a rational basis, the Second Amendment would be redundant with the separate constitutional prohibitions on irrational laws, and would have no effect."Heller Opinion, Opinion of the Court, pp. 56–57. Also, regarding Justice Breyer's proposal of a "judge-empowering 'interest-balancing inquiry'," the Court states, "We know of no other enumerated constitutional right whose core protection has been subjected to a freestanding 'interest-balancing' approach."Heller Opinion, Opinion of the Court, p. 62.
Dissenting opinions
thumb|right|Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a dissenting opinion.
In a dissenting opinion, Justice John Paul Stevens stated that the court's judgment was "a strained and unpersuasive reading" which overturned longstanding precedent, and that the court had "bestowed a dramatic upheaval in the law". Stevens also stated that the amendment was notable for the "omission of any statement of purpose related to the right to use firearms for hunting or personal self-defense" which was present in the Declarations of Rights of Pennsylvania and Vermont.
The Stevens dissent seems to rest on four main points of disagreement: that the Founders would have made the individual right aspect of the Second Amendment express if that was what was intended; that the "militia" preamble and exact phrase "to keep and bear arms" demands the conclusion that the Second Amendment touches on state militia service only; that many lower courts' later "collective-right" reading of the Miller decision constitutes stare decisis, which may only be overturned at great peril; and that the Court has not considered gun-control laws (e.g., the National Firearms Act) unconstitutional. The dissent concludes, "The Court would have us believe that over 200 years ago, the Framers made a choice to limit the tools available to elected officials wishing to regulate civilian uses of weapons.... I could not possibly conclude that the Framers made such a choice."
Justice Stevens's dissent was joined by Justices David Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Stephen Breyer.
Justice Breyer filed a separate dissenting opinion, joined by the same dissenting Justices, which sought to demonstrate that, starting from the premise of an individual-rights view, the District of Columbia's handgun ban and trigger lock requirement would nevertheless be permissible limitations on the right.
The Breyer dissent looks to early municipal fire-safety laws that forbade the storage of gunpowder (and in Boston the carrying of loaded arms into certain buildings), and on nuisance laws providing fines or loss of firearm for imprudent usage, as demonstrating the Second Amendment has been understood to have no impact on the regulation of civilian firearms. The dissent argues the public safety necessity of gun-control laws, quoting that "guns were responsible for 69 deaths in this country each day.'"
With these two supports, the Breyer dissent goes on to conclude, "there simply is no untouchable constitutional right guaranteed by the Second Amendment to keep loaded handguns in the house in crime-ridden urban areas." It proposes that firearms laws be reviewed by balancing the interests (i.e., "'interest-balancing' approach") of Second Amendment protections against the government's compelling interest of preventing crime.
The Breyer dissent also objected to the "common use" distinction used by the majority to distinguish handguns from machine guns: "But what sense does this approach make? According to the majority's reasoning, if Congress and the States lift restrictions on the possession and use of machineguns, and people buy machineguns to protect their homes, the Court will have to reverse course and find that the Second Amendment does, in fact, protect the individual self-defense-related right to possess a machine-gun...There is no basis for believing that the Framers intended such circular reasoning."Heller Opinion, Breyer, J., dissenting, p. 42.
Non-party involvement
National Rifle Association (NRA)
Attorney Alan Gura, in a 2003 filing, used the term "sham litigation" to describe the NRA's attempts to have Parker (aka Heller) consolidated with its own case challenging the D.C. law. Gura also stated that "the NRA was adamant about not wanting the Supreme Court to hear the case". These concerns were based on NRA lawyers' assessment that the justices at the time the case was filed might reach an unfavorable decision. Cato Institute senior fellow Robert Levy, co-counsel to the Parker plaintiffs, has stated that the Parker plaintiffs "faced repeated attempts by the NRA to derail the litigation." He also stated that "The N.R.A.'s interference in this process set us back and almost killed the case. It was a very acrimonious relationship."
Wayne LaPierre, the NRA's chief executive officer, confirmed the NRA's misgivings. "There was a real dispute on our side among the constitutional scholars about whether there was a majority of justices on the Supreme Court who would support the Constitution as written," Mr. LaPierre said. Both Levy and LaPierre said the NRA and Mr. Levy's team were now on good terms.
Elaine McArdle wrote in the Harvard Law Bulletin: "If Parker is the long-awaited "clean" case, one reason may be that proponents of the individual-rights view of the Second Amendment – including the National Rifle Association, which filed an amicus brief in the case – have learned from earlier defeats, and crafted strategies to maximize the chances of Supreme Court review." The NRA did eventually support the litigation by filing an amicus brief with the Court arguing that the plaintiffs in Parker had standing to sue and that the D.C. ban was unconstitutional under the Second Amendment.
Chris Cox, executive director of the NRA's Institute for Legislative Action, had indicated support of federal legislation which would repeal the D.C. gun ban. Opponents of the legislation argued that this would have rendered the Parker case moot, and would have effectively eliminated the possibility that the case would be heard by the Supreme Court.
Immediately after the Supreme Court's ruling, the NRA filed a lawsuit against the city of Chicago over its handgun ban, followed the next day by a lawsuit against the city of San Francisco over its ban of handguns in public housing.
Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence
The Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence opposed the arguments made by the plaintiffs in Parker, and filed amicus curiae against those arguments in both the District and Circuit courts.
Paul Helmke, the president of the Brady Campaign, suggested to D.C. before the Court granted certiorari that it modify its gun laws rather than appeal to the Supreme Court. Helmke has written that if the Supreme Court upholds the Circuit court ruling, it "could lead to all current and proposed firearms laws being called into question."
After the ruling, Paul Helmke stated that, "the classic 'slippery slope' argument", "that even modest gun control would lead down the path to a complete ban on gun ownership", "is now gone." Helmke added that, "The Court also rejected the absolutist misreading of the Second Amendment that some use to argue 'any gun, any time for anyone,' which many politicians have used as an excuse to do nothing about the scourge of gun violence in our country and to block passage of common sense gun laws."
Reactions
To the lower court rulings
Various experts expressed opinions on the D.C. Circuit's decision.
Harvard Law School professor Laurence Tribe contended that the Second Amendment protects an individual right, and predicted that if Parker is reviewed by the Supreme Court "there's a really quite decent chance that it will be affirmed." However, Professor Tribe has also argued that the District's ban on one class of weapons does not violate the Second Amendment even under an individual rights view.
Erwin Chemerinsky, then of Duke Law School and now dean of the University of California, Berkeley School of Law, argued that the District of Columbia's handgun laws, even assuming an "individual rights" interpretation of the Second Amendment, could be justified as reasonable regulations and thus upheld as constitutional. Professor Chemerinsky believes that the regulation of guns should be analyzed in the same way "as other regulation of property under modern constitutional law" and "be allowed so long as it is rationally related to achieving a legitimate government purpose." However, the dicta in Heller suggests that applying a mere rational basis analysis is an incorrect reading of the Constitution and would, in fact, defeat the entire purpose of the Second Amendment.
To the Supreme Court rulings
Cato Institute senior fellow Robert Levy, co-counsel to the Parker plaintiffs, agreed with the court's ruling but describes that his interpretation of the Second Amendment would not preclude all governmental regulation of private ownership of weapons:
Clark Neily, an attorney for Dick Heller in this case, has said regarding Heller:
Richard Posner, judge for the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, compares Heller to Roe v. Wade, stating that it created a federal constitutional right that did not previously exist, and he asserts that the originalist method – to which Justice Antonin Scalia claimed to adhere – would have yielded the opposite result of the majority opinion.
J. Harvie Wilkinson III, chief judge of United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, consents to Posner's analysis, stating that Heller "encourages Americans to do what conservative jurists warned for years they should not do: bypass the ballot and seek to press their political agenda in the courts."
Alan Gura, Lead Counsel for Respondent in Heller rejects Wilkinson's criticism, stating that "Rather, the Court affirmed the Second Amendment's original public meaning, as confirmed by its plain text. Having determined the Amendment's meaning, the Court showed the proper level of deference to the D.C. City Council's outright repudiation of the constitutional text: none."
Post-ruling impacts
Since the June 2008 ruling, over 80 different cases have been heard in lower federal courts on the constitutionality of a wide variety of gun control laws. These courts have heard lawsuits in regard to bans of firearm possession by felons, drug addicts, illegal immigrants, and individuals convicted of domestic violence misdemeanors. Also, cases have been heard on the constitutionality of laws prohibiting certain types of weapons, such as machine guns, sawed-off shotguns and/or specific types of weapons attachments. In addition, courts have heard challenges to laws barring guns in post offices and near schools and laws outlawing "straw" purchases, carrying of concealed weapons, types of ammunition and possession of unregistered firearms. There have been as of May 2019 more than 1,370 Second Amendment cases nationwide which challenged restrictive gun laws of various kinds since the Supreme Court issued its decision in Heller. In most cases the gun safety law or criminal conviction at issue has been however upheld by the lower courts. Provided with only minimum guidance from the Supreme Court in Heller the lower courts were tasked with defining the scope of the Second Amendment rights and the proper standard of review for evaluating Second Amendment claims in the aforementioned cases.
The courts have upheld most of the above-mentioned laws as being constitutional. The basis for the lower court rulings is the dicta in the paragraph near the end of the Heller ruling that states:
Consistently since the Heller ruling, the lower federal courts have ruled that almost all gun control measures as presently legislated are lawful and that according to UCLA professor of constitutional law Adam Winkler: "What gun rights advocates are discovering is that the vast majority of gun control laws fit within these categories."
Robert Levy, the executive director of the Cato Institute who funded the Heller litigation has commented on this passage describing constitutionally acceptable forms of prohibitions of firearms: "I would have preferred that that not have been there," and that this paragraph in Scalia's opinion "created more confusion than light."
Similar to the lifting of gun bans mentioned previously in the settlements of lawsuits filed post-Heller, in US v. Arzberger, also decided post-Heller, it was noted: 
District of Columbia
right|thumb|Dick Heller, pictured here in 2018
The D.C. government indicated it would continue to use zoning ordinances to prevent firearms dealers from operating and selling to citizens residing in the District, meaning it would continue to be difficult for residents to legally purchase guns in the District.. Additionally, the District enacted new firearms restrictions in an effort to cure the constitutional defects in the ordinance that the Supreme Court had identified in Heller. The new provisions were: (1) the firearms registration procedures; (2) the prohibition on assault weapons; and (3) the prohibition on large capacity ammunition feeding devices. In response, Dick Heller challenged these new restrictions filing a civil suit named Heller v. District of Columbia (Civil Action No. 08-1289 (RMU), No. 23., 25) where he requested a summary judgment to vacate the new prohibitions. On March 26, 2010, the D.C. District Judge Ricardo M. Urbina denied Dick Heller's request and granted the cross motion, stating that the court "concludes that the regulatory provisions that the plaintiffs challenge permissibly regulate the exercise of the core Second Amendment right to use arms for the purpose of self-defense in the home."
Dick Heller's application to register his semi-automatic pistol was rejected because the gun was a bottom-loading weapon, and according to the District's interpretation, all bottom-loading guns, including magazine-fed non-assault-style rifles, are outlawed because they are grouped with machine guns. Revolvers will likely not fall under such a ban.
On December 16, 2008, the D.C. Council unanimously passed the Firearms Registration Emergency Amendment Act of 2008 which addresses the issues raised in the Heller Supreme Court decision, and also puts in place a number of registration requirements to update and strengthen the District's gun laws.
Justice Antonin Scalia's opinion for the majority provided Second Amendment protection for commonly used and popular handguns but not for atypical arms or arms used for unlawful purposes, such as short-barreled shotguns. Scalia stated: "Whatever the reason, handguns are the most popular weapon chosen by Americans for self-defense in the home, and a complete prohibition of their use is invalid." "We think that Miller's "ordinary military equipment" language must be read in tandem with what comes after: "[O]rdinarily when called for [militia] service [able-bodied] men were expected to appear bearing arms supplied by themselves and of the kind in common use at the time." 307 U. S., at 179." "We therefore read Miller to say only that the Second Amendment does not protect those weapons not typically possessed by law-abiding citizens for lawful purposes, such as short-barreled shotguns." "It may be objected that if weapons that are most useful in military service – M-16 rifles and the like – may be banned, then the Second Amendment right is completely detached from the prefatory clause. But as we have said, the conception of the militia at the time of the Second Amendment's ratification was the body of all citizens capable of military service, who would bring the sorts of lawful weapons that they possessed at home to militia duty."
On July 24, 2014, the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia ruled, in Palmer v. District of Columbia, that the District's total ban on the public carrying of ready-to-use handguns is unconstitutional.Tom G. Palmer v. District of Columbia, July 24, 2014 (docket entry 51 on July 26, 2014), case no. 1:09-cv-01482-FJS, U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia. In its decision, the Court stated: "[ . . . ] the Court finds that the District of Columbia's complete ban on the carrying of handguns in public is unconstitutional. Accordingly, the Court grants Plaintiffs' motion for summary judgment and enjoins Defendants from enforcing the home limitations of D.C. Code § 7-2502.02(a)(4) and enforcing D.C. Code § 22-4504(a) unless and until such time as the District of Columbia adopts a licensing mechanism consistent with constitutional standards enabling people to exercise their Second Amendment right to bear arms. Furthermore, this injunction prohibits the District from completely banning the carrying of handguns in public for self-defense by otherwise qualified non-residents based solely on the fact that they are not residents of the District."Memorandum - Decision and Order, pp. 16-17, Tom G. Palmer v. District of Columbia, July 24, 2014 (docket entry 51 on July 26, 2014), case no. 1:09-cv-01482-FJS, U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia (footnote omitted; bolded typeface in the original).
New York
thumb|250px|Bloomberg delivering a speech
Mayor of New York City Michael Bloomberg said that "all of the laws on the books in New York State and New York City" would be allowed by the ruling as "reasonable regulation." Robert Levy has stated that the current New York City gun laws are "not much different" from the D.C. ban that has been overturned. The National Rifle Association and other gun-rights advocates have not ruled out suing New York City, especially over the definition of "reasonable regulation".
Southern District of New York Magistrate Judge James Francis has said that, prior to Heller, it would not have been considered unreasonable to require a defendant to surrender a firearm as a condition of pretrial release. Specifically, according to Judge Francis:
Maloney v. Rice (a.k.a. Maloney v. Cuomo and Maloney v. Spitzer),  originally held that the 2nd Amendment does not apply to the states in the Second Circuit. The case involved a state ban on Nunchaku sticks (a martial arts weapon) in New York. In a memorandum opinion dated June 29, 2010, the Supreme Court vacated the Second Circuit decision in Maloney and remanded for further consideration in light of the holding in McDonald v. City of Chicago that the Second Amendment does apply to the states. The Second Circuit has remanded the case to the trial court.
Illinois
The NRA has filed five related lawsuits since the Heller decision. In four Illinois lawsuits, the NRA sought to have the Second Amendment incorporated by the Fourteenth Amendment, causing the Second Amendment to apply to state and local jurisdictions and not just to the federal government. Three Illinois lawsuits have been negotiated and settled out of court involving agreements that repeal gun ban ordinances and did not result in incorporation of the Second Amendment to state and local jurisdictions. The fourth NRA lawsuit against Chicago was rejected. The NRA appealed the case to the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals. On June 2, 2009, the Court of Appeals affirmed the district court's decision, based on the theory that Heller applied only to the Federal Government (including the District of Columbia), and not to states or their subordinate jurisdictions. This opinion directly conflicts with the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals' earlier decision, holding that Heller applies to states as well.
On June 28, 2010, the Supreme Court reversed the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit's decision in McDonald v. City of Chicago and remanded it back to Seventh Circuit to resolve conflicts between certain Chicago gun restrictions and the Second Amendment.
Chicago's handgun law was likened to the D.C. handgun ban by Justice Breyer.Heller Opinion, Breyer, J., dissenting, p. 34. "Chicago has a law very similar to the District's, and many of its suburbs also ban handgun possession under most circumstances."
Similarly, three Illinois municipalities with gun control measures on the books that previously had banned all handguns have rescinded their handgun bans. These cities were Morton Grove, Illinois, Wilmette, another Illinois village, and Evanston, Illinois which enacted a partial repeal of its handgun ban.
In Ezell v. Chicago, decided July 6, 2011, the Seventh Circuit reversed a district court decision that the post-McDonald measures adopted by the City of Chicago were constitutional. The Chicago law required firearms training in a shooting range in order to obtain a gun permit, but also banned shooting ranges within the City of Chicago. The city had argued that applicants could obtain their training at gun ranges in the suburbs. The opinion noted that Chicago could not infringe Second Amendment rights on the grounds that they could be exercised elsewhere, any more than it could infringe the right to freedom of speech on the grounds that citizens could speak elsewhere.
California
On January 14, 2009, in Guy Montag Doe v. San Francisco Housing Authority, the San Francisco Housing Authority reached a settlement out of court with the NRA, which allows residents to possess legal firearms within a SFHA apartment building. The San Francisco lawsuit resulted in the elimination of the gun ban from the SF Housing Authority residential lease terms. Tim Larsen speaking for the Housing Authority said that they never intended to enforce its 2005 housing lease gun ban against law-abiding gun owners and have never done so.
Idaho
On January 10, 2014, in Morris v. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the District Court struck down a Corps of Engineers regulation barring possession of loaded guns in recreation areas surrounding Corps dams. The court held that tents are akin to homes, and under Heller, Second Amendment rights are protected.
Legacy
The decision in McDonald v. City of Chicago, which was brought in response to Heller and decided in 2010, did invalidate much of Chicago's gun purchase and registration laws, and has called into question many other state and local laws restricting purchase, possession, and carry of firearms.
Justice Stevens later called the decision "unquestionably the most clearly incorrect decision that the Supreme Court announced during my tenure on the bench" and called for a Constitutional amendment overruling it".
Stephen Halbrook, a lawyer and Second Amendment analyst who successfully argued three firearms-related cases before the Supreme Court, concluded the majority's opinion in Heller "relied on text, history, and tradition." Halbrook asserted that the individual right to bear arms was not an invention of gun rights activists in the preceding few decades, but was in fact a textualist interpretation confirmed by the historical context of the Second Amendment. This included the English Declaration of Rights of 1689, as well as "post-ratification commentary, antebellum judicial opinions, Reconstruction legislation, and post-Civil War commentary."
The Court's statement that the right secured by the Second Amendment is limited has been widely discussed by lower courts and the media. According to Justice John Paul Stevens, he was able to persuade Justice Anthony M. Kennedy to ask for “some important changes” to Justice Scalia’s opinion, so that the final version of Heller “should not be taken to cast doubt” on the many gun laws existing in the United States.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 554
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Firearm case law in the United States
Gun politics in the United States
Incorporation (Bill of Rights)#Amendment II
Second Amendment to the United States Constitution
References
Sources
, 
, 
External links
Archive of case pleadings, orders, and opinions. Maintained by Gura & Possessky P.L.L.C., plaintiff's counsel.
United States Department of Justice Solicitor General 1-11-2008 amicus curiae brief
Audio commentary by Appellant's Attorney Clark Neily regarding his views on the Second Amendment, dated January 17, 2008
Audio/visual recording of the arguments (RealMedia)
Audio recording of the arguments (MP3)
Harvard Law Review forum: Heller is a "Second Amendment Revolution" in the Harvard Law Record
CRS Report for Congress: "District of Columbia v. Heller: The Supreme Court and the Second Amendment" (public domain – can be copied into article with citations)
Summary of District of Columbia v. Heller
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Second Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:District of Columbia law
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of the District of Columbia
Category:Gun politics in the United States
"""

From "District of Columbia v. John R. Thompson Co." ==> """
District of Columbia v. John R. Thompson Co. Inc., 346 U.S. 100 (1953), is a United States Supreme Court case which began on April 30, 1953 over the validity of the local Washington Acts of 1872 and 1873. The Acts prohibited segregation in public places within the District. With the court's support, the legal ramifications of the 1872 and 1873 Acts could once again be enforced. The case transpired during growing racial tension in the nation's capital. Throughout Washington, the black community had grown tired of unfair treatment regarding housing, businesses, and education. But, change came soon enough through the courts. On June 8, 1953, the Supreme Court unanimously ruled that the segregating policies practiced by Thompson's Cafeteria were illegal, marking a huge victory for the national black community.. 
 Context 
This challenge to segregation initially came from an African American activist, Mary Church Terrell. At 87, she was the chair of Washington's Coordinating Committee, which fought for desegregation across the city. Thanks to research by Howard University Law School Librarian Mercer Daniel,Chris Meyers Asch & Derek Musgrove, Chocolate City: Race and Democracy in the Nations Capital. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, forthcoming, ch. 9 p. 11. lawyers from the D.C. Lawyers Guild such as Charles Hamilton Houston, Joseph Forer, and David ReinChris Meyers Asch & Derek Musgrove, Chocolate City: Race and Democracy in the Nations Capital. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, forthcoming, ch. 9 p. 11 were able to notify Terrell that a number of laws from the Reconstruction Era that outlawed segregation, while not enforced, had technically never been repealed. Consequently, on January 27, 1950, Terrell and a small group of friends walked through the doors of Thompson's diner and requested a table. After the manager promptly refused to serve them, the Coordinating Committee thrust the issue of segregated eating establishments onto the legal and social stage of the nation's capital.
Given its long list of civil rights all-stars including Walter E. Washington, William Hastie, Robert C. Weaver, and Annie Stein, the Coordinating Committee obtained media attention and put pressure on local officials. Normally when it was presented with segregated eating establishments, its actions included boycotts, protests, and silent negotiations. The group also amassed and distributed a wildly-popular list of preferred restaurants that served both blacks and whites as a means of putting economic pressure on more- reluctant restaurant owners. In this instance, the Committee decided to use Thompson's diner on 14th Street as the example to challenge in court. After the restaurant manager rejected Terrell and her friends, the Committee pressed the District Commissioners to look more closely at the restaurant for failing to comply with the Acts of 1872 and 1873.
 Lower courts 
Noticing that the Acts had clearly never been repealed, the City Commissioners immediately sided with Terrell. However, Thompson's manager was still unwilling to budge on his stance. Consequently, the District sued it on Terrell and the committee's behalf, and the case was brought to the local Municipal Court in July 1950. The Board of Trade, a notoriously-white elitist group that actively lobbied for Congress to uphold segregation, came to the legal aid of the restaurant. The Municipal Court quickly rejected the District's claim that the Reconstruction laws were still in effect stating that the laws "had been repealed by implication on the enactment by Congress of the Organic Act of June 11, 1878."District of Columbia v. John R. Thompson Co. Supreme Court. 08 June 1953: 6. That Act restructured the local government to contain only three presidentially-appointed commissioners. Therefore, the Court argued that since the former laws had been put in place by an obsolete government, they no longer applied. A lengthy appeals process followed.
In May 1951, Washington's Municipal Court of Appeals overturned the original ruling. In discussing the 1872 and 1873 laws, the Appeals Court stated that "the former Act insofar as it applied to restaurants, had been repealed, but the latter act was still in effect." Therefore, the 1873 Act was still valid because there were no laws that automatically repealed measures put in place by former officials. However, the victory was short-lived because the verdict did not go into effect until all appeals had been heard.Chris Myers Asch with G. Derek Musgrove, Chocolate City: Race and Democracy in the Nation’s Capital. (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, forthcoming), ch. 9, p. 9. In January 1953, the federal U.S. Court of Appeals overruled the lower-level verdict by one vote: 5–4.Chris Myers Asch with G. Derek Musgrove, Chocolate City: Race and Democracy in the Nation’s Capital. (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, forthcoming), ch. 9, p. 10. Given the contradicting verdicts from various judges, the case soon found itself on the docket of the US Supreme Court. On April 30, 1953, the Supreme Court began its review of the case.
Supreme Court decision
The Supreme Court found flaws in the arguments put forth on Thompson's behalf. For one, the Court stated that "the failure of the executive branch to enforce a law does not result in its modification or repeal."District of Columbia v. John R. Thompson Co. Supreme Court. 08 June 1953: 9. Essentially, although the city did not enforce the 1873 Act for roughly eight decades, it was still in effect. In addition, the Supreme Court reinforced that only Congress had "the power to pass laws which would alter or repeal the Acts of the Legislative Assembly." The Court referenced how Congress, in the Organic Act of 1878, took away all legislative power from the local municipal government in Washington. Therefore, only Congress thereafter had the ability to repeal the 1873 Act, which protected the rights of all races in public places. Since Congress did not act on its power to appeal the Act, it was technically still in effect. Finally, the Supreme Court also touched on the controversy over the Code of 1901, which gave the local, Washington government more autonomy. The Court stated that "even if we assume that after the Code of 1901 the Commissioners had the authority to replace these anti-discrimination laws with others ones, we find no indication that they ever did so."District of Columbia v. John R. Thompson Co. Supreme Court. 08 June 1953: 10.
Consequently, on June 8, 1953, the Supreme Court overturned the decision of the Appeals Court and ruled in favor of the District of Columbia.
 Aftermath 
Terrell stated, "I will die happy to know that the children of my group will not grow up thinking they are inferior because they are deprived of rights which children of other racial groups enjoy." At the age of 90, she was ecstatic to have not only the privilege but also the right at last to be served anywhere in the nation's capital. Along with Hurd v. Hodge and Bolling v. Sharpe, the case helped end institutionalized segregation in Washington.
References
Bibliography
Caplan, Marvin. 1989. “Eat Anywhere!”. Washington History 1 (1). Historical Society of Washington, D.C.: 24–39. http://www.jstor.org/stable/40072980. Pg26    
Supreme Court of the United States June 8, 1953346 U.S. 10073 S.Ct. 100797 L.Ed. 1480     
D.C. v. John R. Thompson Co., 346 U.S. 100, 73 S. Ct. 1007, 97 L. Ed. 1480 (1953)
Alice Dunnigan, “Resents Ike’s Taking Credit For Winning DC Restaurant Case,” New York Amsterdam News, 20 January 1953.
External links
Category:1953 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:Legal history of the District of Columbia
Category:African-American history of Washington, D.C.
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "District of Columbia v. Wesby" ==> """
District of Columbia v. Wesby, 583 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that police officers had probable cause to arrest those attending a party in Washington, D.C..
Facts and procedural history
In March 2008, police officers in Washington, D.C. were called to a residence due to noise complaints. When asked, guests gave conflicting reasons for why they were in the residence, and the homeowner ultimately indicated he had not given permission for the party and that the party's host, "Peaches", had not yet signed a lease for the residence. Though the 21 attendees were arrested, charges were later dropped.
A jury later awarded those arrested $680,000 in damage, and the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit determined that the arresting officers did not have immunity from legal repercussions for the arrests. The Supreme Court reversed and remanded this decision, and held that the officers had probable cause to arrest the party attendees and were entitled to qualified immunity.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 583
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States class action case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2018 in United States case law
"""

From "Dixon v. United States" ==> """
Dixon v. United States, 548 U.S. 1 (2006), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning the level of proof required to establish the affirmative defense of duress in a federal criminal case.
 Background 
In January 2003 the petitioner, Keshia Dixon, purchased firearms at two gun shows.  In the course of purchasing them, she provided a false address and falsely stated that she was not under indictment for a felony.  Dixon was arrested, tried, and convicted of one count of receiving a firearm while under indictment in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(n) and eight counts of making false statements in connection with the acquisition of a firearm in violation of § 922(a)(6).
 Procedural history 
At trial, Dixon admitted that she knew she was under indictment when she bought the weapons and that she knew doing so was a crime; her defense was that she acted under duress because her boyfriend threatened to kill her or hurt her daughters if she did not buy the guns for him.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 322 (2006).  In his charge to the jury, the trial judge required her to prove duress by a preponderance of the evidence.  After her conviction, Dixon appealed, alleging that this standard was erroneous.  The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals rejected the appeal.United States v. Dixon,   Other circuits having ruled to the contrary,See, e.g. United States v. Talbott, 78 F.3d 1183 (7th Cir. 1998);  the Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the circuit split.
 Issue 
The Supreme Court granted certiorari on the issue of whether the burden of proof in the jury instruction concerning the duress defense violated the Constitution's Due Process Clause and, if so, what should the proper burden of proof be?
 Parties' arguments 
Dixon contended that once she presented some evidence that she acted under duress, the government should have to disprove duress in order to meet its burden of establishing the guilt of the accused.  The government contended they need only prove the elements of the crime, and that Dixon needed to establish duress to be found not guilty.
 Opinion of the Court 
The court sided with the government, holding that "The duress defense, like the defense of necessity that we considered in Bailey v. United States ... may excuse conduct that would otherwise be punishable, but the existence of duress normally does not controvert any of the elements of the offense itself."
As to the second question, that of what standard would be appropriate, Justice Stevens wrote that Congress's lack of direction made the decision difficult.  "There is no evidence in the Act’s structure or history that Congress actually considered the question of how the duress defense should work in this context, and there is no suggestion  that the offenses at issue are incompatible with a defense of duress.  Assuming that a defense of duress is available to the statutory crimes at issue, then, we must determine what that defense would look like as Congress 'may have contemplated' it."  The general practice at the time the statute was written (1968) was to use the common law rule giving the defendant the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence.  Stevens held for the majority that this was the standard that should apply.
 Concurrences 
 Kennedy's concurrence 
Justice Kennedy concurred in the result, but suggested that the Court should not limit the standards lower courts might apply.  "Absent some contrary indication in the statute, we can assume that Congress would not want to foreclose the courts from consulting these newer sources and considering innovative arguments in resolving issues not confronted in the statute and not within the likely purview of Congress when it enacted the criminal prohibition applicable in the particular case."
 Alito's concurrence 
Justice Alito agreed with Stevens, but would have held that the common law rule applied to all federal crimes absent some indication otherwise.  "Although Congress is certainly free to alter this pattern and place one or both burdens on the prosecution, either for all or selected federal crimes, Congress has not done so but instead has continued to revise the federal criminal laws and to create new federal crimes without addressing the issue of duress. Under these circumstances, I believe that the burdens remain where they were when Congress began enacting federal criminal statutes."
 Dissent 
Justice Breyer wrote that the government should have the burden of proof in affirmative defenses.  "I agree with the majority that the burden of production lies on the defendant, that here the burden of persuasion issue is not constitutional, and that Congress may allocate that burden as it sees fit. But I also believe that, in the absence of any indication of a different congressional intent, the burden of persuading the jury beyond a reasonable doubt should lie where such burdens normally lie in criminal cases, upon the prosecution."
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2006 in United States case law
