"""

From "Artuz v. Bennett" ==> """
Artuz v. Bennett, 531 U.S. 4 (2000), was a unanimously-decided United States Supreme Court case. The case concerned whether a habeas corpus petition tolled for time under the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 when certain state claims are still pending. The Court held that the petition did not toll.
 Facts 
The petitioner, Bennett, was convicted of attempted murder after shooting at police. In 1995, Bennett moved pro se to vacate his conviction, which was denied orally by a New York court. Bennett claimed that he never received a copy of a written order reflecting the denial. In 1998, Bennett filed a federal habeas corpus petition alleging violations of his rights to present witnesses in his defense and to a fair trial, to be present at all material stages of the trial, and to the effective assistance of counsel. The Federal District Court dismissed Bennett's federal habeas corpus petition as untimely under the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), which set a 1-year period of limitation on federal habeas corpus applications by state prisoners. The Court of Appeals found that the habeas corpus petition was not time barred due to Bennett not receiving a written order from his 1995 claim.
Opinion 
Justice Scalia delivered the unanimous decision for the Court, which held that an application for postconviction relief containing procedurally barred claims is properly filed within the meaning of the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996. Only the specific claims and not the actual filing of the claims could be defaulted under state law, he argued. "An application is 'filed', as that term is commonly understood," Scalia wrote, "when it is delivered to, and accepted by, the appropriate state officer for placement into the official record". In the present case, the Court had not issued a written dismissal, just an oral decision from the bench. That would not count toward the tolling of the habeas claim.
See also
 Habeas corpus
 Death penalty
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
"""

From "Asahi Metal Industry Co. v. Superior Court" ==> """
Asahi Metal Industry Co. v. Superior Court, 480 U.S. 102 (1987), decided on February 24, 1987, was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court, in which the court decided whether a foreign corporation, by merely being aware that its products could end up in the forum state and into the American "stream of commerce" which later caused injuries, satisfied the minimum contact necessary to satisfy jurisdictional due process requirements. The court was unanimous in the result, but issued a fractured decision with Associate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor writing for a plurality of the court.
Facts
Asahi Metal Industry Co. was an international corporation based in Japan, which manufactured a valve used in the manufacture of motorcycle wheels. These valves were bought by Cheng Shin Rubber Industrial Co., a Taiwanese distributor. One of these valves was alleged to have failed, causing an accident in California. As a result of the accident the driver of the motorcycle sustained serious injuries and his wife, who was riding on the motorcycle as a passenger, was killed. The accident victim sued Cheng Shin in a California state court, and Cheng Shin in turn filed a third-party complaint (impleader) seeking indemnification from Asahi. Asahi contested California's personal jurisdiction over Asahi, but the California courts found jurisdiction based on Asahi's alleged awareness of the international distribution of its products. Specifically, Asahi moved to quash Cheng Shin's summons. The California Superior Court denied the motion but the California Court of Appeals issued a writ of mandamus to the state of California telling them to quash the summons. The California Supreme Court reversed this decision, leading Asahi to appeal to the United States Supreme Court.
Holding
The Supreme Court applied a five-factor test in determining whether "traditional notions of fair play" would permit the assertion of personal jurisdiction over a foreign (meaning out-of-state) defendant:
What is the burden on the defendant?
What are the interests of the forum state in the litigation?
What is the interest of the plaintiff in litigating the matter in that state?
Does the allowance of jurisdiction serve interstate efficiency?
Does the allowance of jurisdiction serve interstate policy interests?
The Court found that in this case, the burden on the defendant was severe based on both the geographic distance and legal dissimilarities between Japan and the United States. Cheng Shin was not a California resident, diminishing California's interest in the case. Cheng Shin also did not show that it would be inconvenienced if the case for indemnification against Asahi were heard in Japan or Taiwan instead of California. Finally, neither interstate efficiency nor interstate policy interests would be served by finding jurisdiction.
Because an assertion of jurisdiction would disturb the "traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice," the decision of the California Supreme Court was reversed and the judgment of California Court of Appeal (California's intermediate appellate court) was effectively reinstated.
 See also 
 International trade
 Comity
 Trade treaties
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 480
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
Asahi Metal Industry Co. v. Superior Court
Supreme Court of the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Ashcraft v. Tennessee (1944)" ==> """
Ashcraft v. Tennessee, 322 U.S. 143 (1944), is a United States Supreme Court case.
The defendant in the case, E.E. Ashcraft, was charged with hiring John Ware to murder Ashcraft's wife, Zelma Ida Ashcraft. Ashcraft and Ware confessed to the crimes and were sentenced to 99 years in the state penitentiary. Ware and Ashcraft appealed, claiming that their confessions were extorted from them. Ware, a black man, claimed that he confessed because he feared mob violence. Ashcraft - who had been questioned for more than 36 hours, with only one 5-minute break - claimed he was threatened and abused.
The Supreme Court of Tennessee affirmed both men's convictions.  However, neither they nor the original Trial Court ruled that the confessions were voluntarily made.  On this question, they deferred to the jury, which had decided that the confessions were voluntary.  After making an "independent examination", the United States Supreme Court reversed both convictions.
Justices Jackson, Roberts and Frankfurter dissented because they felt the Supreme Court did not grant sufficient deference to the State Courts' rulings.
This case is important, in part, because of the Court's decision not to grant deference to the jury's determination that the defendants' confessions were voluntary.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1944 in United States case law
Category:United States evidence case law
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
"""

From "Ashcroft v. al-Kidd" ==> """
Ashcroft v. al-Kidd, 563 U.S. 731 (2011), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that U.S. Attorney General John D. Ashcroft could not be personally sued for his involvement in the detention of a U.S. citizen in the wake of the September 11, 2001 attacks in the United States.. 
 Background 
The plaintiff, Abdullah al-Kidd (born Lavoni T. Kidd in Wichita, Kansas), was an American citizen and a prominent football player at the University of Idaho. While at college, Kidd converted to Islam and adopted the name Abdullah al-Kidd. Al-Kidd was arrested by federal agents in 2003 at Dulles International Airport. He was travelling to Saudi Arabia to attend school. He was held for two weeks under the federal material-witness statute. and controlled by supervised release for 13 months because he was to testify in the trial of Sami Omar Al-Hussayen. The latter was tried and acquitted on charges of supporting terrorist organizations.
At the time of al-Kidd's arrest, the FBI Director Robert S. Mueller told Congress that it was one of the FBI's "success" stories.  Al-Kidd was never charged or called as a witness, and he was ultimately released.
Al-Kidd filed suit against John Ashcroft, who was U.S. Attorney General from 2001 to 2005. Al-Kidd alleges that he was denied access to a lawyer, shackled, and strip-searched. The American Civil Liberties Union, which represented al-Kidd, claim that he is one of 70 Muslim men who were similarly treated.
The federal government said that Ashcroft has absolute immunity from such civil suits because he was acting within the scope of his duties as US Attorney General.  In the alternative, Ashcroft has qualified immunity that prevents such suits unless the official violated a right that was clearly established at the time of the violation.
In 2009, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit found that Ashcroft could personally be sued and held responsible for al-Kidd's wrongful detention. On October 18, 2010, the United States Supreme Court agreed to hear Ashcroft's appeal of the Ninth Circuit's ruling.
 Opinion of the Court 
On May 31, 2011, the Supreme Court, in an 8–0 ruling, stated that al-Kidd's lawyers had not met the high burden of proof needed to show that Attorney General Ashcroft could be personally sued, that he was directly involved or had explicit knowledge of the events (suggesting the matter was handled mostly by distant subordinates). The ACLU had sued him personally because it is very hard to sue a senior agent of the government in his or her official capacity (unless an individual commits a felony or other serious crime, in which case an elected official may be impeached) because American government bodies enjoy immunity from being sued. In the majority opinion written by Justice Scalia, the court ruled that "Qualified immunity gives government officials breathing room to make reasonable but mistaken judgments about open legal questions. When properly applied, it protects all but the plainly incompetent or those who knowingly violate the law. Ashcroft deserves neither label" (internal citation omitted).
Justice Kagan did not participate in the case as she had previously worked on the government's preparation of its case while serving in the Obama administration.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 563
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:George W. Bush administration controversies
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:Legal issues related to the September 11 attacks
"""

From "Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union" ==> """
Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, 535 U.S. 564 (2002), followed by 542 U.S. 656 (2004), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court, ruling that the Child Online Protection Act (COPA) was unconstitutional as a violation of the First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech.Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, . 
Background
In 1996 Congress passed the Communications Decency Act (CDA). The CDA prohibited the use of the Internet to purposely send indecent material to those under 18 years of age. In 1997 the Supreme Court unanimously struck down the anti-indecency provisions of the CDA in Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, because in the CDA lacked the precision necessary for any regulation of speech. Congress attempted to address the issue of Internet pornography with a new and more specific statute the following year.
Child Online Protection Act
The Child Online Protection Act (COPA), passed in 1998, was Congress's second attempt to criminalize the use of the Internet to distribute obscene material, including pornography, simulated pornography, and pornographic artwork. COPA enforced a $50,000 fine and six months in prison for the posting for "commercial purposes" of content on the internet that is "harmful to minors".. 
COPA attempted to be more specific than the "harmful to children" provisions of its predecessor statute, and made it illegal for any commercial sources to allow minors access to obscene content, drawing on language from the landmark Miller v. California ruling at the Supreme Court to better define the term "obscenity." Material that is "harmful to minors" was defined as: 
Thus, COPA was narrower and more precise that the CDA because it attempted to make use of the Miller Test to find "obscene" Internet material that could be regulated. 
Opponents of COPA argued that child pornography was already illegal, and COPA would not be effective because it would waste too much time going after individual sites within the US that could simply set up shop overseas if shut down. It was also argued that COPA would infringe upon the rights of adults to receive legal (but perhaps inappropriate for children) content voluntarily, and that COPA was not the least pervasive or most efficient way to protect children from inappropriate online content.
Procedural history
In 1999, Judge Lowell A. Reed Jr. of the Eastern District of Pennsylvania granted a preliminary injunction blocking COPA enforcement.American Civil Liberties Union v. Reno,  This ruling was appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. In 2000, the circuit court upheld the preliminary injunction against COPA because it was impossible to apply "contemporary community standards" to the Internet.American Civil Liberties Union v. Ashcroft,  This decision was appealed to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, .
First Opinion of the Court
In May 2002, the Supreme Court, in a 8-1 decision, affirmed the injunction against enforcement of COPA enacted by the circuit court, but ultimately ruled that the statute could not be invalidated because of the vague and overbroad definition of "contemporary community standards" in the Miller Test for obscenity. Furthermore, the circuit court should not have determined that defining that term was impossible. Thus, the majority voted to remand the case back to the circuit court to discuss that matter further.
Dissenting opinions
The only dissenting opinion came from Justice John Paul Stevens, who argued that the court should have declared COPA to be unconstitutional without remanding to the circuit court for further discussion. 
 Second Opinion of the Court 
In October 2002, the Third Circuit heard the case a second time, after the remand from the Supreme Court. In March 2003, the Third Circuit again upheld the injunction, this time with a more precise discussion of "contemporary community standards".American Liberties Union v. Ashcroft,  The government appealed that decision and the Supreme Court granted certiorari again,Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, . and in June 2004 the Court reaffirmed the original preliminary injunction..
This time, the Supreme Court ruled 5-4 that, in light of the circuit court's further discussion of "contemporary community standards" in the Miller Test as applied to the Internet, COPA was indeed an unconstitutional restriction on freedom of speech. The court opined that using contemporary community standards to police the Internet would cause more harm than good, due to differing opinions across America about what was acceptable for children or consenting adults on the Internet. 
The court ultimately ruled that COPA was too restrictive in light of the First Amendment. Justice Anthony Kennedy, who delivered the majority opinion, suggested that parents and educators could voluntarily adopt Internet filters and related software to reduce the visibility of harmful or unwanted material. In Kennedy's words, "Filters are less restrictive than COPA. They impose selective restrictions on speech at the receiving end, not universal restrictions at the source. ... [T]he Government failed to introduce specific evidence proving that existing filtering technologies are less effective than the restrictions in COPA.”
The court also found that COPA did not pass the strict scrutiny test for governmental speech regulations, because while preventing children from accessing harmful material on the Internet was a compelling government interest, the statute was not narrowly tailored enough to enable other uses, including consenting adults, to access such material voluntarily, and (given the availability of filtering software) the statute was not the least restrictive means of achieving the government's goals. 
While allowing the injunction against the enforcement of COPA to stand, the Supreme Court gave the government one more chance to argue its case, due to the now clarified definitions of "contemporary community standards" and other matters. Thus the trial portion of the legal challenge was remanded back to the district court.
Dissenting opinions
Justice Antonin Scalia dissented, arguing that pornography in the media deserved no constitutional protection regardless of the existence of COPA, so that statute should not have been subjected to the strict scrutiny test. Justice Stephen Breyer delivered another dissent, arguing that COPA was indeed the least restrictive means to achieve the government's compelling interest in shielding children from Internet pornography.
 Subsequent developments 
The case was remanded to the Eastern District of Pennsylvania and went to trial again in 2006, at which time the government was given the opportunity to update its arguments in favor of enforcing COPA. The district court rejected the government's updated arguments, and this decision was appealed again to the Third Circuit. The circuit court ruled against the government again in 2008, once again upholding the injunction against enforcement. The government appealed this decision to the Supreme Court yet again in 2009, but this time the court denied certiorari,. effectively striking COPA from the United States Code, with the law never having taken effect.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 535
 Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition (2002), which dealt with a similar law, the Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996..
References
External links
 Summary of COPA cases from People for the American Way
 Summary of PFAW's involvement in ACLU v. Ashcroft
 Washington Post transcript of online discussion of COPA with ACLU Associate Legal Director Ann Beeson
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:United States Internet case law
Category:2002 in United States case law
Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit cases
"""

From "Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition" ==> """
Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, 535 U.S. 234 (2002), is a U.S. Supreme Court case that struck down two overbroad provisions of the Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996 because they abridged "the freedom to engage in a substantial amount of lawful speech".Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, . The case was brought against the U.S. government by the Free Speech Coalition, a "California trade association for the adult-entertainment industry", along with Bold Type, Inc., a "publisher of a book advocating the nudist lifestyle"; Jim Gingerich, who paints nudes; and Ron Raffaelli, a photographer who specialized in erotic images. By striking down these two provisions, the Court rejected an invitation to increase the amount of speech that would be categorically outside the protection of the First Amendment.
Background of the case
Prior case law had established two relevant categories of speech that were outside the protection of the First Amendment. In Miller v. California, ,Miller v. California,  the Court had held that the First Amendment allowed the government to restrict obscenity. And in New York v. Ferber, ,New York v. Ferber,  the Court held that the government could ban the distribution of child pornography to protect children from the harm inherent in making it. The Court extended Ferber to allow the criminalization of the mere possession of child pornography in Osborne v. Ohio, .Osborne v. Ohio, 
The statute at issue
Before 1996, Congress defined child pornography with reference to the Ferber standard. In passing the Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996, Congress added the two categories of speech challenged in this case to its definition of child pornography. The first prohibited "any visual depiction, including any photograph, film, video, picture, or computer or computer-generated image or picture" that "is, or appears to be, of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct". The Court observed that this provision "captures a range of depictions, sometimes called 'virtual child pornography', which include computer-generated images, as well as images produced by more traditional means". The second prohibited "any sexually explicit image that was advertised, promoted, presented, described, or distributed in such a manner that conveys the impression it depicts a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct".
The lawsuit
The Free Speech Coalition, fearing that Congress's expanded definition of child pornography would endanger their legitimate activities, filed a lawsuit seeking to enjoin enforcement of the CPPA in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California. They alleged that the first provision, prohibiting images that "appear to be" children engaged in sexual activity, and the second, prohibiting speech that "conveys the impression" that the images depict minors engaged in sexual activity, were overbroad, vague, and had a chilling effect on their legitimate work. The district court disagreed, adding that the overbreadth claim was specious as it was "highly unlikely" that any "adaptations of sexual works like Romeo and Juliet ... will be treated as 'criminal contraband.
The Ninth Circuit reversed, reasoning that the government could not prohibit speech merely because of its tendency to persuade its viewers to engage in illegal activity. It ruled that the CPPA was substantially overbroad because it prohibited material that was neither obscene nor produced by exploiting real children, as Ferber prohibited. The court declined to reconsider the case en banc. The government asked the Supreme Court to review the case, and it agreed, noting that the Ninth Circuit's decision conflicted with the decisions of four other circuit courts of appeals. Ultimately, the Supreme Court agreed with the Ninth Circuit.
Opinion
The First Amendment provides that "Congress shall make no law... abridging the freedom of speech". The Court opined that imposing a criminal sanction on protected speech is a "stark example of speech suppression", but at the same time, that sexual abuse of children "is a most serious crime and an act repugnant to the moral instincts of a decent people." "Congress may pass valid laws to protect children from abuse, and it has." The great difficulty with the two provisions of the CPPA at issue in this case was that they included categories of speech other than obscenity and child pornography, and thus were overbroad. 
The Court concluded that the "CPPA prohibits speech despite its serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value." In particular, it prohibits the visual depiction of teenagers engaged in sexual activity, a "fact of modern society and has been a theme in art and literature throughout the ages." Such depictions include performances of Romeo and Juliet, by William Shakespeare; the 1996 film William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet, directed by Baz Luhrmann; and the Academy Award winning movies Traffic and American Beauty. "If these films, or hundreds of others of lesser note that explore those subjects, contain a single graphic depiction of sexual activity within the statutory definition, the possessor of the film would be subject to severe punishment without inquiry into the work's redeeming value. This is inconsistent with an essential First Amendment rule: The artistic merit of a work does not depend on the presence of a single explicit scene."
Thus, the CPPA prohibited speech for a different reason than anti-child pornography laws. Laws prohibiting the distribution and possession of child pornography ban speech because of the manner in which it is produced, regardless of its serious literary or artistic value. But speech prohibited by the CPPA "records no crime and creates no victims by its production." Ferber did not hold that child pornography is "by definition without value", but that it is illegal because of the harm that making and distributing it necessarily inflicts upon children. Ferber expressly allowed virtual child pornography as an alternative that could preserve whatever value child pornography might have while at the same time mitigating the harm caused by making it. The CPPA would eliminate this distinction and punish people for engaging in what had heretofore been a legal alternative.
The Government countered that without the CPPA, child molesters might use virtual child pornography to seduce children. But "there are many things innocent in themselves, however, such as toys, movies, games, video games, candy, money etc. that might be used for immoral purposes, yet we would not expect those to be prohibited because they can be misused." The First Amendment draws a distinction between words and deeds, and does not tolerate banning of mere words simply because those words could lead to bad deeds. Although the CPPA's objective was to prohibit illegal conduct, it went well beyond that goal by restricting speech available to law-abiding adults. If the goal was to eliminate the market for all child pornography, the Court ruled that the government could not accomplish that goal by eliminating lawful speech in the process. The burden should not, however, fall on the speaker to prove that his speech is lawful, instead of on the government to prove that it is not. Furthermore, such an affirmative defense is "incomplete on its own terms" because it "allows persons to be convicted in some instances where they can prove children were not exploited in the production."
As for the provision that forbade advertising speech so as to convey the impression it depicted minors engaged in sexual conduct, the Court found this provision to be even more sweeping. "Even if a film contains no sexually explicit scenes involving minors, it could be treated as child pornography if the title and trailers convey the impression that the scenes would be found in the movie." Although pandering may be a relevant question in an obscenity prosecution, the "conveys the impression" prohibition forbade speech advertising depictions that were entirely lawful. "The First Amendment requires a more precise restriction" than the one drawn by CPPA.
Dissenting opinion
Chief Justice Rehnquist put forth a dissenting opinion, which began with a concern that rapidly advancing technology would soon make it very difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish between pornography made with actual children and pornography made with simulated images of children. "Congress has a compelling interest in ensuring the ability to enforce prohibitions of actual child pornography, and we should defer to its findings that rapidly advancing technology soon will make it all but impossible to do so." Rehnquist's dissenting opinion agreed that serious First Amendment concerns would arise if the government actually prosecuted, say, the producers of Traffic or American Beauty under CPPA. But it had not done so, and Rehnquist believed that the statute did not need to be construed to allow the government to do so. Rehnquist observed that the CPPA banned only depictions of minors engaged in actual sexual activity, not mere suggestions of sexual activity. CPPA simply outlawed "computer-generated images virtually indistinguishable from real children in sexually explicit conduct". None of the films the majority mentioned depicted children engaged in actual sexual activity. As for the "conveys the impression" provision, Rehnquist categorized this provision as merely an anti-pandering provision. Because one could, by definition, only pander obscenity, and that which the panderer knew to be obscenity in any event, that provision also did not violate the First Amendment.
See also
Child pornography laws in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 535
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Transcript of oral argument
Brief of the ACLU
Brief of the Solicitor General
Free Speech Coalition
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:United States Internet case law
Category:2002 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Ashcroft v. Iqbal" ==> """
Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662 (2009), was a United States Supreme Court case which held that plaintiffs must present a "plausible" cause of action. Alongside Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly (and together known as Twiqbal), Iqbal raised the threshold which plaintiffs needed to meet. Further, the Court held that government officials are not liable for the actions of their subordinates without evidence that they ordered the allegedly discriminatory activity. At issue was whether current and former federal officials, including FBI Director Robert Mueller and former United States Attorney General John Ashcroft, were entitled to qualified immunity against an allegation that they knew of or condoned racial and religious discrimination against Muslim men detained after the September 11 attacks. The decision also "transformed civil litigation in the federal courts" by making it much easier for courts to dismiss individuals' suits.Adam Liptak, "Supreme Court Ruling Altered Civil Suits, to Detriment of Individuals", The New York Times, May 19, 2015.
 Background 
On the morning of September 11, 2001, Javaid Iqbal, a Pakistani-American cable television installer was in lower Manhattan when the World Trade Center was attacked. He had been on his way to renew his work authorization card, as he was an immigrant and did not yet have permanent citizenship. In an initially unrelated action eight weeks later, he was arrested on charges of conspiracy to defraud the United States and fraud in relation to identification documents (violations of 18 U.S.C. §§ 371 and 1028), and he was placed in pretrial detention at the Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn, New York.Iqbal v. Hasty, 490 F. 3d 143, 147–148 (2bd Cir. 2007). When officers searched his apartment, they found a card for an appointment to be downtown on 9/11, as well as media reporting on the attacks, and suspected him of involvement.
Iqbal alleged that FBI officials carried out a discriminatory policy by designating him as a person "of high interest" in the investigation of the September 11 attacks because of his race, religion, and national origin. He asserted that it was because of his identity as a Pakistani Muslim that he was placed in the detention center's Administrative Maximum Special Housing Unit for over six months while he was awaiting the fraud trial.
Iqbal asserted that he was tortured by prison staff on the orders of, and under policies written by, John Ashcroft. Specifically, he claimed that on the day he was transferred to the special unit, prison guards, without provocation, "picked him up and threw him against the wall, kicked him in the stomach, punched him in the face, and dragged him across the room."First Amended Complaint in No. 04–CV–1809(JG) (JA), ¶113, App. to Pet. for Cert. 176a. He testified that after being attacked a second time, he sought medical attention but was denied care for two weeks.Id., ¶¶187–188, at 189a. Further, Iqbal asserted that prison staff in the special unit subjected him to unjustified strip and body cavity searches,Id., ¶¶136–140, at 181a verbally berated him by calling him a "terrorist" and "Muslim killer,"Id., ¶87, at 170a–171a. refused to give him adequate food,Id., ¶91, at 171a–172a. subjected him to extreme heat and cold,id., ¶84, at 170a. Further, he stated that prison staff interfered with his attempts at prayer, to engage in religious study,id., ¶¶153–154, at 183a–184a. and his access to counsel.Id., ¶¶168, 171, at 186a–187a.
Iqbal pleaded guilty to using another man's Social Security card on April 22, 2002, and was sentenced to prison, where he remained until his release on January 15, 2003. While in prison, his wife divorced him, thus invalidating his green card. Iqbal was deported to Pakistan after his release.Cases to Watch at the Supreme Court (NYT)Brief of Respondents Michael Rolince, Former Chief of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's International Terrorism Operations Section, Counterterrorism Division, and Kenneth Maxwell, Former Assistant Special Agent in Charge, New York Field Office, Federal Bureau of Investigation in Support of Reversal, pg 1. Upon his return to Pakistan he was branded an American agent. His son was persecuted and forcibly disappeared as a result.
thumb|left|The Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn, New York where Mr. Iqbal was allegedly abused.
After being released, Iqbal brought claims under implied causes of action established by Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents for violations of his First, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Eighth Amendment rights as well as various statutory claims, including Federal Tort Claims Act claims against the United States seeking compensatory and punitive damages. Iqbal argued that Mueller and Ashcroft personally condoned the decision to detain him as well as Arab immigrants to the US.
The Office of Inspector General of the Department of Justice had previously investigated and confirmed accounts of abuse of September 11 detainees like Iqbal. The OIG conducted more than one hundred interviews and obtained videotape evidence in its investigation of conditions at the MDC.
The federal government argued that Iqbal's legal filings were not specific enough in linking the government officials with a policy of detaining Arab immigrants and Muslims. The District Court found that the facts alleged in Iqbal's complaint were sufficient. It also found that the OIG Report suggested that petitioners were personally involved in "creating or implementing" the policies that led to respondent's confinement in the Administrative Maximum Special Housing Unit.Respondent Iqbal's Brief, pg. 6. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the lower court and refused to dismiss the action, concluding that it was plausible enough to survive a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss.
The Supreme Court granted review, in part, to address "whether conclusory allegations that high-level government officials had knowledge of alleged wrongdoing by subordinate officials are sufficient to survive a motion to dismiss in an action brought under Bivens."
 Decision 
In a 5–4 decision, delivered on May 18, 2009, by Justice Kennedy, the Supreme Court reversed the Second Circuit's decision that the Plaintiff had pleaded sufficient facts.  The Supreme Court held that Iqbal's complaint failed to plead sufficient facts to state a claim for purposeful and unlawful discrimination. The court affirmed that the Second Circuit had subject-matter jurisdiction to affirm the District Court's order denying petitioners' motion to dismiss.
 Supervisory liability 
The Court found that according to precedent, government officials could not be held liable for the unconstitutional conduct of their subordinates because of respondeat superior and also because vicarious liability was inapplicable to Bivens and Section 1983 suits, a plaintiff must plead that each government-official defendant, through the official's own individual actions, has violated the US Constitution.Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662 (2009), Majority Opinion, pgs 11–12.
To do so, the Court found, 
The Court rejected Iqbal's argument that under a theory of "supervisory liability," Ashcroft and Mueller could be liable for "knowledge and acquiescence in their subordinates' use of discriminatory criteria to make classification decisions among detainees."Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662 (2009), Majority Opinion, pgs 13.
 Rule 8 pleading standard 
Under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8(a)(2), a complaint must contain a "short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief.... detailed factual allegations" are not required.  However, the court found that Rule 8 requires the non-moving party to show plausible factual allegations, accepted as true, to " state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face."  Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007).
A claim has facial plausibility when the pleaded factual content allows the court to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged. (Id. at 556.) In so doing, the Court confirmed that the standard set forth in Conley v. Gibson, 355 U.S. 41 (1957) (the Supreme Court case that had defined the Rule 8 pleading standard prior to Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly) should not be followed in any context.  The two cases are often referred to by the portmanteau Twiqbal.
The Court restated the substance and application of the Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly test for the sufficiency of pleadings:
Applying the test to the plaintiff's complaint, the Court held that Iqbal's pleadings did not comply with Rule 8 under Twombly. The Court found that several of his allegations (that petitioners agreed to subject him to harsh conditions as a matter of policy, solely on account of discriminatory factors and for no legitimate penological interest, that Ashcroft was that policy's "principal architect," and that Mueller was "instrumental" in its adoption and execution) were conclusory and not entitled to be assumed true. The Court decided that given that the September 11 attacks were perpetrated by Arab Muslims, it was not surprising that a legitimate policy directing law enforcement to arrest and detain individuals because of their suspected link to the attacks would produce a disparate, incidental impact on Arab Muslims, even if the policy's purpose was to target neither Arabs nor Muslims.
Even if the complaint's well-pleaded facts gave rise to a plausible inference that Iqbal's arrest was the result of unconstitutional discrimination, that inference alone did not entitle him to relief since his claims rested solely on their ostensible policy of holding detainees categorized as "of high interest," but the complaint does not contain facts plausibly showing that their policy was based on discriminatory factors.
The Court rejected three of Iqbal's arguments. Firstly, the Court found that Iqbal's claim that Twombly should be limited to its antitrust context was not supported by that case or the Federal Rules. Secondly, the Court found that Rule 8's pleading requirements need not be relaxed based on the Second Circuit's instruction that the District Court in-camera discovery to preserve petitioners' qualified-immunity defense in anticipation of a summary judgment motion. Thirdly, the Court found that Rule 9(b), which requires particularity when pleading "fraud or mistake" but allows "other conditions of a person's mind [to] be alleged generally," did not require courts to credit a complaint's conclusory statements without reference to its factual context.
The Supreme Court concluded that the Second Circuit should decide in the first instance whether to remand to the District Court to allow Iqbal to seek leave to amend his deficient complaint. The court of appeals then remanded the case to the district court so that it could decide the issue. Before the trial began, the parties settled out of court. That settlement, unlike the Court's ruling, ended his lawsuit against all government officials involved.
Iqbal's claims against lower-level officials, including the guards and supervisors at the detention center, are unaffected by the court's ruling.
 Souter's dissent 
Justice Souter wrote a dissent joined by Justice Stevens, Justice Ginsburg and Justice Breyer, saying that despite the fact that Ashcroft and Mueller had conceded that an officer could be subject to Bivens liability as a supervisor on grounds other than respondeat superior, "[t]he court apparently rejects this concession and... does away with supervisory liability under Bivens. The majority then misapplies the pleading standard under Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544 (2007), to conclude that the complaint fails to state a claim."Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662 (2009), Souter dissent. Souter went on to say that the main fallacy in the majority's position was grown that they are looking at Iqbal's allegations in isolation and not as a unit. Furthermore, Iqbal was alleging not only that Ashcroft and Mueller had allowed the discrimination policy but also that they had created it.
 Breyer's dissent 
Justice Breyer filed a separate dissent, saying that neither the briefs nor the Court's opinion provided convincing grounds for finding that trial courts had inadequate means to prevent unwarranted interference with "the proper execution of the work of the government."Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662 (2009), Breyer dissent, p. 1, quoting majority p. 21.
 Impact 
The decision, referenced with predecessor opinion Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly as "Twiqbal," has been described as possibly "the most consequential ruling in Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr.'s 10-year tenure" because it has "transformed civil litigation in the federal courts" to the detriment of individuals. It is one of the five most cited Supreme Court decisions of all time. As of 2017, it had been cited over 85,000 times, mostly in lower courts. It has likely made it harder for civil rights cases to proceed through the Federal Judiciary.
Writing in 2017, Stanford Law professor  argued that the case mostly ignored the real center of the case: Iqbal himself. Sinnar noted that the court generalized Iqbal as a suspect and a foreigner, and failed to take in the human dimension of the case. She went on to write that the Court's decision in Iqbal is in many ways discriminatory, and that the Court ignored a true and serious problem around post 9/11 detentions. Many arrests were made on the basis of ethnicity, nationality, and religion, and suspects were jailed under inhumane conditions despite their innocence. Sinnar concluded that the seemingly obtuse tweak to the Rules of Civil Procedure from the case has had a disparate impact on plaintiffs since.
Because "information about wrongdoing is often secret, and plaintiffs need discovery to unearth the facts" about dangerous products or discriminatory practices, courts are "potentially losing cases that could play an important role not only in the lives of plaintiffs but also in the law and society.
Ehad Elmaghraby, an Egyptian who was part of the original suit, settled with the US government for $300,000 before the case would reach the Supreme Court.
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Case Brief of Ashcroft v. Iqbal
Petitioners Ashcroft and Mueller's Brief to the U.S. Supreme Court
Respondent Iqbal's Brief to the U.S. Supreme Court
Respondents Rolince and Maxwell's Brief to the U.S. Supreme Court
Brief to the U.S. Supreme Court of Dennis Hasty as Respondent supporting Petitioners
Reply Brief of Petitioners
Ashcroft v. Iqbal (SCOTUSWiki)
Ashcroft v. Iqbal: Different Spanks for Different Ranks? (JURIST)
Throwing Out Mr. Iqbal's Case (NYT)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
Category:Implied constitutional cause of action case law
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States motion to dismiss case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Legal issues related to the September 11 attacks
Category:Religious discrimination
"""

From "Ashe v. Swenson" ==> """
Ashe v. Swenson, 397 U.S. 436 (1970), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that "when an issue of ultimate fact has once been determined by a valid and final judgment, that issue cannot again be litigated between the same parties in any future lawsuit." The Double Jeopardy Clause prevents a state from relitigating a question already decided in favor of a defendant at a previous trial. Here, the guarantee against double jeopardy enforceable through the Fifth Amendment provided that where the defendant was acquitted of robbing one victim, the government could not prosecute the criminal defendant in a second trial for a different victim in the same robbery.
Bob Fred Ashe, who was one of four masked individuals charged with the armed robbery of six poker players, was indicted on six separate counts of armed robbery. At trial, a jury returned a general verdict of not guilty "due to insufficient evidence."  Six weeks later, Ashe was brought to trial for the robbery of a second poker player. At the conclusion of the trial, Ashe was found guilty and sentenced to thirty-five years. The Missouri Supreme Court affirmed the conviction, holding no former jeopardy violation.
After the federal district court denied habeas corpus relief, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed. The Supreme Court, however, granted certiorari and concluded from the record of the prior trial that the "single rationally conceivable issue in dispute before the jury was whether [Ashe] had been one of the robbers. And the jury by its verdict found that he had not. The federal rule of law, therefore, would make a second prosecution for the robbery . . . wholly impermissible."
Because the first jury, by  its verdict, had rejected the claim that Ashe was one of the robbers, the Supreme Court held that the State could not "constitutionally hail him before a new jury to litigate that issue again."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 397
Waller v. Florida (1970)
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:1970 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley Authority" ==> """
Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley Authority, 297 U.S. 288 (1936), was a United States Supreme Court case that provided the first elaboration of the doctrine of "Constitutional avoidance".
Background
In Ashwander, the Supreme Court faced a challenge to the constitutionality of a congressional program of development of the Wilson Dam. The plaintiffs, preferred stockholders of the Alabama Power Company, had unsuccessfully protested to the corporation about its contracts with the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA). Plaintiffs then brought suit against the corporation, the TVA, and others alleging breach of contract and advancing a broad constitutional challenge to the governmental program.Ashwander, 297 U.S. at 316-17. Plaintiffs argued that the federal government, through the TVA, was undertaking a "coup" which "would open every essential industry and service to direct and permanent governmental competition." Id. at 291-92. Plaintiffs challenged the TVA program's "validity in every respect, in its entirety, and in detail, asserting that the program and all of its essentials, the means employed to promote it, its dominant objectives, and its arbitrary methods, do not consist with the letter and spirit of the Constitution." 297 U.S. at 293; see also 297 U.S. at 317.  In December 1934, Federal Judge William Irwin Grubb held that the government had no right to engage in the power business except to dispose of a surplus incidental to the exercise of some other constitutional function. While he did not directly rule that the TVA was unconstitutional, he issued an injunction that caused Senator George Norris, prime sponsor of the New Deal's power program, to declare: "The effect of the injunction is practically to nullify the whole TVA Act."  In July 1935, the injunction was overturned by the 5th Federal Circuit Court in New Orleans. When the matter reached the Supreme Court, the majority did not reach the broadest constitutional questions presented by plaintiffs, but instead upheld Congress's constitutional authority to dispose of electric energy generated at the dam and validated the contracts.Ashwander, 297 U.S. at 339-40. The district court below did not reach plaintiffs' request for general declaratory relief, but it did annul the contract at issue, enjoin transfer of the transmission lines and auxiliary properties, and enjoin the municipal defendants from "making or performing any contracts with the [TVA] for the purchase of power." 297 U.S. at 317. The court of appeals reversed, finding that Congress had the constitutional authority to construct the Wilson Dam and dispose of the surplus energy thereby produced. 297 U.S. at 318.
Majority opinion
At the outset, the majority rejected the government's argument that the preferred stockholders did not have standing to bring the suit because the government program was directly competing with a private company.Ashwander, 297 U.S. at 318 ("while their stock holdings are small, they have a real interest and there is no question that the suit was brought in good faith").  The majority then considered the scope of the constitutional issue presented. The majority found the scope "limited to the validity of the contract" between the parties, rather than extending to the broad challenge to the validity of the entire TVA program.Ashwander, 297 U.S. at 324. The government urged the court to construe the constitutional issue narrowly. Id. at 310-11. The court agreed: "The pronouncements, policies and program of the [TVA] and its directors, their motives and desires, did not give rise to a justiciable controversy save as they had fruition in action of a definite and concrete character constituting an actual or threatened interference with the rights of the persons complaining." 297 U.S. at 324.
The single dissenter, however, would have considered plaintiffs' allegation that, "while pretending to act within their powers to improve navigation, the United States, through corporate agencies, are really seeking to accomplish what they have no right to undertake — the business of developing, distributing and selling electric power." 297 U.S. at 357 (McReynolds, J., dissenting). After evaluating the evidence presented in support of that allegation, he found that the trial court's ruling should be affirmed. 297 U.S. at 372.  Although the majority refused to issue an advisory opinion on plaintiffs' broader hypothetical and contingent constitutional claims, it did review the constitutionality of the legislation insofar as the plaintiffs had presented facts of a legitimate "case or controversy".Ashwander, 297 U.S. at 325. The government claimed that the shareholders' complaints were "premature," "hypothetical" and "speculative" because some portions of the constitutional challenge were based on future, contingent acts. 297 U.S. at 313-14. The majority agreed:
[P]laintiffs had no right to demand that the directors should start a litigation to obtain a general declaration of the unconstitutionality of the [TVA] in all its bearings or a decision of abstract questions as to the right of the [TVA] and of the Alabama Power Company in possible contingencies. 297 U.S. at 325.
Based on the concrete dispute before the court, the majority concluded that Congress had the war and commerce power authority to construct the Wilson Dam. The majority also found that the disposal of the electric energy generated pursuant to the provisions of the contracts at issue was lawful.Ashwander, 297 U.S. at 330-40 (construing U.S. Constitution Article IV, Section 3) Thus, the judgment in Ashwander, in which Justice Brandeis concurred, ultimately did not avoid a constitutional issue.
Concurrence
Justices Cardozo, Roberts and Stone joined the Brandeis concurrence. The concurring Justices would have affirmed the court of appeals' judgment "without passing on it," although they agreed with the majority's conclusion on the constitutional issues it reached. The court of appeals had decided, like the majority, that Congress had the constitutional authority to construct the Wilson Dam and dispose of the surplus energy thereby produced. The concurrence, however, would have affirmed this judgment without reaching the merits because of other infirmities in plaintiffs' case.
Brandeis primarily objected to plaintiffs' standing.Ashwander, 297 U.S. at 341; see also Alexander M. Bickel, The Least Dangerous Branch: The Supreme Court at the Bar of Politics, pp. 119-21 (2d ed. 1986) (calling Brandeis' primary concern in Ashwander one of standing). This standing concern is nearly identical to Brandeis' primary objection to jurisdiction in the draft opinion in Atherton Mills v. Johnston, 259 U.S. 13 (1922). See Bickel, notes 76 and 149, for discussion of Atherton Mills. Heated debate over appropriate access to the courts for those asserting corporate interests was reflected in several cases during the 1936 term. Felix Frankfurter and Adrian S. Fisher, "The Business of the Supreme Court at the October Terms, 1935 and 1936," 51 Harvard Law Review 577 (1938).  His concurrence disagreed with the majority's conclusion that the preferred stockholders could bring the action because they had already voiced their complaints to the corporation without success. Brandeis concluded that plaintiffs had no "right to interfere" in corporate governance under the substantive law, and because the stockholders could allege no injury which the substantive law recognized, they lacked standing to bring suit.Ashwander, 297 U.S. at 341-44. The concurrence attempted to distinguish prior decisions in stockholder cases where the court had rendered decisions, 297 U.S. at 349-52, or, alternatively, urged that the prior cases be overruled. 297 U.S. at 352-53.
The concurrence then raised an equity bar to the requested relief. The preferred stockholders could not show the "irreparable injury" to their property rights necessary to obtain relief in equity. Plaintiffs had only a limited interest in the corporation and the district court had made no finding that the proposed transactions with the TVA endangered their property interests.
Brandeis also examined other potential hurdles standing between the court and the constitutional issues. He concluded that the power company was estopped from bringing a challenge and thus its stockholders had lost any right to bring a challenge. Finally, according to Brandeis, even if plaintiffs had standing under the substantive law, "courts should, in the exercise of their [equitable] discretion, refuse an injunction unless the alleged invalidity is clear." Brandeis urged a presumption in favor of the validity of any legislative act until "its violation of the [C]onstitution is proved beyond all reasonable doubt."Ashwander, 297 U.S. at 355 (quoting Justice Washington's opinion in Ogden v. Saunders, 25 U.S. (12 Wheat.) 212, 270 (1827)).
Formulation of the avoidance doctrine
The particular part of the Ashwander concurrence that has become famous is its articulation of "[t]he practice in constitutional cases." In describing that "practice," Brandeis set out a broad formulation of the avoidance doctrine.
Brandeis characterized judicial review of the constitutionality of legislative acts as a grave and delicate power for use by fallible, human judges only when its use cannot conscientiously be avoided.Ashwander, 297 U.S. at 345. Brandeis notes early in his opinion that the Supreme Court "has frequently called attention to the 'great gravity and delicacy' of its function in passing upon the validity of an act of Congress."  This reluctance to use the power of judicial review was, according to Brandeis, predicated on the separation of powers principle that one branch must not "encroach upon the domain of another." Brandeis identified two prominent limitations on the federal judicial power based on the separation principle: the "case or controversy" requirement and the rule that federal courts have no power to render advisory opinions. Brandeis linked a host of justiciability doctrines, including political question and standing inquiries, to these limitations.
Brandeis recited traditional Article III jurisprudence by recognizing well-established constitutional limits on the federal judicial power. The concurrence's theme of judicial restraint is not inconsistent with the majority's decision: a federal court should only decide an actual Article III controversy when the facts present one, and should refuse to render an advisory opinion on the entire TVA program. Brandeis then relied on the avoidance doctrine to argue that the court should not reach the merits of the constitutional issue.
Brandeis described how the court had developed "prudential" rules — meaning nonconstitutional, self-imposed restraints — by which to avoid "passing upon a large part of all the constitutional questions" presented to it, despite having jurisdiction to hear them. He described the avoidance doctrine as consisting of a "series" of seven rules:
"The Court will not pass upon the constitutionality of legislation in a friendly, non-adversary, proceeding ...";
"The Court will not 'anticipate a question of constitutional law in advance of the necessity of deciding it.'"
"The Court will not 'formulate a rule of constitutional law broader than is required by the precise facts to which it is to be applied.'"
The Court will not pass upon a constitutional question, although properly presented by the record, if there is also present some other ground upon which the case may be disposed.
The Court will not pass upon the constitutionality of a statute unless the plaintiff was injured by operation of the statute.
"The Court will not pass upon the constitutionality of a statute at the instance of one who has availed himself of its benefits."
Even if "serious doubt[s]" concerning the validity of an act of Congress are raised, the court will first ascertain "'whether a construction of the statute is fairly possible by which the question may be avoided.'"
Brandeis concludes his discussion of the avoidance doctrine with this warning: "One branch of the government cannot encroach upon the domain of another, without danger. The safety of our institutions depends in no small degree on a strict observance of this salutary rule."Ashwander, 297 U.S. (quoting Sinking-Fund Cases v. U.S. Central Pacific Railroad Co., 99 U.S. 700, 718 (1871)). For a different cast of the separation of powers principle, see generally Robert A. Katzmann, "The Underlying Concerns," in Judges and Legislators p. 14 (Robert A. Katzmann ed., 1988) (discussing separation of powers as "separated institutions sharing powers,' not separate institutions"); David B. Frohnmayer, "The Separation of Powers: An Essay on the Vitality of a Constitutional Idea," 52 Oregon Law Review 211 (1973).
Analysis of the seven rules
Rules related to Article III requirements
The first rule bars collusive suits as not proper cases or controversies under Article III. Brandeis relied on Atherton Mills v. Johnston, in which the court dismissed a challenge to a congressional act regulating child labor as moot, in support of the first rule.Atherton Mills v. Johnston, 259 U.S. 13, 16 (1922); see Bickel, supra note 7, at 3. Brandeis also cited to Chicago & Grand Trunk R.R. v. Wellman, 143 U.S. 339 (1892), which is described in Harlan's dissent in Poe v. Ullman: "the parties sought a ruling as to whether a particular passenger rate was unconstitutionally confiscatory, having stipulated all the debatable and contingent facts which otherwise might have rendered a constitutional decision unnecessary." 367 U.S. 497, 529 (1961). Atherton Mills presented a challenge to the Child Labor Tax Act by a father of a child employed at a mill, who alleged that his son was about to be discharged due to the impact of the tax. The father alleged that the resultant loss of his son's wages would injure him. He sought an injunction to keep the mill from discharging his son. The district court issued the injunction, finding the act unconstitutional, and the case proceeded to the Supreme Court. Atherton Mills, 259 U.S. at 13-15. As Professor Alexander Bickel points out, however, Atherton Mills was "a case of quite conventional mootness, hardly apt as an illustration of judicial self-restraint in constitutional litigation."Alexander M. Bickel (1957), The Unpublished Opinions of Mr. Justice Brandeis, p. 3. Mootness, a justiciability doctrine, serves to ensure that a controversy is "live" and in need of judicial resolution."Mootness avoids unnecessary federal court decisions, limiting the role of the judiciary and saving the courts' institutional capital for cases truly requiring decisions." Chemerinsky, supra note 38, at 110. The justifications for the doctrine, however, have been challenged. Susan Bandes, The Idea of a Case, 42 Stanford Law Review 227 (1990); Evan Tsen Lee, "Deconstitutionalizing Justiciability: The Example of Mootness," 105 Harvard Law Review 605 (1992) (maintaining that mootness should not be considered a constitutional doctrine, but merely a prudential rule); Henry P. Monaghan, "Constitutional Adjudication: The Who and When," 82 Yale Law Journal 1363 (1973) (debunking the judicial capital argument as "assum[ing] precisely what is at issue"). For Brandeis, however, Atherton Mills represented the issue of collusive suits arranged to obtain fast and convenient adjudication of constitutional issues.Bickel, supra, at 3. Brandeis argued in the unpublished opinion in Atherton Mills that the suit was merely a collusive, fictitious controversy between the parties — essentially, the child employee and employer. Id. at 6-7. The draft mirrors Brandeis' suspicion, articulated elsewhere, of claims for declaratory relief.  See Willing v. Chicago Auditorium Ass'n, 277 U.S. 274, 289 (1928) (Brandeis said declaratory relief was beyond the scope of Article III judicial power, and there was no statutory authorization for declaratory judgments at that time). The court, in Nashville, Chattanooga & St. L. Ry. v. Wallace, disagreed. 288 U.S. 249, 264 (1933) (declaratory judgments are justiciable as long as the case retains the essentials of an adversary proceeding, involving a real, not a hypothetical, controversy). In 1934, Congress passed the Declaratory Judgment Act, the constitutionality of which was upheld in Aetna Life Insurance Co. v. Haworth, 300 U.S. 227, 244 (1937). Despite the Declaratory Judgment Act, the avoidance doctrine still applies. Poe v. Ullman, 367 U.S. 497, 506 (1961) (stating that the declaratory judgment procedure "does not permit litigants to invoke the power of this Court to obtain constitutional rulings in advance of necessity"); Rescue Army v. Municipal Court of L.A., 331 U.S. 549, 573 n.41 (stating that discretionary element in declaratory judgment jurisdiction offers convenient instrument for making effective the avoidance doctrine). Brandeis elaborated on this concern in Ashwander, declaring judicial review of the constitutionality of legislative acts legitimate only as a last resort, and as a necessity in the determination of real, earnest and vital controversies between individuals.Ashwander, 297 U.S. at 346. It was never the thought that a party beaten in the legislature could transfer to the courts, by means of a friendly suit, an inquiry as to the constitutionality of the legislative act.Id. (quoting Chicago and Grand Trunk Ry. Co. v. Wellman, 143 U.S. 339, 345 (1892)); see Brilmayer, supra note 39, at 300 (stating that Article III's case or controversy requirement "has traditionally been understood to include the power to resolve abstract legislative issues, including constitutional issues, but only as a necessary byproduct of the resolution of particular disputes between individuals"); Bandes, supra note 78.
Federal courts thereby safeguard their limited power by barring such nonadversarial, fake controversies — suits over which an Article III court has no jurisdiction.See, e.g., Bickel, supra note 7, at 1-2 (in the draft opinion of Atherton Mills, Brandeis pointed out that neither the employee, his father nor the mill wanted the challenged tax). In Carter v. Carter Coal Company, 298 U.S. 238 (1936), decided the same term as Ashwander, Justice Brandeis joined Justice Cardozo's dissent from the majority opinion, which reached the merits of a constitutional challenge to Congressional legislation regulating the coal industry in an obviously collusive suit. In Carter Coal, the president of a coal company sued the coal company to enjoin its compliance with the legislation and the court found the legislation in part unconstitutional. 298 U.S. at 278-79. Justice Cardozo reasoned in dissent, quoting Brandeis in Ashwander, that there was no need to reach some of the constitutional issues. Id. at 325.
For other instances in which the court has rejected collusive suits, see United States v. Johnson, 319 U.S. 302, 303-05 (1943) (action dismissed where plaintiff sued defendant at defendant's request, and defendant financed and controlled litigation); Muskrat v. United States, 219 U.S. 346, 362-63 (1911) (suit between Native Americans and federal government was not justiciable merely because Congress had passed legislation authorizing suit to resolve constitutional question when their interests were not adverse). The court has described the requirement of standing as "closely related" to the rule against entertaining friendly, collusive suits.Flast v. Cohen, 392 U.S. 83, 100 (1968). This first rule of avoidance also overlaps with the ripeness requirement, discussed in conjunction with the second rule.
The second rule of the avoidance doctrine mirrors the ripeness requirement in that it obliges federal courts to refrain from deciding a dispute prematurely.Poe v. Ullman, 367 U.S. 497, 508-09 (1961) (dispute not ripe due to no real threat of criminal prosecution of plaintiffs under Connecticut statute regulating contraceptives); see Brilmayer, supra note 39; Gene R. Nichol Jr., "Ripeness and the Constitution," 54 University of Chicago Law Review 153 (1987); Jonathan D. Varat, "Variable Justiciability and the Duke Power Case," 58 Texas Law Review 273 (1980). The primary rationale for the ripeness doctrine, another justiciability doctrine arising from the case or controversy requirement, is "to prevent the courts, through avoidance of premature adjudication, from entangling themselves in abstract disagreements."Abbott Laboratories v. Gardner, 387 U.S. 136, 148 (1967); see Rescue Army v. Municipal Court of L.A., 331 U.S. 549, 575-85 (1947) (dispute not ripe because an incomplete factual record rendered a constitutional decision premature). In a leading case on ripeness, Poe v. Ullman, the court relied on the avoidance doctrine to set the stage for its decision that the controversy was not ripe.Poe, 367 U.S. 497, 498, 508-09 (1961) (the court declined to address plaintiffs' claim that Connecticut law regulating contraceptive use and related medical advice violated the Fourteenth Amendment). As the court instructed in Poe, "'The best teaching of this Court's experience admonishes us not to entertain constitutional questions in advance of the strictest necessity.'" 367 U.S. at 503 (quoting Parker v. County of Los Angeles, 338 U.S. 327, 333 (1949)). Justice Frankfurter wrote for four members of the court, and Justice Brennan concurred in the judgment, although four justices would have reached the constitutional issue. 367 U.S. at 509-55. Justice Brennan's brief, pivotal opinion in Poe reasons that the "true controversy" was the opening of large scale birth-control clinics and that that controversy simply was not ripe on the facts because the State had made no "definite and concrete" attempt to enforce the law. Constitutional adjudication could await such factual development, he concluded. 367 U.S. at 509. In Poe, Justice Felix Frankfurter described the Ashwander rules as arising from the "historically defined, limited nature and function of courts" and from the separation of powers principle.Poe, 367 U.S. at 503 (Such concerns "press with special urgency in cases challenging legislative action or state judicial action as repugnant to the Constitution."); see also United Public Workers v. Mitchell, 330 U.S. 75, 104 (1947).
Moreover, the rules recognize that adjudication within an adversary system functions best in the presence of "a lively conflict" between actively pressed antagonistic demands, making resolution of the controverted issue a practical necessity.Poe, 367 U.S. at 503. Frankfurter termed the justiciability doctrines of standing, ripeness, and mootness as merely "several manifestations ... of the primary conception that federal judicial power is to be exercised to strike down legislation ... only at the instance of one who is himself immediately harmed, or immediately threatened with harm, by the challenged action."Poe, 367 U.S. at 504 (emphasis added); see also Bickel, supra note 57, at 116 (both the time lag and the "flesh-and-blood facts" of a dispute secured by standing and the requirements of a case or controversy are important to legitimating judicial review of legislative action). The first two rules of the avoidance doctrine are, thus, closely linked to well-recognized justiciability requirements, and serve as alternative, but not distinctive, limitations on the federal judicial power.It is not surprising that many rules within the avoidance doctrine overlap with other justiciability and jurisdictional rules: the doctrine is a "series of rules" reflecting the larger canon of judicial self-restraint. Such rules are frequently and perhaps necessarily overlapping. See Bickel, supra note 57, at 71, 118, 125.
Standing, another justiciability doctrine derived from the "case or controversy" requirement, requires a litigant to allege that she has personally suffered or imminently will suffer a concrete injury, fairly traceable to the defendant's conduct, and that the court's decision will likely redress her injury.Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S. 737, 751 (1984); Cherminsky, supra note 38, § 2.3.  For background on the standing doctrine, see Bandes, supra note 78; Gene R. Nichol, "Injury and the Disintegration of Article III," 74 California Law Review 1915 (1986) (and earlier articles by Nichol cited therein); Antonin Scalia, "The Doctrine of Standing as an Essential Element of the Separation of Powers," 17 Suffolk University Law Review 881 (1983); Cass Sunstein, "Standing and the Privatization of Public Law," 88 Columbia Law Review 1432 (1988). Standing includes both constitutional and prudential components.  The third rule of the avoidance doctrine requires federal courts facing constitutional issues to rule no more broadly than the precise facts require.The third rule of the avoidance doctrine was a focus of debate in the court's controversial decision upholding the constitutionality of Missouri's abortion statute in Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, 492 U.S. 490 (1989). In Webster, the five-member majority upheld the state's prohibition against public employees assisting in the performance of an abortion which was not necessary to save a mother's life. 492 U.S. at 507, 522. This rule may reflect the fact-specific focus of the standing inquiry. The fifth rule, which requires that the challenged legislation injure the plaintiff, mirrors the injury and causation components of the standing requirement.The doctrine of standing, like the avoidance doctrine, reflects "the Art. III notion that federal courts may exercise power only 'in the last resort, as a necessity,' and only when adjudication is 'consistent with a system of separated powers and [the dispute is one] traditionally thought to be capable of resolution through the judicial process.'" Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S. 737, 752 (quoting Chicago & Grand Trunk R.R. v. Wellman, 143 U.S. 339, 345 (1892) and Flast v. Cohen, 392 U.S. 83, 97 (1968)); see David Logan, "Standing to Sue: A Proposed Separation of Powers Analysis," 1984 Wisconsin Law Review 37 (1984) (arguing that standing requirements are applied more stringently to constitutional claims).
Cases construing the prudential component of the standing doctrine have relied on the avoidance doctrine. Prudence gives rise to, among other doctrines, the prohibition against third-party standing.Singleton v. Wulff, 428 U.S. 106, 124 (Powell, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (citing Brandeis' discussion of the avoidance doctrine in Ashwander). As a general rule, a litigant can raise only her own claims, not those of another. Third party standing also implicates the basic concept of a right, which includes the power of the rightholder to choose whether to exercise that right. One policy underlying the prohibition is the desire to avoid unnecessary constitutional adjudication.Singleton, 428 U.S. at 124 n.3 (Powell, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). A second justification for the prohibition against third-party standing is the court's need for effective advocacy through a traditional controversy. Id. The court, in explicating the bar against third-party standing, has described Brandeis' Ashwander rules as "offering the standing requirement as one means by which courts avoid unnecessary constitutional adjudications."Singleton, 428 U.S. at 114. A second prudential restriction is the bar against finding standing for a generalized grievance — a harm shared in substantially equal measure by all or a large group of citizens.See, e.g., City of Los Angeles v. Lyons, 461 U.S. 95, 111 (1983) (person injured by police "chokehold" could seek damages but had no standing to seek injunctive relief against future use of "chokehold" because he could not show sufficient likelihood of imminent personal harm and irreparable injury); Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490, 499 (1975); Schlesinger v. Reservists Comm. to Stop the War, 418 U.S. 208, 221-27 (1974). The court has also linked this standing bar to the avoidance doctrine: the requirement of an individualized injury serves to ensure that "there is a real need to exercise the power of judicial review in order to protect the interests of the complaining party."Schlesinger, 418 U.S. at 221 (emphasis added) (challenging holding of Armed Forces Reserve commissions by members of Congress under Incompatibility Clause of Article I, § 6). The court also found the avoidance doctrine "particularly applicable" in Schlesinger because the litigants sought an interpretation of a constitutional provision which had not been construed by the federal courts. Indeed, the avoidance doctrine may be an early formulation of the justiciability doctrines.
Rules three and five of the avoidance doctrine thus echo concerns addressed by the constitutional and prudential limitations of standing and ripeness. In some cases, the tenets of the avoidance doctrine addressed above — rules 1, 2, 3 and 5 — may serve to buttress the conclusion that a case is not justiciable, or that a case is justiciable but the court will voluntarily decline to exercise its jurisdiction for prudential reasons. The avoidance doctrine as set out in these rules functions primarily as a supplement to established doctrines of standing and ripeness.
 Rules reflecting largely prudential concerns 
The sixth rule of the avoidance doctrine provides that a court will not rule upon the constitutionality of a statute at the instance of one who has benefitted from the statute. In support of this rule, Brandeis cited cases in which a party waived its ability to object to a statute because the party had pursued benefits afforded under the statute in one proceeding prior to challenging the statute's constitutionality in a separate judicial proceeding.See, e.g., Wall v. Parrot Silver & Copper Co., 244 U.S. 407, 411-12 (party which instituted proceeding for valuation of its stock under state legislation could not afterward assert the constitutional invalidity of legislation); Great Falls Mfg. Co. v. Attorney General, 124 U.S. 581, 598-600 (1888) (party which commenced Court of Claims proceeding for compensation after its property was taken for public use could not separately challenge the constitutionality of the taking in federal court). The Supreme Court later distinguished cases relying on the "estoppel to sue" doctrine as being cases in which "litigants had received or sought advantages from the statute that they wished to attack, advantages other than the mere right to sue."See Oklahoma v. United States Civil Service Commission, 330 U.S. 127, 139-40 & n.14 (1947). The sixth rule may be of relatively little importance today. To the extent the estoppel principle was based on a doctrine forbidding parties from asserting inconsistent positions in judicial proceedings,See Leonard v. Vicksburg, Shreveport, & Pacific Railroad Co., 198 U.S. 416, 423 (1905). Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8(d)(3) now expressly allows alternative or inconsistent allegations ("Inconsistent Claims or Defenses. A party may state as many separate claims or defenses as it has, regardless of consistency"). Moreover, broad modern principles of claim preclusion appear to address adequately the concern reflected in the cases cited for the estoppel principle.
The seventh rule of the avoidance doctrine derives from the familiar canon of statutory construction that a statute "ought not to be construed to violate the Constitution if any other possible construction remains available."Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173 (1991) (quoting Edward J. Debartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Bldg. and Const. Trades Council, 485 U.S. 568, 575 (1988)). A discussion of statutory construction is beyond the scope of this Article. A classic review of the canons is presented in Karl N. Llewellyn's "Remarks on the Theory of Appellate Decision and the Rules or Canons about How Statutes are to be Construed," 3 Vanderbilt Law Review 395, 401-06 (1950) (arguing that the canons of statutory construction provide little guidance because, for every canon, there is an equally weighty opposing canon). See Richard A. Posner (1985), The Federal Courts: Crisis And Reform, p. 276 (giving examples of same). A collection of intriguing articles commemorating Llewellyn's attack on the canons and examining the reemergence of the canons in recent judicial decisions is contained in "Symposium: A Reevaluation of the Canons of Statutory Interpretation," 45 Vanderbilt Law Review 529 (1992). The canon and the rule are identical and, not surprisingly, often used interchangeably.Rust, 111 S. Ct. at 1788 (O'Connor, J., dissenting). Justice O'Connor also cites the second rule of the avoidance doctrine in support of her argument not to decide constitutional questions in advance of the strictest necessity. Id. As in Zobrest v. Catalina Foothills School District, 509 U.S. 1 (1993), she refused to join the dissenters in Rust who reached the merits of, and dissented from the majority on, the constitutional issues.  See also Gregory v. Ashcroft, 111 S. Ct. 2395 (1991) (interpreting age discrimination statute so as to avoid Tenth Amendment problem). Indeed, the canon of statutory construction is grounded in large part upon the well-established practice of not reaching constitutional questions unnecessarily.United States v. Locke, 471 U.S. 84, 92 (1984). The seventh rule poses an alternative to the directive of the last resort rule. Through statutory construction rules, it may also be possible to avoid a constitutional question.See Rust, 111 S. Ct. at 1759.
See also
 Brandeis's Ashwander Rules
 Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill
References
External links
Category:1936 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Tenth Amendment case law
Category:Tennessee Valley Authority
Category:Alabama Power
"""

From "Aspen Skiing Co. v. Aspen Highlands Skiing Corp." ==> """
Aspen Skiing Co. v. Aspen Highlands Skiing Corp., 472 U.S. 585 (1985), was a United States Supreme Court case that decided whether a dominant firm's unilateral refusal to deal with a competitor could establish a monopolization claim under Section 2 of the Sherman Act..  The unanimous Supreme Court agreed with the 10th Circuit that terminating a pro-consumer joint venture without a legitimate business justification could constitute illegal monopolization.472 U.S. at 605–09  However, its decision created an exception to the general rule that firms can decide with whom to do business absent collusion, sparking significant controversy about the appropriate scope of this exception., doi:10.15779/Z38KX2Z., doi:10.3386/w8105. In a subsequent case, Verizon Communications Inc. v. Law Offices of Curtis V. Trinko, LLP, Justice Scalia, writing for the majority, stated that Aspen Skiing is "at or near the outer boundary of § 2 liability.". Although its holding has been narrowed, this case's relevance remains contested, especially in the context of refusals to license intellectual property.
Facts
Aspen Highlands and Aspen Skiing Co. were rival ski resorts in Aspen, Colorado. Throughout his ownership, Aspen Highlands founder Whip Jones remained at odds with Aspen Skiing Company, which owned and operated the three other Aspen ski areas: Aspen Mountain (Ajax), Buttermilk and Snowmass.
In every season, but one, from 1962 to 1977, Highlands and Ski Co. collaborated to offer a 6-day, All-Aspen ticket. Revenues from All-Aspen ticket sales were divided according to which hills skiers used.472 U.S. 585 at 591. Multi-area tickets became popular with consumers and by 1977 made up over one third of the market.
Despite more than a decade of cooperation, Ski Co. management grew discontent with the All-Aspen ticket. Complaining that monitoring ticket-holders’ use was cumbersome and inaccurate and that the All-Aspen ticket attracted customers who would otherwise buy Ski Co.’s 3-area, 6-day ticket, Ski Co. management recommended abandoning the All-Aspen ticket for the 1978-79 season.472 U.S. 585 at 592. Accordingly, the Ski Co. board offered Highlands a fixed percentage of the revenue significantly below Highland’s usual rate to continue the All-Aspen ticket for the 1978-79 season. As one board member suggested, it was an offer Highlands “could not accept” and the All-Aspen ticket vanished.
Although Highlands sought other ways to offer multi-area passes to compete with Ski Co., Ski Co. successfully thwarted its efforts. Ski Co. refused to sell Highlands any lift tickets, even at retail value.472 U.S. at 593. It also refused to accept vouchers backed by local banks for the full cash-value of retail price lift tickets.472 U.S. at 594. Eventually, Highlands replaced vouchers with American Express Traveler's Checks or money orders. While Ski Co. accepted these, the product was inconvenient compared to the All-Aspen ticket and Highland's share of the Aspen downhill skiing market sank from 20.5% in the 1976-77 season to only 11% in the 1980-81 season.472 U.S. at 594-95.
In 1979, Highlands filed a complaint against Ski Co. alleging illegal monopolization in violation of Section 2 of the Sherman Act.472 U.S. at 595.
 Procedural history 
A jury in the United States District Court for the District of Colorado found that Ski Co. maintained its monopoly through anticompetitive means in violation of the Sherman Act. The District Court awarded Highlands $7,500,000 in treble damages, costs, attorneys' fees and issued a temporary injunction requiring revival of the All-Aspen ticket.472 U.S. at 598. Ski Co. appealed the decision, arguing that its refusal to cooperate with a competitor could not constitute illegal monopolization as a matter of law. However, the 10th Circuit affirmed the jury verdict, finding that Ski Co.’s refusal to cooperate could constitute illegal monopolization applying either of the two available tests: (1) the anticompetitive effect and intent test and (2) the essential facilities doctrine.Aspen Highlands Skiing Corp., 738 F.2d at 1520.472 U.S. at 599.
The Supreme Court granted cert and affirmed the 10th Circuit’s decision based on anticompetitive intent, without analyzing the essential facilities doctrine.472 U.S. at 600.
Judgment
The Supreme Court held that Ski Co.'s refusal to deal with Highlands, despite the historical success of their joint-venture, could constitute illegal monopolization because it deprived consumers of a superior All-Aspen ticket option,472 U.S. at 605-607. injured Highlands' ability to offer competitive multi-area tickets,472 U.S. at 607-08. and, "perhaps most significant," it lacked any efficiency justification.472 U.S. at 608-611.  As the Court recognized in Lorain Journal, a firm's right to choose with whom to do business, or not, is important, but not "unqualified.”472 U.S. at 601 (citing ).
The court assessed and rejected all of Ski Co.'s proffered justifications for its refusals to deal. Ski Co. attempted to justify its termination of the All-Aspen ticket by suggesting that use monitoring was too inaccurate, but the Court pointed out Ski Co. already monitored usage on its own hills.472 U.S. at 608-09. Ski Co. further argued that it refused to accept Highland's “Adventure-Pack” coupons, even though they were redeemable for cash at local banks, because were cumbersome to process.472 U.S. at 609. However, the Court upheld factual findings that these vouchers were no more difficult to process than credit cards. Finally, Ski Co. argued that it ended its relationship with Highlands in order to distance itself from what, Ski Co. argued, were inferior slopes.472 U.S. at 609-610. The Court rejected this argument as implausible for two reasons: First, consumers could differentiate and assess quality on their own by choosing where to ski; Second, Ski Co. associated itself with "inferior products in other markets."472 U.S. at 610.
Rejecting all proffered justifications, the Court found that Ski Co. sacrificed short-term profits from selling Highlands lift tickets at retail prices in the hope of long-term anticompetitive gains from injuring their rival. This conduct could support a monopolization claim.
 Criticism 
Aspen Skiing was criticized for its handing of economic issues and its controversial injunction requiring cooperation.
 Inadequate analysis of exclusionary effects 
In its caution to avoid imposing inappropriate duties to deal, the Court focused significant attention on the history of successful joint-ventures to illustrate that such conduct was possible and beneficial.472 U.S. at 603-607.Jacobs, supra, at 65.Carlton, supra, at 677. As critics point out, however, this analysis alone does not support an antitrust violation.Herbert Hovenkamp, The Monopolization Offense, 61 Ohio St. L.J. 1035, 1044 (2000) If a joint-venture produces efficiencies, both parties should be able to reach an agreement without judicial intervention. Therefore, the discontinuation a joint-venture should not be suspect except in very narrow circumstances where one rival has the ability to exclude the other from the market. In this case, Ski Co. did not explicitly exclude Highlands since it did not prohibit its ski customers from also purchasing passes from Highlands. Still, Ski Co. might have functionally excluded Highlands.Carlton, supra, at 678. With three of the four Aspen mountains, Ski Co. enjoyed significant economies of scale. It also employed a non-linear pricing structure, offering significantly lower rates for multi-day passes over single-day passes. Customers choosing Ski Co.'s multi-area, multi-day passes may choose not to purchase Highlands passes since they already sunk the cost of the Ski Co. ticket.472 U.S. at 607 ("Even for the affluent, this was an irritating situation because it left the skier the option of either wasting 1 day of the 6-day, 3-area pass or obtaining a refund which could take all morning and entailed the forfeit of the 6-day discount.") While this exclusion could raise antitrust concerns, the Court did not address the central issues: whether there were economies of scale, whether there were sufficient day-pass skiers to avoid harm from exclusion in the multi-area/multi-day pass market, whether the non-linear pricing structure lead to exclusion.
Despite its emphasis on prior dealing, the Court did not wholly disregard exclusion. When discussing consumer preferences, the Court referenced a survey in the record indicating that over half of respondents "wanted to ski Highlands, but would not" and about 40% responded that "they would not be skiing at the mountain of their choice because their ticket could not permit it."472 U.S. at 606-07.  The Court, quoting the 10th Circuit decision, also "noted that by refusing to cooperate with Highlands, Ski Co. became the only business in Aspen that could offer a multi-day multi-mountain skiing experience."472 U.S. at 599 (internal quotations omitted). While neither the Supreme Court nor the 10th Circuit analyzed how exclusion from the multi-day/multi-area sub-market impacted the downhill skiing market as a whole, these facts may be relevant to finding the exclusion necessary for a monopolization claim.
 Improper market definition 
Neither the 10th Circuit nor the Supreme Court engaged in significant analysis of the relevant market. This, however, was not an oversight. The 10th Circuit refused to hear Ski Co.'s appeal of the relevant market instruction because they failed to properly object during the trial.Aspen Highlands Skiing Corp., 738 F.2d at 1515. Ski Co. argued that the relevant market should be decided by the judge as a matter of law (applying the Small, but Significant and Non-Transitory Increase in Price or SSNIP test), not the jury.Aspen Highlands Skiing Corp., 738 F.2d at 1513–16., doi:10.1093/joclec/nhq012. The trial court judge disagreed, reinforcing the idea that market definition is generally a question of fact. Ski Co. failed to object to the jury instruction's emphasis on relevant submarkets. Therefore, the appeals courts adopted the jury findings that " the relevant product submarket was downhill skiing services in the Aspen area, including multi-area and multi-day lift tickets" and  "the relevant geographic submarket was the Aspen area."Aspen Highlands Skiing Corp., 738 F.2d at 1513. Criticism of this conclusion falls on the jury, not the judges.
While the jury apparently accepted the analysis of the Plaintiff's marketing expert, who emphasized that Highlands and Ski Co. competed over skiers who already decided to come to Aspen,Macher and Mayo, supra, at 9. Ski Co. argued that this limited geographic market definition overlooked the fact that most Aspen skiers came from outside Colorado, suggesting that Aspen resorts actually competed with skiing destinations throughout North America.Jacobs, supra, at 64.Macher and Mayo, supra, at 10-13. A wider geographic market could mean Ski Co. lacked the requisite monopoly power for a conviction under Section 2. While the court alludes to the difference between multi-area/multi-day packages and single-day passes, it does not question the jury's finding.
 Inappropriate injunctive relief 
The injunction requiring cooperation to offer an All-Aspen ticket was widely criticized. First, since cooperation failed in the market, an injunction to cooperate forces the court to play the role of regulator, overseeing the price-setting and other complex terms of the contract.Verizon Commc'ns Inc., 540 U.S. at 408. Second, requiring cooperation can make it easier for rivals to illegally collude in markets outside the joint-venture. In fact, in 1975, when Highlands and Ski Co. were cooperating to offer the All-Aspen ticket, the Colorado Attorney General sued both of them for alleged price-fixing.472 U.S. 585, 591 n.9 The case settled with a consent decree allowing the All-Aspen ticket to continue.
  Subsequent case law 
As the Supreme Court stated in Verizon Communications v. Law Offices of Curtis V. Trinko, Aspen is "[t]he leading case imposing § 2 liability for refusal to deal with competitors."Verizon Commc'ns Inc., 540 U.S. at 399. Aspen "is at or near the outer boundary of § 2 liability" and represents a "limited exception" to a firm's right to choose with whom to do business that applies when a monopolist is willing to "forsake short-term profits to achieve an anticompetitive end."   Subsequent cases have applied and refined Aspen's holding:
Eastman Kodak Co. v. Image Tech. Servs., Inc., 504 U.S. 451(1992) (finding protection of intellectual property qualified as a valid business justification for a monopolist's unilateral refusal to deal, but this justification does not extend to products or services outside the scope of the patent)
In re Indep. Serv. Organizations Antitrust Litig. (Xerox), 203 F.3d 1322 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (Applying Kodak, without citing Aspen, the Court found no antitrust liability for refusal to license intellectual property protected by patents and copyrights because IP-right holders enjoy the statutory right to exclude even when there is a risk of anticompetitive harm)
LePage's Inc. v. 3M, 324 F.3d 141, 150 (3d Cir. 2003) (Citing Aspen, the Court required the defendant monopolist to justify its exclusionary dealings and loyalty discount practices with a legitimate business purpose)
Verizon Communications v. Law Offices of Curtis V. Trinko, LLP, 540 U.S. 398 (2004) (Distinguishing Aspen, the Court found no antitrust liability for a monopolist's unilateral refusal to cooperate with a rival when there was no history of prior cooperation because, unlike the termination of a successful joint-venture, refusal to enter a cooperative agreement does not create a presumption that the monopolist sacrificed short-term profits for future anticompetitive gain)See also 
Pacific Bell Telephone Co. v. linkLine Communications, Inc., 555 U.S. 438 (2009) (finding, absent a duty to deal as existed in Aspen, a monopolist's practice of charging rivals high wholesale prices, while charging direct consumers low retail prices, known as "price-squeezing," is not cognizable under the Sherman Act)
References
External links
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Aspen Skiing Company
Category:Legal history of Colorado
"""

From "Associated Press v. United States" ==> """
Associated Press v. United States, 326 U.S. 1 (1945), was a United States Supreme Court case on U.S. antitrust law.
Facts
The Associated Press (AP) had prohibited member newspapers from selling or providing news (whether that news was supplied by the AP, or was authored by the member newspaper - called "spontaneous" news) to nonmember organizations as well as making it very difficult for nonmember newspapers to join the AP.
Originally there were three separate cases (Associated Press et al. v. U.S., Tribune Company et al. v. U.S. and U.S. v. Associated Press et al.) that were joined into one when heard at the Supreme Court.
Judgment
The Supreme Court held that Associated Press had violated the Sherman Act. The bylaws of AP at that time, as written, constituted restraint of trade. The fact that AP had not achieved a complete monopoly was irrelevant. The First Amendment did not excuse newspapers from violating the Sherman Antitrust Act. News, traded between states, counts as interstate commerce, and thus makes the issue relevant for the Sherman Antitrust Act. Finally, Freedom of the press from governmental interference under the First Amendment does not sanction repression of that freedom by private interests (326 U.S. 20).
See also
US antitrust law
 International News Service v. Associated Press (1918) - a copyright Supreme Court case
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:1945 in United States case law
Category:Associated Press
"""

From "Association for Molecular Pathology v. Myriad Genetics, Inc." ==> """
Association for Molecular Pathology v. Myriad Genetics, Inc., 569 U.S. 576 (2013), was a Supreme Court case that challenged the validity of gene patents in the United States, specifically questioning certain claims in issued patents owned or controlled by Myriad Genetics that cover isolated DNA sequences, methods to diagnose propensity to cancer by looking for mutated DNA sequences, and methods to identify drugs using isolated DNA sequences..  Prior to the case, the U.S. Patent Office accepted patents on isolated DNA sequences as a composition of matter. Diagnostic claims were already under question through the Supreme Court's prior holdings in Bilski v. Kappos and Mayo v. Prometheus. Drug screening claims were not seriously questioned prior to this case.
The case was originally heard in Southern District Court of New York. Proponents of the validity of these patents argued that recognizing such patents would encourage investment in biotechnology and promote innovation in genetic research by not keeping technology shrouded in secrecy. Opponents argued that these patents would stifle innovation by preventing others from conducting cancer research, would limit options for cancer patients in seeking genetic testing, and that the patents are not valid because they relate to genetic information that is not inventive, but is rather produced by nature. The District Court ruled that none of the challenged claims were patent eligible.
Myriad then appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. The Federal Circuit reversed the district court in part and affirmed in part, ruling that isolated DNA that does not exist alone in nature can be patented and that the drug screening claims were valid but that Myriad's diagnostic claims were unpatentable. On appeal, the Supreme Court vacated and remanded the case for the Federal Circuit to reconsider the issues in light of Prometheus. On remand, the Federal Circuit held that Prometheus did not affect the outcome of the case, so the American Civil Liberties Union and the Public Patent Foundation filed a petition for certiorari. The Supreme Court granted certiorari and unanimously invalidated Myriad's claims to isolated genes. The Supreme Court held that merely isolating genes that are found in nature does not make them patentable.
 Background 
The global search for a genetic basis for breast and ovarian cancer began in earnest in 1988. In 1990, at a meeting of the American Society of Human Genetics, a team of scientists led by Mary-Claire King, from the University of California, Berkeley announced the localization through linkage analysis of a gene associated with increased risk for breast cancer (BRCA1) to the long arm of chromosome 17.  It was understood at the time that a test for these mutations would be a clinically important prognostic tool. Myriad Genetics was founded in 1994 as a startup company out of the University of Utah, by scientists involved in the hunt for the BRCA genes. In August 1994, Mark Skolnick, a founder of Myriad and scientist at University of Utah, and researchers at Myriad, along with colleagues at the University of Utah, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and McGill University published the sequence of BRCA1, which they had isolated. In that same year, the first BRCA1 U.S. patent was filed by the University of Utah, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), and Myriad.. Over the next year, Myriad, in collaboration with University of Utah, isolated and sequenced the BRCA2 gene, and the first BRCA2 patent was filed in the U.S. by the University of Utah and other institutions in 1995.. In 1996, Myriad launched their BRACAnalysis product, which detects certain mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes that put women at high risk for breast cancer and ovarian cancer.
Myriad's business model has been to exclusively offer diagnostic testing services for the BRCA genes. It was on the basis of the premium price that the patents would allow Myriad to set during the 20 year life of the patents, that investors put money into Myriad. These were the funds that allowed Myriad to rapidly sequence the BRCA2 gene and finalize a robust diagnostic test. The business model meant that Myriad would need to enforce its patents against competitors, which included diagnostic labs at universities, which function very much like for-profit businesses in addition to educating pathologists-in-training. The patents were to expire, starting in 2014. In 2012, Myriad—just a startup in 1994—employed about 1200 people, had revenue of around $500 million, and was a publicly traded company.Myriad Investor Page—see "Myriad at a glance"  accessed October 2012.
About 2000 isolated human genes had been patented in the United States before this case started. Gene patents have generated a great deal of controversy, especially when their owners or licensees have aggressively enforced them to create exclusivity. Clinical pathologists have been especially concerned with gene patents, as their medical practice of offering clinical diagnostic services is subject to patent law, unlike the practices of other doctors which are exempt from patent law. ("This subsection (exemptions of patent infringement for doctors) does not apply to the activities of any person...who is engaged in ...the provision of ... clinical laboratory services").  For example, in 1998, the University of Pennsylvania's Genetic Diagnostic Laboratory received cease and desist letters on the basis of patent infringement from Myriad, which requested clinical pathologists to stop testing patient samples for BRCA.  Because of these kinds of legal threats to its members' medical practices, the Association for Molecular Pathology has actively lobbied against the existence of, and exclusive licensing of, gene patents and was the lead plaintiff in this litigation.Association for Molecular Pathology Press Release, February 16, 2012. AMP Testifies at USPTO: AMP presented testimony to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office requesting moratorium on human gene patenting.Mary Steele Williams, Executive Director, Association for Molecular Pathology., February 16, 2012. Association for Molecular Pathology Testimony to the USPTO
 Litigants 
Along with the AMP (Association for Molecular Pathology) and the University of Pennsylvania, other plaintiffs in the suit included researchers at Columbia, NYU, Emory, and Yale, several patient advocacy groups, and several individual patients.
The defendants in the suit were originally Myriad, the trustees of the University of Utah, and the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), but the USPTO was severed from the case by the district court.
The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and Public Patent Foundation represented the plaintiffs, with attorney Chris Hansen arguing the case. The law firm of Jones Day represented Myriad.
 Arguments 
The complaint challenged specific claims on isolated genes, diagnostic methods, and methods to identify drug candidates, in seven of Myriad's 23 patents on BRCA1 and BRCA2.
The specific claims that were challenged were:
claims 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, and 20 of U.S. patent 5,747,282;
claims 1, 6, and 7 of U.S. patent 5,837,492;
claim 1 of U.S. patent 5,693,473;.
claim 1 of U.S. patent 5,709,999;.
claim 1 of U.S. patent 5,710,001;.
claim 1 of U.S. patent 5,753,441;. and
claims 1 and 2 of U.S. patent 6,033,857.
The plaintiffs wanted these claims declared invalid, arguing that they are not patentable subject matter under §101 of Title 35 of the United States Code—that the isolated genes are unpatentable products of nature, that the diagnostic method claims are mere thought processes that do not yield any real world transformations, and that the drug screening claims were merely describing the basic processes of doing science. This part of U.S. law describes what is patent-eligible: "any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof".  If the invention falls under one of several excluding categories, however, including a "naturally occurring article" (a defined term in the law), then it is not patent eligible.
The Plaintiffs argued that Myriad's use of these patents—and the patents' very existence—restricted research for clinicians and limited scientific progress. They further argued that from a patient's perspective, Myriad's use of the patents not only made it impossible to obtain a second opinion on a patient's genetic predisposition to breast and ovarian cancer, but also kept the cost of BRCA1/2 testing high by preventing competition.
Myriad defended their patents, arguing that the USPTO issues patents for genes as "isolated sequences" in the same way it issues patents for any other chemical compound, since the isolation of the DNA sequence renders it different in character from that present in the human body. Myriad argued that their diagnostic tests were patentable subject matter.
Decision of the District Court
On March 29, 2010, Judge Robert W. Sweet of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York declared all of the contested claims invalid.
With respect to claims to isolated DNA sequences, Judge Sweet's 152 page decision stated: "DNA's existence in an 'isolated' form alters neither this fundamental quality of DNA as it exists in the body nor the information it encodes. Therefore, the patents at issue directed to 'isolated DNA' containing sequences found in nature are unsustainable as a matter of law and are deemed unpatentable under 35 U.S.C. §101." The decision also found that comparisons of DNA sequences involved in these patents are abstract mental processes under the Federal Circuit's In re Bilski decision, therefore also not patent eligible, and that the drug screening claims were unpatentable as they merely cover a "basic scientific principle".
On June 16, 2010, Myriad filed its Notice of Appeal.
First hearing in the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit
Myriad's appeal was granted, and the case was heard in United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. Myriad, the defendant-appellant, was supported by at least 15 amicus briefs and the plaintiff-appellees' position received support from 12 amicus briefs.Donald Zuhn for Patent Docs Blog, January 27, 2011. Amicus Briefs in AMP v. USPTO: AARPDonald Zuhn for Patent Docs Blog, December 16, 2010. AMP v. USPTO—Briefing Update II The Department of Justice provided a surprising and unsolicited brief that in part supported the appellees but also suggested that claims covering isolated naturally occurring human genetic sequences are not properly patentable. Oral arguments were held on April 4, 2011.Dennis Crouch for Patently-O Blog. Apr 4, 2011 Federal Circuit Hears Myriad Gene Patent Case
On July 29, 2011, the Federal Circuit overturned the district court's decision in part (reversing that an isolated DNA sequence is patent-ineligible, and the district court's decision that methods for screening cancer therapeutics is patent-ineligible) and affirmed its ruling in part (agreeing that the district court's decision that Myriad's claims for comparing DNA sequences are patent-ineligible). Judge Alan Lourie, who wrote the majority ruling, reasoned that isolated DNA is chemically distinct from the natural state of a gene in the body. Judge Lourie cited the Supreme Court case Diamond v. Chakrabarty, which used the test of whether a genetically modified organism was "markedly different" from those found in nature to rule that genetically modified organisms are patent eligible. Thus, he concluded that since Myriad's patents describe DNA sequences that do not alone exist in nature, they are patent eligible.
First petition to the Supreme Court
After the Federal Circuit ruling, the Association for Molecular Pathology petitioned for a writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court, asking it to review this case. The Supreme Court granted the writ, and on March 26, 2012, it vacated the Federal Circuit decision, and remanded the case back to the Federal Circuit.Kevin Noonan for Patent Docs Blog, March 26, 2012 Supreme Court Remands Myriad Case In other words, the Supreme court revoked the original ruling of the Federal Circuit, and directed the lower court to re-hear the entire case again. These Supreme Court actions were made in light of its recent decision in Mayo Collaborative Services v. Prometheus Laboratories, Inc., where the Court ruled that certain kinds of claims in medical diagnostics patents, including natural phenomena, were not patentable. The Supreme Court expected the Federal Circuit to take this precedent into account in its new ruling.
Second hearing in the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit
On August 16, 2012, the Federal Circuit held its ground, ruling again in a 2–1 decision in favor of Myriad. The new court opinion was nearly identical to the original. The Federal Circuit again reversed the district court's decision on isolated DNA molecules; the Federal Circuit found that such molecules are patent-eligible under § 101 because they are nonnaturally occurring compositions of matter. It also reversed the district court's decision concerning assays to find drugs to treat cancer; the Federal Circuit again found that these assays are patentable. And again—now reinforced by the Mayo decision—the Federal Circuit affirmed the lower court's decision, that method claims directed to "comparing" or "analyzing" DNA sequences are patent ineligible. Such claims were held to include no transformative steps and therefore to cover only patent-ineligible abstract, mental steps.
With respect to the patentability of isolated genes, the majority opinion stated that the Mayo precedent was not particularly relevant to this case, because it did not deal with the patent eligibility of gene patents. Judge Lourie stated: "The remand of this case for reconsideration in light of Mayo might suggest, as Plaintiffs and certain amici state, that the composition claims are mere reflections of a law of nature. Respectfully, they are not, any more than any product of man reflects and is consistent with a law of nature."
Judge William Bryson wrote a dissent with respect to the non-patentability of isolated DNA sequences, applying the reasoning of the Supreme Court in the Mayo case, with respect to methods involving "natural laws", to products of nature:In Mayo, which involved method claims…the [Supreme] Court found that the method was not directed to patent-eligible subject matter because it contributed nothing "inventive" to the law of nature that lay at the heart of the claimed invention…In concluding that the claims did not add "enough" to the natural laws, the Court was particularly persuaded by the fact that "the steps of the claimed processes…involve well-understood, routine, conventional activity previously engaged in by researchers in the field."
Just as a patent involving a law of nature must have an "inventive concept" that does "significantly more than simply describe…natural relations,"… a patent involving a product of nature should have an inventive concept that involves more than merely incidental changes to the naturally occurring product. In cases such as this one, in which the applicant claims a composition of matter that is nearly identical to a product of nature, it is appropriate to ask whether the applicant has done "enough" to distinguish his alleged invention from the similar product of nature. Has the applicant made an "inventive" contribution to the product of nature? Does the claimed composition involve more than "well-understood, routine, conventional" elements? Here, the answer to those questions is no.
Neither isolation of the naturally occurring material nor the resulting breaking of covalent bonds makes the claimed molecules patentable….The functional portion of the composition—the nucleotide sequence—remains identical to that of the naturally occurring gene.Bryson's dissent, as cited in John Conley for Genomics Law Report Applying Mayo to Myriad: Latest Decision Brings No New News access date October 14, 2012.
Second petition to the Supreme Court
On September 25, 2012, the American Civil Liberties Union and the Public Patent Foundation filed another petition for certiorari with the Supreme Court with respect to the second Federal Circuit Decision.Kevin E. Noonan for Patent Docs Blog, September 25, 2012. Plaintiffs (Again) File Certiorari Petition in Myriad Case  On November 30, 2012, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the plaintiffs' appeal of the Federal Circuit's ruling.Dennis Crouch for Patently-O Blog, November 20, 2012. Supreme Court has Granted Cert in the Myriad Case, Question: Are Human Genes Patentable
Oral arguments were heard before the Supreme Court on April 15, 2013.SCOTUS Blog calendar, accessed on May 14, 2013
Decision of the Supreme Court
Justice Clarence Thomas, on June 13, 2013, delivered the opinion of the Court, in which all other members of the Supreme Court joined, except Justice Antonin Scalia, who concurred in part and concurred in the judgment. The majority opinion delivered by Thomas held, "A naturally occurring DNA segment is a product of nature and not patent eligible merely because it has been isolated, but cDNA is patent eligible because it is not naturally occurring."Slip opinion from the U.S. Supreme Court In Part III of the majority opinion, Thomas wrote:
It is important to note what is not implicated by this decision. First, there are no method claims before this Court. Had Myriad created an innovative method of manipulating genes while searching for the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, it could possibly have sought a method patent. But the processes used by Myriad to isolate DNA at the time of Myriad's patents "were well understood, widely used, and fairly uniform insofar as any scientist engaged in the search for a gene would likely have utilized a similar approach," 702 F. Supp. 2d, at 202–203, and are not at issue in this case.
Similarly, this case does not involve patents on new applications of knowledge about the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Judge Bryson aptly noted that, "[a]s the first party with knowledge of the [BRCA1 and BRCA2] sequences, Myriad was in an excellent position to claim applications of that knowledge. Many of its unchallenged claims are limited to such applications." 689 F. 3d, at 1349.
Nor do we consider the patentability of DNA in which the order of the naturally occurring nucleotides has been altered. Scientific alteration of the genetic code presents a different inquiry, and we express no opinion about the application of §101 to such endeavors. We merely hold that genes and the information they encode are not patent eligible under §101 simply because they have been isolated from the surrounding genetic material.
In his concurring opinion, which relates to the scientific details in the majority opinion, Scalia wrote:
I join the judgment of the Court, and all of its opinion except Part I–A and some portions of the rest of the opinion going into fine details of molecular biology.  I am unable to affirm those details on my own knowledge or even my own belief.  It suffices for me to affirm, having studied the opinions below and the expert briefs presented here, that the portion of DNA isolated from its natural state sought to be patented is identical to that portion of the DNA in its natural state; and that complementary DNA (cDNA) is a synthetic creation not normally present in nature.
Reactions to the decision
Molecular Pathology v. Myriad Genetics was a landmark case on the practice of gene patenting. The District Court's decision was received as an unexpected ruling, because it contradicted the generally accepted practice of gene patents. The Federal Circuit's decision was a return to the status quo, in which the U.S. Patent Office issues patents for isolated gene sequences. However, it still ignited much controversy and interest from the public. The plaintiff's argument that DNA should be excluded from patent eligibility was widely echoed in popular media.Sharon Begley for the Daily Beast. Feb 3, 2010 Who Owns Your DNA?60 Minutes, CBS. April 5, 2010 Should Firms Be Able to Own Your Genes? Jim Dwyer, a reporter for The New York Times, wrote: "But for many people, it is impossible to understand how genes—the traits we inherit from our parents and pass along to our children—could become a company's intellectual property."Jim Dwyer for The New York Times. March 30, 2010 In Patent Fight, Nature, 1; Company, 0 James Watson, one of the discoverers of the structure of DNA, agreed and submitted a brief in the case. He argued that DNA conveys special genetic information, that human genetic information should not be the private property of anyone, and that developing a patent thicket of gene sequences could prevent easy commercialization of genetic diagnostics.Donald Zuhn for Patent Docs July 12, 2012. Dr. James Watson: Human Genes Should Not Be Patented Access date October 14, 2012. For Watson's amicus brief to the Federal Circuit, see here
In terms of the emotional impact of this case as it was portrayed in the media—the exclusive offering of a diagnostic test and the high price of the test—the real legal force on that issue arose from the outcome of other cases, Bilski v. Kappos and Mayo v. Prometheus. These cases rendered most diagnostic claims unpatentable, making it difficult for Myriad's business model (as described above in the Background section) to work going forward—difficult for R&D driven business and investors and thus potentially bad for patients as there may be fewer diagnostic tests brought to market, but also potentially better for patients in that prices for tests may be lower and it will be easier to have a test re-done by an alternate lab.Susan Decker and John Lauerman for Bloomberg News. Jul 19, 2012. Human Genes as Company Property Tested by Myriad Patent CaseMeredith Cohn, The Baltimore Sun. September 22, 2012 Gene patent case could impact patients, research: Promising personalized medicine field could be limited by gene patents
The same issue, namely the patentability of the DNA sequence in the BRCA1 gene, was considered in a February 2013 case in the Federal Court of Australia where the validity of Myriad's patent was upheld. This was also a landmark ruling, and an appeal to the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia was to be heard in August 2013. The submissions for that appeal were due on June 14, 2013, the day after the U.S. Supreme Court ruling was published, and the appellants in the Australian case stated that the U.S. ruling was referenced within their submission. In a unanimous decision in October 2015, the High Court of Australia, Australia's final court of appeal, concluded that an isolated nucleic acid, coding for a BRCA1 protein, with specific variations from the norm that are indicative of susceptibility to breast cancer and ovarian cancer was not a "patentable invention".
References
Further reading
.
.
.
External links
 Very large collection of documents related to the case, collected and published in connection with 
Category:2013 in biotechnology
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Biological patent law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Astrue v. Capato" ==> """
Astrue v. Capato, 566 U.S. 541 (2012), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that children conceived after a parent's death are not entitled to Social Security Survivors benefits if the laws in the state that the parent's will was signed in forbid it.. The case was a unanimous decision.
Background
In 1999, Karen Capato's husband, Robert Capato, was diagnosed with esophageal cancer. Out of fear that he would become sterile due to the chemotherapy, Robert started to deposit sperm in a sperm bank in 2001. He began to recover and discovered that he was not left infertile by the cancer treatments. This led to the Capatos conceiving a son.  Robert's condition started to worsen in 2002 and he died of cancer. Eighteen months after her husband's death, in 2003, Capato gave birth to twins. They were conceived after Robert's death using the sperm deposited in the sperm bank via in vitro fertilization.  This was according to the Capatos' plan, so their son could have siblings. She applied for Social Security Survivors Benefits based on her husband's earnings during his lifetime. Her claim was rejected by the Social Security Administration (SSA).
Litigation history
The administrative Judge for the Social Security Administration ruled that the place of death of Robert Capato was Florida. Under Florida law children can not inherit from a parent if they were conceived after that parent's death. The Social Security Administration has used state inheritance laws as the deciding factor if a person was a "child" under the Social Security Act and therefore eligible for survivors benefits since the 1940s. Capato appealed the Social Security Administration's decision and the case moved to the US Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The appeals court reversed the Social Security Administration's decision.
Before the Court
Are children conceived by in vitro fertilization after their biological father's death protected under Title II of the Social Security Act?
Decision
In a unanimous 9–0 decision, Justice Ginsburg wrote the majority decision for the Supreme Court in favor of Astrue, stated that the children conceived after the death of their father were not entitled to Social Security benefits.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 566
References
Citations
Bibliography
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:Social Security lawsuits
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "AT&T Corp. v. Hulteen" ==> """
AT&T Corporation v. Hulteen, 556 U.S. 701 (2009), is a US labor law case of the United States Supreme Court, holding that maternity leave taken before the passage of the 1978 Pregnancy Discrimination Act needed not to be considered in calculating employee pension benefits.
Facts
The case entered the Supreme Court's docket in October 2007 and concerned whether maternity leave taken before the passage of the 1978 Pregnancy Discrimination Act can be considered in calculating employee pension benefits. The Supreme Court agreed to hear the case in June 2008. The case concerns Noreen Hulteen who took maternity leave in 1968. Due to complications resulting from giving birth she was hospitalized and required surgery. She missed a total of 240 days of work due to her pregnancy and surgery, but her employer, AT&T Corporation, only gave her 30 days of paid leave. Under company policy at the time, in contrast, employees who took disability leave were entitled to be paid as long as they were disabled. Before the passage of the Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978, it was lawful to award less service credit for pregnancy leave and exclude conditions related to pregnancy from employee sickness and accident benefits plans. The Supreme Court had previously upheld this in the cases of General Electric Company v. Gilbert (1976) and Geduldig v. Aiello (1974).
As a result of the policy, when Hulteen retired in 1994 from AT&T, AT&T calculated her pension benefits by excluding 210 days that it would have credited if she had been granted leave because of any disability other than pregnancy.
Shortly after her retirement, the Communications Workers of America (CWA), the union for the majority of AT&T's nonmanagement employees, filed charges of discrimination with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), alleging discrimination on the basis of sex and pregnancy in violation of Title VII. In 1998 the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), agreed with the CWA, alleging discrimination on the basis of sex and pregnancy in violation of Title VII and issued a Letter of Determination finding reasonable cause to believe that AT&T had discriminated Hulteen and several other women. In 2001, Hulteen and several other women sued AT&T, stating its decision to pay them smaller pensions because of their pregnancy disability leaves constituted an unlawful employment practice under the 1978 Pregnancy Discrimination Act, an amendment to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of pregnancy and allows those on maternity leave the same coverage as other medical leave. Lawyers for the women argued that each reduced retirement check that they receive is "a fresh act of discrimination" a reference to the first bill signed into law by President Barack Obama the Lilly Ledbetter law.
AT&T's argument was that the 1978 law cannot be applied retroactively because congress did not make the law retroactive and that they were basing the pension calculations on conditions at the time of employment.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in hearing the case ruled in favor of Hulteen. This decision directly conflicted with previous decisions of the Sixth and Seventh Circuits, helping to lead to the Supreme Courts decision to review the case. Oral arguments were heard on December 10, 2008.
Judgment
The Supreme Court ruled in a 7–2 decision on May 18, 2009, that maternity leave taken before the passage of the 1978 Pregnancy Discrimination Act could be excluded in calculating employee pension benefits, even though leave taken for non-pregnancy related medical disabilities was not excluded.. As a result of the Court's opinion AT&T was not required to amend its discriminatory pension policy retroactive to the effective date of the Pregnancy Discrimination Act. 
Justice Souter, in the majority opinion, wrote the following.
Justice Ginsburg dissented and said the following.
Significance
Critics of the decision like Christine L. Owens of the National Employment Law Project stated that "The court's decision could affect thousands of women who took pregnancy leaves decades ago and now are headed toward retirement; the only way women who took pregnancy leave before 1979 can make their leave time count is through the good graces of their company or through legislation by Congress."
Proponents of the decision like Rae T. Vann of Equal Employment Advisory Council stated that the decision was a "sensible and straightforward ruling" and "Congress intended the Pregnancy Discrimination Act to be applied prospectively, not retroactively."
 See also 
US labor law
 Pregnancy discrimination
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States family case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:Communications Workers of America
Category:AT&T litigation
Category:Parental leave in the United States
"""

From "AT&T Mobility LLC v. Concepcion" ==> """
AT&T Mobility LLC v. Concepcion, 563 U.S. 333 (2011), is a legal dispute that was decided by the United States Supreme Court. On April 27, 2011, the Court ruled, by a 5–4 margin, that the Federal Arbitration Act of 1925 preempts state laws that prohibit contracts from disallowing class-wide arbitration, such as the law previously upheld by the California Supreme Court in the case of Discover Bank v. Superior Court. As a result, businesses that include arbitration agreements with class action waivers can require consumers to bring claims only in individual arbitrations, rather than in court as part of a class action.
The decision was described by Jean Sternlight as a "tsunami that is wiping out existing and potential consumer and employment class actions" and by law professor Myriam Gilles as "the real game-changer for class action litigation". By April 2012, Concepcion was cited in at least 76 decisions sending putative class actions to individual arbitration. After the decision, several major businesses introduced or changed arbitration terms in their consumer contracts (some of which were based on the consumer-friendly terms found in the AT&T Mobility agreement), although the hypothesis of massive adoption of consumer arbitration clauses following the decision has been disputed.
Facts
In 2006, Vincent and Liza Concepcion sued AT&T Mobility over contract, contending that the cell phone company had engaged in deceptive advertising by falsely claiming that their wireless plan included free cell phones. Their suit became a class action. AT&T asked the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of California to dismiss the suit, because AT&T's contract required the Concepcions to submit any disputes to individual arbitration rather than filing a class action lawsuit.
Unlike other arbitration agreements, AT&T Mobility's arbitration agreement was designed to facilitate the pursuit of small claims in arbitration. The arbitration agreement provided that AT&T Mobility would pay the entire cost of arbitration (unless the claim was determined to be frivolous). The arbitration would take place in the county where the consumer was located, by telephone, or through document submission, and forms for the arbitration were made available on AT&T Mobility's website. The arbitrator was not limited in the damages it could award to a consumer, and if the consumer received an award greater than AT&T Mobility's last written settlement offer, the award would be increased to $7,500, and the consumer would be entitled to double attorney's fees. This led the United States District Court for the Southern District of California to state that arbitration under AT&T Mobility's agreement was "quick, easy to use, and prompts full or, as described by Plaintiffs, even excess payment to the customer without the need to arbitrate or litigate."
Nevertheless, the district court declined to dismiss the suit, ruling that California law prohibits contracts that unfairly exculpate one party from its wrongdoing, such as clauses that do not allow class action lawsuits alleging fraud in consumer adhesion contracts where the individual damages are small. AT&T appealed the case, saying that the Federal Arbitration Act should preempt state law. On October 27, 2009, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the lower court decision. AT&T, represented by Andrew J. Pincus of Mayer Brown, then appealed to the Supreme Court. After the Supreme Court granted review, appellate lawyer Deepak Gupta of Washington, D.C. was brought in to help represent the Concepcions and to argue the case in the Supreme Court on their behalf.
The Court heard oral arguments on November 9, 2010. Justices Scalia and Sotomayor questioned Pincus (attorney for AT&T Mobility) about when unconscionability doctrines are made under state law. Pincus argued that the California law was not being applied uniformly. Scalia challenged that assertion when he asked, "Are we going to tell the State of California what it has to consider unconscionable?". Other justices questioned different procedural issues arising from the unconscionability discussion and the scope of the rule AT&T was proposing. Deepak Gupta, representing the Concepcions, argued that the contract AT&T imposed on Respondents was clearly unfair. He asserted that state law should be a guidepost in these questions. Some of his arguments drew criticism from Chief Justice John Roberts. Gupta concluded by arguing that California "has made a judgment that if you preclude class-wide relief... that will gut the State's substantive consumer protection laws..."
Judgment
The majority opinion was written by Justice Antonin Scalia, and joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, and Samuel Alito. "Requiring the availability of classwide arbitration interferes with fundamental attributes of arbitration," Scalia wrote. "We find it hard to believe that defendants would bet the company with no effective means of review, and even harder to believe that Congress would have intended to allow state courts to force such a decision." Justice Scalia focused on the impact California's unconscionability law was having on arbitration clauses - since the rule was invalidating a large proportion of arbitration agreements, the rule must violate the policy in favor of arbitration. Therefore, it was preempted by the FAA.
Justice Stephen Breyer dissented, joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan. Breyer stated that class arbitrations are appropriate ways to resolve claims that are minor individually but significant in the aggregate. "Where does the majority get its contrary idea — that individual, rather than class, arbitration is a fundamental attribute of arbitration?" He said that without class actions, minor frauds would not be remedied. "What rational lawyer would have signed on to represent the Concepcions in litigation for the possibility of fees stemming from a $30.22 claim?"
Significance
Concepcion has been widely criticized in academic literature,See E McGaughey, 'Fascism-Lite in America (or the social idea of Donald Trump)' (2018) British Journal of American Legal Studies (arguing that like the Lochner era made social rights void, a new Concepcion era put rights up "for sale") and M Finkin, 'Workplace Justice: Does Private Judging Matter?' (2014) Zeitschrift für Vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft 2/2014 and calls for its reversal through an Arbitration Fairness Act have been made. Following Concepcion, many businesses introduced or renewed motions to move pending lawsuits to arbitration. In September 2011, J. Russell Jackson described the Supreme Court's ruling in Concepcion as "the decision that has launched a thousand motions", as defendants sought to compel arbitration of cases that had been pending "for some time", especially in California. In April 2012, Public Citizen published a list of 76 putative class actions where a court cited Concepcion in granting a motion to compel individual arbitration. University of Kansas law professor Christopher Drahozal wrote that the Public Citizen statistic overstated the impact of Concepcion, as several decisions applied state law that permitted class action waivers prior to Concepcion. Cardozo law professor Myriam Gilles wrote that the Concepcion decision had a greater impact on class actions than Wal-Mart v. Dukes, since Concepcion allowed businesses to avoid class actions by including arbitration clauses in boilerplate terms.
The Concepcion decision also impacted the usage of arbitration clauses in consumer contracts, including the usage of "consumer-friendly" arbitration terms like the ones in AT&T's agreement. Jean Sternlight said that the Concepcion decision would cause businesses to include arbitration clauses with class action waivers, saying that the Concepcion decision removed the possibility of "costly litigation" over whether such terms are enforceable. In a 2012 research paper, Gilles wrote that the majority opinion in Concepcion led to a "race to the top" in implementing arbitration procedures that are more friendly to consumer claims and more likely to allow their vindication. Gilles wrote that corporate lawyers encouraged companies to implement terms similar to the ones used by AT&T Mobility and upheld in Concepcion. According to Gilles, many large consumer-oriented businesses changed their arbitration provisions in 2011 and 2012. However, Gilles noted that only 6 out of the 37 companies she examined had arbitration clauses that "offered anything close to AT&T's set of incentives, and none were quite as generous". Ann Marie Tracey and Shelley McGill wrote that businesses would introduce more consumer-unfriendly terms in their arbitration clauses since unconscionability "provided strong motivation for business to draft agreements fairly in the pre-Concepcion environment; that motivation does not exist in the post-Concepcion era." Suzanna Sherry said that the broad holding of the decision would make harsh arbitration clauses, similar to the earliest consumer arbitration clauses, enforceable, since the unconscionability doctrine that had been used to strike down those harsh clauses could be found preempted based on Concepcion.
Several large businesses introduced arbitration provisions after Concepcion, and several companies' addition of arbitration clauses was reported by the media to have been prompted by the Supreme Court's ruling in Concepcion. According to a September 2011 CNN article, a Sony spokesperson said that Sony added an arbitration clause to its PlayStation Network terms of service because "[t]he Supreme Court recently ruled in the AT&T case that language like this is enforceable". PCWorld writer Jared Newman cited Sony and Microsoft as examples of companies that took advantage of Concepcion to add arbitration agreements with class action waivers. Drahozal and University of Georgia law professor Peter B. Rutledge wrote that Sony and Netflix added arbitration provisions following data breach class action litigation. Other companies reported to have added arbitration provisions to their consumer contracts after Concepcion include Umpqua Bank, Valve, eBay, PayPal, Instagram, and StubHub. American Arbitration Association Senior Vice President Richard Naimark said that a number of companies increased their usage of consumer arbitration after Concepcion, while before Concepcion, the number of consumer arbitrations administered by the AAA had been declining. Rutledge and Drahozal wrote that the adoption of arbitration in franchise contracts did not significantly increase after Concepcion or Am. Express Co. v. Italian Colors Rest., a case decided in 2013 that closely followed Concepcion, casting doubt on the hypothesis that Concepcion would cause businesses to adopt arbitration en masse. In November 2015, Stephen L. Carter wrote that although he and other critics had predicted that businesses would introduce "increasingly burdensome and one-sided arbitration clauses", "this hasn't happened".
Concepcion's prohibition on class actions has not necessarily led to a proportionate increase in individual claims filed through the arbitration system. AT&T, for instance, saw only 204 complaints resolved through the arbitration system in 2018, compared to AT&T's customer base of over 150 million subscribers.
See also
United States contract law
United States labor law
Federal Arbitration Act
Class action waiver
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 563
Notes
References
Ewan McGaughey, 'Fascism-Lite in America (or the social idea of Donald Trump)' (2018) British Journal of American Legal Studies
M Finkin, 'Workplace Justice: Does Private Judging Matter?' (2014) Zeitschrift für Vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft 2/2014
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United States class action case law
Category:AT&T litigation
"""

From "Atascadero State Hospital v. Scanlon" ==> """
Atascadero State Hospital v. Scanlon, 473 U.S. 234 (1985), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding Congress' power to abrogate the Eleventh Amendment sovereign immunity of the states.
Ordinarily, sovereign immunity prohibits the states from being sued, and the Eleventh Amendment prohibits states from being sued without consent in federal court; however, there are exceptions. A state can waive its sovereign immunity, and in Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer, 427 U.S. 445 (1976), the Supreme Court had emphasized that Congress could abrogate state sovereign immunity pursuant to powers granted it by the Civil War Amendments. The Court noted that Edelman v. Jordan, 415 U.S. 651 (1974), however, had recognized that "the Eleventh Amendment implicates the fundamental constitutional balance between the Federal Government and the States," Atascadero, at 238, the Court had applied a clear statement rule to waiver. The Court will only deem the state to have waived its immunity when the waiver is couched in "the most express language or by such overwhelming implication from the text as [will] leave no room for any other reasonable construction." Murray v. Wilson Distilling Co., 213 U.S. 151, 171 (1909).
In Atascadero, the Court made the rule symmetrical: just as purported waiver requires a clear statement, so too a purported abrogation requires a clear statement. Reiterating its "reluctance to infer that a State's immunity from suit in the federal courts has been negated[,] stem[ming] from recognition of the vital role of the doctrine of sovereign immunity in our federal system," Pennhurst State School and Hospital v. Halderman, 465 U.S. 89, 98 (1984) (Pennhurst II), and citing "[t]he fundamental nature of the interests implicated by the Eleventh Amendment," Atascadero, at 242, the court held "that Congress may abrogate the States' constitutionally secured immunity from suit in federal court only by making its intention unmistakably clear in the language of the statute." Id.
In response to Atascadero, Congress enacted a statute providing the clear language that the Court had demanded. The Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1986 stated that "a State shall not be immune under the Eleventh Amendment... from suit in Federal court for a violation" of relevant provisions of federal law.Lane v. Pena, , at 198Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1986, Pub. L. 99–506, 100 Stat. 1807, §1003; 
 References 
 External links  
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
"""

From "Atkins v. Virginia" ==> """
Atkins v. Virginia, 536 U.S. 304 (2002), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled 6-3 that executing people with intellectual disabilities violates the Eighth Amendment's ban on cruel and unusual punishments, but states can define who has an intellectual disability. At the time Atkins was decided, just 18 of the 38 death penalty states exempted intellectually disabled offenders from the death penalty.
Twelve years later in Hall v. Florida the U.S. Supreme Court narrowed the discretion under which U.S. states can designate an individual convicted of murder as too intellectually incapacitated to be executed.
The case
Around midnight on August 16, 1996, following a day spent together drinking alcohol and smoking marijuana, 18-year-old Daryl Renard Atkins (born November 6, 1977) and his accomplice, William Jones, walked to a nearby convenience store where they abducted Eric Nesbitt, an airman from nearby Langley Air Force Base. Unsatisfied with the $60 they found in his wallet, Atkins drove Nesbitt in his own vehicle to a nearby ATM and forced him to withdraw a further $200. In spite of Nesbitt's pleas, the two abductors then drove him to an isolated location, where he was shot eight times, killing him. 
Footage of Atkins and Jones in the vehicle with Nesbitt was captured on the ATM's CCTV camera, which showed Nesbitt in the middle between the two men and leaning across Jones to withdraw money. Further forensic evidence implicating the two men were found in Nesbitt's abandoned vehicle. The two suspects were quickly tracked down and arrested. In custody, each man claimed that the other had pulled the trigger. Atkins's version of the events, however, was found to contain a number of inconsistencies. Doubts concerning Atkins's testimony were strengthened when a cell-mate claimed that Atkins had confessed to him that he had shot Nesbitt. A deal of life imprisonment was negotiated with Jones in return for his full testimony against Atkins. The jury decided that Jones's version of events was the more coherent and credible, and convicted Atkins of capital murder.
During the penalty phase of the trial, the defense presented Atkins's school records and the results of an IQ test carried out by clinical psychologist Dr. Evan Nelson confirmed that he had an IQ of 59. On this basis they proposed that he was "mildly mentally retarded". Atkins was nevertheless sentenced to death.
On appeal, the Supreme Court of Virginia affirmed the conviction but reversed the sentence after finding that an improper sentencing verdict form had been used. At retrial, the prosecution proved two aggravating factors under Virginia law—that Atkins posed a risk of "future dangerousness" based on a string of previous violent convictions, and that the offense was committed in a vile manner. The state's witness, Dr. Stanton Samenow, countered the defense's arguments that Atkins was intellectually disabled, by stating that Atkins's vocabulary, general knowledge and behavior suggested that he possessed at most average intelligence. As a result, Atkins's death sentence was upheld. The Virginia Supreme Court subsequently affirmed the sentence based on a prior Supreme Court decision, Penry v. Lynaugh, 492 U.S. 302 (1989). Justice Cynthia D. Kinser authored the five-member majority. Justices Leroy Rountree Hassell Sr. and Lawrence L. Koontz Jr. each authored dissenting opinions and joined in each other's dissent.
Due to what it perceived to be a shift in the judgments of state legislatures as to whether intellectually disabled people are appropriate candidates for execution in the thirteen years since Penry was decided, the Supreme Court agreed to review Atkins's death sentence. The Court heard oral arguments in the case on February 20, 2002.
The ruling
The Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution forbids cruel and unusual punishments. In the ruling, it was stated that, unlike other provisions of the Constitution, the Eighth Amendment should be interpreted in light of the "evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society."  The best evidence on this score was determined to be the judgment of state legislatures. Accordingly, the Court had previously found that the death penalty was inappropriate for the crime of rape in Coker v. Georgia, 433 U.S. 584 (1977), or for those convicted of felony murder who neither themselves killed, attempted to kill, or intended to kill in Enmund v. Florida, 458 U.S. 782 (1982). The Court found that the Eighth Amendment forbids the imposition of the death penalty in these cases because "most of the legislatures that have recently addressed the matter" have rejected the death penalty for these offenders, and the Court will generally defer to the judgments of those bodies.
The Court then described how a national consensus that intellectually disabled people should not be executed had emerged. In 1986, Georgia was the first state to outlaw the execution of intellectually disabled people. Congress followed two years later, and the next year Maryland joined these two jurisdictions. Thus, when the Court confronted the issue in Penry in 1989, the Court could not say that a national consensus against executing intellectually disabled people had emerged. Over the next twelve years, nineteen more states exempted intellectually disabled people from capital punishment under their laws, bringing the total number of states to twenty-one, plus the federal government. While there are 50 states, 19 don't allow the death penalty under any circumstance, making 21 out of 31 a clear majority of the death penalty states. In light of the "consistency of direction of change" toward a prohibition on the execution of intellectually disabled people, and the relative rarity of such executions in states that still allow it, the Court proclaimed that a "national consensus has developed against it."  The Court, however, left it to individual states to make the difficult decision regarding what determines intellectual disability.
Also, the "relationship between mental retardation and the penological purposes served by the death penalty" justifies a conclusion that executing intellectually disabled people is cruel and unusual punishment that the Eighth Amendment should forbid. In other words, unless it can be shown that executing the intellectually disabled promotes the goals of retribution and deterrence, doing so is nothing more than "purposeless and needless imposition of pain and suffering", making the death penalty cruel and unusual in those cases. Being intellectually disabled means that a person not only has substandard intellectual functioning but also significant limitations in adaptive skills such as communication, self-care, and self-direction. These deficiencies typically manifest before the age of eighteen. Although they can know the difference between right and wrong, these deficiencies mean they have a lesser ability to learn from experience, engage in logical reasoning, and understand the reactions of others. This means that inflicting the death penalty on one intellectually disabled individual is less likely to deter other intellectually disabled individuals from committing crimes. As for retribution, society's interest in seeing that a criminal get his "just desserts" means that the death penalty must be confined to the "most serious" of murders, not simply the average murder. The goal of retribution is not served by imposing the death penalty on a group of people who have a significantly lesser capacity to understand why they are being executed.
Because intellectually disabled people are not able to communicate with the same sophistication as the average offender, there is a greater likelihood that their deficiency in communicative ability will be interpreted by juries as a lack of remorse for their crimes. They typically make poor witnesses, being more prone to suggestion and willing to "confess" in order to placate or please their questioner. Thus, there is a greater risk that the jury may impose the death penalty despite the existence of evidence that suggests that a lesser penalty should be imposed. In light of the "evolving standards of decency" that the Eighth Amendment demands, the fact that the goals of retribution and deterrence are not served as well in the execution of intellectually disabled people, and the heightened risk that the death penalty will be imposed erroneously, the Court concluded that the Eighth Amendment forbids the execution of intellectually disabled people.
In dissent, Justices Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas and Chief Justice William Rehnquist argued that in spite of the increased number of states that had outlawed the execution of intellectually disabled people, there was no clear national consensus, and even if one existed, the Eighth Amendment provided no basis for using such measures of opinion to determine what is "cruel and unusual". Justice Antonin Scalia commented in his dissent that "seldom has an opinion of this court rested so obviously upon nothing but the personal views of its members." The citing of an amicus brief from the European Union also drew criticism from Chief Justice Rehnquist, who denounced the "Court's decision to place weight on foreign laws".
Subsequent Supreme Court decisions
Twelve years after its Atkins decision the U.S. Supreme Court narrowed in Hall v. Florida (2014) the discretion under which U.S. states can designate an individual convicted of murder as too intellectually incapacitated to be executed. The Court laid down as a legal rule that "if the individual claiming intellectual incapacity has an IQ score that falls somewhere between 70 and 75, then that individual's lawyers must be allowed to offer additional clinical evidence of intellectual deficit, including, most importantly, the inability to learn basic skills and adapt, how to react to changing circumstances."
In Moore v. Texas (2017) the Supreme Court stated although the states have the primary responsibility for "the task of developing appropriate ways to enforce" the Eighth Amendment's prohibition of executing intellectually disabled persons, they can't do this in the way they want. States must closely take into account the most recent medical guide on intellectual disabilities. "A diagnosis of intellectual disability requires three things: 1) significantly subaverarge intellectual functioning (typically measured by an IQ score roughly two standard deviations below the mean); 2) adaptive-functioning deficits; and 3) an onset during childhood, before reaching 18. As the court recognized in Hall v. Florida (2014), intellectual disability is a condition, not an IQ score, and proper diagnosis thus places great emphasis on the second requirement, related to adaptive functioning." The Court further decided that instead of stereotypes, science should govern death penalty cases involving intellectually-disabled prisoners and that courts should base their decisions on opinions of professional organizations like the American Psychological Association.
Subsequent developments for Daryl Atkins
A jury in Virginia decided in July 2005 that Atkins was intelligent enough to be executed on the basis that the constant contact he had with his lawyers provided intellectual stimulation and raised his IQ above 70, making him competent to be put to death under Virginia law. The prosecution had argued that his poor school performance was caused by his use of alcohol and drugs, and that his lower scores in earlier IQ tests were tainted. 
In January 2008, Circuit Court Judge Prentis Smiley, who was revisiting the matter of whether Atkins was mentally disabled, received allegations of prosecutorial misconduct.  These allegations, if true, would have authorized a new trial for Atkins. After two days of testimony on the matter, Smiley determined that prosecutorial misconduct had occurred. At this juncture, Smiley could have vacated Atkins's conviction and ordered a new trial. Instead, Smiley determined the evidence was overwhelming that Atkins had participated in a felony murder and commuted Atkins's sentence to life in prison.
Prosecutors sought writs of mandamus and prohibition in the Virginia Supreme Court on the matter, claiming Smiley had exceeded his judicial authority with his ruling. On June 4, 2009, the Virginia Supreme Court, in a 5-2 decision authored by Chief Justice Leroy R. Hassell Sr., ruled that neither mandamus nor prohibition was available to overturn the court's decision to commute the sentence. Justice Cynthia D. Kinser, joined by Justice Donald W. Lemons, considered the two most conservative justices of the Court, wrote a lengthy dissent that was highly critical of both the majority's reasoning and the action of the circuit court in commuting the sentence.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court decisions on capital punishment
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 536
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Bigby v. Dretke
 Hall v. Florida - A 2014 U.S. Supreme Court case limiting the death penalty in the wake of Atkins v. Virginia
 Monster (Walter Dean Myers novel)
Footnotes
External links
  Transcript of oral argument
  Information about Atkins from the Death Penalty Information Center, an anti-capital punishment clearinghouse
 "Killer's fate hanging on his IQ" at BBC News
  Information about applying Atkins from the American Psychiatric Association
  Amicus brief of the Criminal Justice Legal Foundation
  Amicus brief of the American Association on Mental Retardation
 Virginia Supreme Court Opinion in Atkins v. Commonwealth including dissents of Hassell and Koontz
  Blog entry from the Daily Kos
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Virginia
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:2002 in United States case law
Category:Intellectual disability
"""

From "Atkinson Trading Co. v. Shirley" ==> """
Atkinson Trading Co. v. Shirley, 532 U.S. 645 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the Navajo Nation's imposition of a hotel occupancy tax upon nonmembers on non-Indian fee land within its reservation is invalid.
 Background 
The Atkinson Trading Company, Inc. owns a hotel, restaurant, cafeteria, gallery, curio shop, retail store, and recreational vehicle facility, which are located on non-Indian fee land within the Navajo Nation Reservation.  The tribe provided police, fire, and ambulance services for the area, including the hotel complex.  In 1992, the Navajo Nation enacted an 8 percent hotel occupancy tax on hotel rooms located within the reservation.  Atkinson sought a declaratory judgment that the tax was invalid under Montana v. United States.; ,  256 (2005).
Under Montana, Indian tribes lack civil authority over the conduct of non-Indians on non-Indian land which is located on a reservation.  An exception to Montana is where the non-Indian had entered into a consensual relationship with the tribe.  Here, the hotel complex was surrounded by the reservation and received numerous services from the tribe.  The District Court granted summary judgment to the tribe and the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed.Atkinson, 532 U.S. at 647-49; Jacob T. Levy, Three perversities of Indian law, in  148, 154 (Lisa Ford & Tim Rowse eds. 2012);  , at 256.
 Supreme Court 
Chief Justice William Rehnquist delivered the opinion of a unanimous court.  Rehnquist stated that while Indian tribes have unique attributes of sovereignty over both their members and their territory, they do not have civil authority past those limits, with minor exceptions.  The tribe's imposition of a tax upon nonmembers on non-Indian fee land within the reservation was presumptively invalid without establishing that the tax was related to a consensual relationship with Atkinson.Atkinson, 532 U.S. at 659.
 Subsequent developments 
The decision appeared to defy established Indian law, and significantly affected the ability of a tribe to build a significant tax base.  The ruling significantly affected the Navajo's revenue in a negative manner.  Although they still provided services, tax revenue had dropped from $1,167,000 to $881,000 in 2001.  The tribe now requires a consent to taxes clause in all contracts.,  11 (2009); Sarah Krakoff, Healing the West with Taxes: The Navajo Nation and the Enactment of Sovereignty, in  27, 43 (Patricia Nelson Limerick, Andrew Cowell, & Sharon K. Collinge eds. 2009).
 References 
External links
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Navajo Nation
Category:United States Native American case law
"""

From "Atlantic Marine Construction Co. v. United States District Court" ==> """
Atlantic Marine Construction Co., Inc. v. United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, 571 U.S. 49 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court decision dealing with the enforcement of forum selection clauses., slip op. at 1 (2013).
Background
Petitioner, a corporate citizen of Virginia, entered into a contract to build a child development center in Fort Hood, Texas.Atlantic Marine Construction, slip op. at 2 (noting that Atlantic Marine's principal place of business was in Virginia). The Petitioner then entered into a subcontract with a Texas corporation for work on the project.Atlantic Marine Construction, slip op. at 2. The contract specified that any litigation resulting from the contract would be brought in state court in Norfolk, Virginia or in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia.Atlantic Marine Construction, slip op. at 2 (citing In re Atlantic Marine Constr. Co., 701 F. 3d 736, 737–738 (5th Cir. 2012)). When a dispute arose under the contract, the Texas corporation filed suit in the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, invoking that court's diversity jurisdiction. The Petitioner moved to dismiss the suit on the grounds that venue was "wrong" under 28 U.S.C. 1406(a) and "improper" under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(3), citing the contract's forum selection clause. In the alternative, the Petitioner sought transfer to the Eastern District of Virginia under 28 U.S.C. 1404(a). The district court denied both motions. On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit refused to grant a writ of mandamus directing the district court to grant either motion.Atlantic Marine Construction, slip op. at 3.
 Opinion 
In a unanimous opinion authored by Associate Justice Samuel Alito, the Supreme Court clarified that the proper procedure to enforce a forum selection clause is through a motion to transfer under 28 U.S.C. 1404(a).Atlantic Marine Construction, slip op. at 4, 8-9. When such a motion is made, the district court should grant it unless extraordinary circumstances counsel against doing so.Atlantic Marine Construction, slip op. at 4, 8-9 ("Only under extraordinary circumstances unrelated to the convenience of the parties should a §1404(a) motion be denied."). Noting that Section 1404(a) does not provide for transfer to non-federal court venues, the Court said that the doctrine of forum non conveniens still exists within the federal courts.Atlantic Marine Construction, slip op. at 8-10. While that doctrine has been codified at Section 1404(a) for the federal system, the same factors that apply in analyzing motions user that statute can be used to transfer cases to non-federal forums.Atlantic Marine Construction, slip op. at 9-10 (""Section 1404(a) is merely a codification of the doctrine of forum non conveniens for the subset of cases in which the transferee forum is within the federal court system; in such cases, Congress has replaced the traditional remedy of outright dismissal with transfer.").
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 571
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States contract case law
"""

From "Atlantic Sounding Co. v. Townsend" ==> """
Atlantic Sounding Co. v. Townsend, 557 U.S. 404 (2009), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States holding that a seaman may recover punitive damages from his employer for failure to pay maintenance and cure.  Townsend reversed a line of cases, starting with Guevara v. Maritime Overseas Corp. in the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit (New Orleans), that restricted damages in maritime personal injury cases only to "pecuniary" damages.  Consequently, a seaman can now recover both attorney's fees and punitive damages for the willful and wanton refusal of a shipowner to provide medical care to a seaman injured on the job.  The Court's 5-4 opinion was delivered by Justice Clarence Thomas.
The Court explained that Congress never used the words "pecuniary" or "non-pecuniary" to describe the damages available for personal injuries (injuries not causing death) under either the Jones Act or the Federal Employers Liability Act.  Congress merely said "damages"; hence, any limitation on those damages to "pecuniary damages" was a creation of the courts, not Congress.  The Court stated that it "will not attribute words to Congress that Congress did not say."
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States admiralty case law
"""

From "Atlantic Works v. Brady" ==> """
Atlantic Works v. Brady, 107 U.S. 192 (1883), is a patent infringement decision of the United States Supreme Court, noted for this criticism of allowing patents on trivial inventions that encourage speculators:
Background
right|thumb|300px|Drawing of Brady's dredging boat, from his patent
Edwin L. Brady obtained a patent on boats for dredging under water.U.S. Pat. No. 72,360. The patented dredge boat consisted of "a strong boat, propelled [preferably] by  . . . two propellers placed in the stern of the boat" and driven by a steam engine.  The use of two propellers made "the boat more manageable in steering in crooked channels." Near the bow of the boat, Brady placed another steam engine driving a "mud fan," like a propeller but with sharper blades, extending two feet below the bottom of the boat. "[T]heir object is, by their rapid revolution, to displace the sand and mud on the bottom and, stirring them up, to mix them with the water so that they may be carried off by the current." The boat has a series of watertight compartments into or out of which water is pumped so as to sink the vessel to the required depth for dredging.107 U.S. at 192-93
Brady claimed as his invention:
Atlantic Works of Boston constructed a dredge boat of the same construction as that described in Brady's patent. He sued for patent infringement in the circuit court, seeking an injunction and "an account of all such gains and profits as they, the respondents, have received by their unlawful and wrongful acts and doings."Brady v. Atlantic Works, 3 F. Cas. 1190, 1192, 1876 U.S. App. LEXIS 1522 (C.C.D. Mass. 1876). The case was tried before Supreme Court Justice Clifford, as Circuit Justice. He sustained the patent and found it infringed.107 U.S. at 195.
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|right|125px|Justice Joseph Bradley
Justice Bradley delivered a unanimous opinion of the Court. He began by analyzing the patent:
All the elements were old. The use of a series of tanks for the purpose of keeping the vessel level while she settles "is an old contrivance long used." The use of propeller screws "for the removal of sand and mud accumulated at the mouths of the Mississippi had frequently occurred years before" the patentee's alleged invention. Dredging by "running the vessel up and down over the bar, and thus stirring up the mud with the propeller screw" so that "the screws' coming in contact with the mud and deposit, and the revolutions of the screws about sixty times a minute, would create a current of water by which the sediment would be washed away" was previously used on the Mississippi River.107 U.S. at 197.
The Court observed: "It may well be asked at this point where was there any invention in the device described in the patent? Was it invention to place a screw for dredging at the stem of the boat? Nothing more than this was in reality suggested by the patentee." But previous boats used as dredge boats did that. They just ran the boats backwards. "They were turned end for end, and the stern was used as the [bow], and the screws went forward, working in the bottom deposit in advance of the vessels." If, instead of using an existing ordinary boat for dredging, one wanted to construct a boat expressly for dredging, putting the screws at the front would "have been suggested by ordinary mechanical skill."107 U.S. at 199. Even though all the elements of Brady's dredge boat were old, could there be invention in combining them? "Did he make a selection and combination of these elements that would not have occurred to any ordinary skilled engineer called upon, with all this previous knowledge and experience before him, to devise the construction of a strong dredge boat for use at the mouth of the Mississippi? We think not. We think that there is no reasonable ground for any such pretension."107 U.S. at 202.
The Court explained how technological progress ordinarily occurs:
The patent system must be operated knowing this, the Court explained, or technological progress will be hampered instead of being promoted by the patent system:
The Court therefore ruled: "Our conclusion is that the patent sued on cannot be sustained, and that the decree of the circuit court must be reversed and the cause remanded, with instructions to dismiss the bill of complaint."107 U.S. at 205.
Commentary
According to Justin Lee, the key policy guiding Atlantic Works "is the notion that a patent grant is a quid pro quo. The patentee is granted a bundle of exclusionary rights and the public receives in return a disclosure of previously unknown technological know-how." Therefore, if any routine mechanic would devise the claimed invention when con fronted with the problem that the patent addresses, "then the grant of exclusionary rights succeeds only in preventing the public from exercising its rights to practice technology already within its grasp without giving anything back to the public return."Justin Lee, How KSR Broadens (without Lowering) the Evidentiary Standard of Nonobviousness, 23  L.J. 15, 17-18 (2008).
 References 
External links
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1883 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Dredging
"""

From "Atwater v. City of Lago Vista" ==> """
Atwater v. Lago Vista, 532 U.S. 318 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court decision which held that a person's Fourth Amendment rights are not violated when the subject is arrested for driving without a seatbelt. The court ruled that such an arrest for a misdemeanor that is punishable only by a fine does not constitute an unreasonable seizure under the Fourth Amendment.
Facts
Texas law provides for police officer discretion in arresting any person caught committing a misdemeanor, such as violating its mandatory seat belt laws. Violation of its seat belt law in 1999 was punishable with the maximum fine of $50. (citing  Tex. Tran. Code Ann. § 545.413 (1999)).  In March 1997, Gail Atwater, a long-term resident of Lago Vista, Texas, was driving her pick-up truck with her three-year-old son and five-year-old daughter from soccer practice.  One of the children had lost a toy and she allowed them to unbuckle their seat belts to stand to search for the toy; hence, none of them were wearing their seat belts. Police officer Bart Turek, then with the city of Lago Vista, recognized Ms. Atwater and pulled her over. According to court records, witnesses observed that Atwater and her children remained in her pick up when Turek approached the driver's side window and aggressively jabbed his finger toward Atwater's face. According to Atwater's complaint (allegations, previously supported by witnesses at the scene, that the court also presumed to be true for its purposes), Turek screamed at Atwater about the seatbelts, frightening her children. When Atwater requested that Turek lower his voice, Turek immediately yelled in response, "you’re going to jail." According to the record, Atwater remained calm when Turek told her that she was going to jail. The record also stated that Atwater did not act suspiciously, did not pose any threat to Turek, and did not engage in any illegal conduct other than failing to wear a seat belt. Turek continued to verbally abuse Atwater, accusing her of not caring for her children.
After telling Atwater that she would be taken to jail, Turek demanded her driver's license and proof of insurance. When Atwater informed Turek that her purse had been stolen a couple of days ago and that her license and insurance card were in the purse, Turek told Atwater that he had "heard that story two-hundred times." Atwater provided her address from her checkbook. Atwater then asked Turek to allow her to take her "frightened, upset, and crying" children to a friend's home located just two houses away before taking her to jail, but he refused her request. Turek told her "[y]ou're not going anywhere" and stated that her children could accompany her to the police station. A friend of Atwater's who came to the scene, took the children into her care while the officer arrested Atwater. Turek handcuffed Atwater, in front of her two young children, placed her in his squad car, did not fasten her seat belt, and drove her to the police station to be booked and fingerprinted. According to the court document, "booking officers had her remove her shoes, jewelry, and eyeglasses, and empty her pockets. Officers took Atwater's 'mug shot' and placed her alone in a jail cell for about one hour."  A magistrate released Atwater on $310 bond. She later paid three $50 fines for each violation of Texas's seat belt law - one for her and each of her children. The charges of driving without a license and without proof of insurance were dismissed.
Atwater and her husband, Michael Haas, an emergency room physician at a local hospital, filed suit under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, represented by Charles Lincoln, alleging that the city violated her Fourth Amendment right to be free from unreasonable seizures by arresting her for a crime whose only punishment was a fine. This argument required her to concede that the police had probable cause to arrest her for violating the seat belt law, and thus the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas found summary judgment for the city. A panel of the Fifth Circuit reversed, holding that arresting a person for a fine-only misdemeanor was per se unreasonable. The Fifth Circuit sitting en banc reversed the panel, agreeing with the district court's reasoning. Three judges dissented from the en banc panel's ruling, arguing that the police had to have a specific reason for arresting Atwater for only violating the seat belt law. The U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear the case.
Majority opinion
The court started by analyzing and rejecting Atwater's argument that the common law did not grant authority to police officers to execute warrantless arrests for misdemeanors that did not involve a breach of the peace. The court, recognizing the lack of unanimity of a common law rule, found that the historical common law had a "decided, majority view that the police did not need to obtain an arrest warrant merely because a misdemeanor stopped short of violence or threat of it" and hence the argument had failed.
The majority conceded that "If we were to derive a rule exclusively to address the uncontested facts of this case, Atwater might well prevail."  The majority also acknowledged specific directness in its actual opinion, "suggesting that courts look with 'disfavor' on such legislative enactments 'as interfering with the constitutional liberties of the subject'." Furthermore, the majority decision concluded that "warrantless misdemeanor arrests [may not] need constitutional attention," and that "It is of course easier to devise a minor-offense limitation by statute than to derive one through the Constitution"  Thus, the court rejected adopting a new Constitutional law rule by focusing on administrability concerns. It then held that probable cause was the issue and that the standard had been met.
Analysis
The Court held officer "Turek was authorized (though not required) to make a custodial arrest without balancing costs and benefits or determining whether Atwater's arrest was in some sense necessary."  Atwater v. City of Lago Vista, 532 U.S. 318, 322.
In Wilson v. Arkansas, , the Court considered whether the Fourth Amendment required the police to knock first and announce their presence before entering a person's home.  To decide that issue, the Court deemed it necessary to examine whether the common law required the police to knock and announce their presence.  The Court's analysis in this case proceeded along similar lines.  Atwater claimed that the Framers of the Fourth Amendment understood an "unreasonable" seizure to include a warrantless arrest for a misdemeanor offense that was not a "breach of the peace."  The Court examined the historical evidence of practice in England during the Middle Ages and in the 17th and 18th centuries and in America from the time of the ratification of the Bill of Rights to modern times.  Though the Court did find some evidence favoring Atwater's position, it determined that much of the historical precedent contradicted her argument.   In the end, the Court's common law analysis supported the proposition that a police officer could arrest any person for a misdemeanor committed in his or her presence.
Atwater had urged the Court to adopt a "bright-line" rule that the police not arrest anyone for an offense that did not carry jail time unless the government could show a compelling need to detain the person.  At first blush, the Court conceded, this rule appeared easily administrable by police officers, which would serve the government's interest in rules that are easy to apply on the spot.  But in thinking through many possible applications of the rule Atwater proposed, the Court found it more difficult to apply.  Court opinion stated that it is not reasonable to expect the average police officer to know the details of "frequently complex penalty schemes", especially since the penalty associated with seemingly identical conduct can vary with the facts that are difficult to discern at the scene of a crime, such as whether the suspect is a repeat offender or the weight of drugs.  Furthermore, even if the officer could make that distinction on the spot, he could not know how the district attorney will later choose to charge the offense.
Police routinely exercise discretion in their work.  Requiring the police to decide whether a crime is a fine-only crime, for which he could not arrest the suspect, in the heat of the moment ultimately exposes the police to greater legal consequences—either exclusion of illegally obtained evidence, or personal liability for violating the suspect's constitutional rights.  Balancing of Fourth Amendment interests through "probable cause" and "extraordinary" circumstances has been delineated in Terry v. Ohio, .  Given the choice to abandon or abridge the requirement of probable cause for arrest in the case of fine-only misdemeanors, the Court ruled that the Fourth Amendment imposed the same standard for all crimes: probable cause.
The Court's decision in this case ultimately involved the extent of law-enforcement discretion in exercising their duties.  After asking in oral argument, "how bad the problem is out there?" the court admonished Atwater's counsel's failure to provide it with "indications of comparably foolish, warrantless misdemeanor arrests."  The majority opinion ultimately emphasized a specific view that "Multiplied many times over, the costs to society of such underenforcement could easily outweigh the costs to defendants of being needlessly arrested and booked."
Dissenting opinion
Justice O'Connor, presenting the (4-5) dissenting opinion, stated that the historical evidence was not uniform in rejecting Atwater's proposed rule and reasoned that the Fourth Amendment required a balancing of interests in the case of an arrest for a fine-only misdemeanor.  The court dissent in Atwater precluded the sole use of probable cause in Whren v. United States, , where the Court had held that, on balance, it was reasonable to allow the police to make a traffic stop whenever they spied a violation of the traffic laws, although a traffic stop was a seizure. But, because of the length of the typical traffic stop and the fact that most drivers are free to go after it is done, such a seizure was commensurate with the magnitude of the violation and sufficient to ensure that the offender would appear later in court if necessary.  The dissent elucidated, "probable cause" and "extraordinary" circumstances as delineated in Terry v. Ohio, Whren v. United States, etc., have also proved less than problematic.  Strong argument to the contrary also remains as to the merit of the majority opinion that "personal § 1983 liability for the misapplication of a constitutional standard…would guarantee increased litigation." In Atwater, the dissent further argued that Atwater could not have been characterized as a possible flight risk by the arresting officer, since she was known to him and was an established member of the community and that respondents failed to substantiate any demonstrable merit for the arrest decision. They further noted that arrest for a fine-only misdemeanor was not reasonable because sending someone to jail for up to 48 hours (the time necessary to get him or her before a magistrate to be released) was too great an intrusion upon the personal liberty interests of anyone who had committed a relatively minor offense as would only merit such a fine as punishment.
The Atwater dissenting court opinion states, "A broad range of conduct falls into the category of fine-only misdemeanors...   Such unbounded discretion [given to law enforcement] carries with it grave potential for abuse.  The majority takes comfort in the lack of evidence of ‘an epidemic of unnecessary minor-offense arrests’."  Reasoning beyond the case of a misdemeanor arrest for a seat-belt-law violation, Justice O'Connor’s dissenting court opinion further cautions, "The Court’s error, however, does not merely affect disposition of this case. The per se rule that the Court creates has potentially serious consequences for the everyday lives of Americans." Justice O'Connor concludes the court's minority's dissent by stating, "The Court neglects the Fourth Amendment’s express command in the name of administrative ease.  In so doing, it cloaks the pointless indignity that Gail Atwater (and her children) suffered with the mantle of reasonableness."
Relation with search incident arrest
Along with the power to make a custodial arrest for any misdemeanor traffic offense, officers have the Constitutional authority to make a suspicionless search of any person incident to a custodial arrest.
However, the potential for a warrantless search of a vehicle incident to such misdemeanor arrests—combining the holdings of Atwater and New York v. Belton—has since been limited by Arizona v. Gant.
Gant limited searches incident to arrest to circumstances where it is reasonable to believe that: 1) the arrested individual might access the vehicle at the time of the search; or 2) the arrested individual's vehicle contains evidence of the offense that led to the arrest. The Court suggested in dictum that "when a recent occupant is arrested for a traffic violation, there will be no reasonable basis to believe the vehicle contains relevant evidence." at page 10. Argued October 7, 2008—Decided April 21, 2009.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 532
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
Further reading
External links
  Text of U.S.C.A. - Fifth Circuit: No. 98-50302, findlaw.com  (initial ruling of 3-judge panel, reversed en banc)
 Text of U.S.C.A. - Fifth Circuit: No. 98-50302 (en banc decision, affirmed 5-4 by the Supreme Court) (pdf)
  Text of the opinion, LII, Cornell University
  OYEZ Project
 Amicus brief from Americans for Effective Law Enforcement
 Information about applying Atwater in California, from the Alameda County District Attorney's office
 Amicus brief from the CATO Institute
 Amicus brief from the ACLU
 Amicus brief of the Solicitor General
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Auer v. Robbins" ==> """
Auer v. Robbins, 519 U.S. 452 (1997), is a United States Supreme Court case that concerns the standard that the Court should apply when it reviews an executive department's interpretation of regulations established under federal legislation. The specific issue was whether sergeants and lieutenants in the St. Louis Police Department should be paid for working overtime. The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 established the overtime pay requirement, and the US Department of Labor issued regulations to determine if an employee was covered by the overtime requirement.
The Court held that it should defer to the Secretary of Labor's interpretation of the regulations.
 Background 
A statute under the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 exempted "bona fide executive, administrative, or professional" employees from overtime pay requirements. In determining whether an employee was exempt, the US Department of Labor and the Secretary of Labor applied a "salary-basis" test in 1940 that was not applicable to state and local employees.
In 1974, Congress extended the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 to cover all public-sector employees. For an employee to be exempt under the salary-basis test, the employee must earn a specified minimum amount on a salary basis. Employees would be considered to be paid on a salary basis if they routinely received a weekly predetermined payment that was not subject to reduction because of any variations in the "quality or quantity of the work performed."
Petitioners were sergeants and a lieutenant employed by the St. Louis Police Department in Missouri. They sued the respondents, members of the St. Louis Board of Police Commissioners, and sought overtime pay that they believed was owed to them under the FLSA. Petitioners argued that they did not meet the requirements of the Secretary's salary-basis test since the St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department Manual stated that their salary could be reduced for a variety of disciplinary infractions, including the quality or the quantity of work performed. Petitioners also argued their duties were not of an executive, administrative, or professional nature, as required under the salary-basis test.
The District Court found for the respondents, ruling that petitioners were paid on a salary basis. On appeal, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed in part and reversed in part. While petitioners had argued that the police department manual made it a possibility for employees to be deducted pay for disciplinary infractions, all employees are subject to such deductions that are nonexempt under the FLSA. Specifically, the petitioners highlighted the fact that one sergeant was actually subjected to a disciplinary deduction.
The Court of Appeals rejected the petitioners' argument. The Court held that a "one-time incident" in which disciplinary deductions were executed against one sergeant was a unique circumstance that did not defeat the salaried status of an employee. The Court held that both the salary-basis test and the duties test were satisfied to all petitioners.
The Supreme Court granted certiorari.
 Issue 
Did the Fair Labor Standards Act's rule regarding overtime pay for private-sector employees apply equally to public-sector employees?
If the first question was answered in the affirmative, did the Secretary of Labor reasonably interpret the salary-basis test to deny public-sector employees salaried status and thus grant them overtime pay when their compensation might, "as a practical matter," be adjusted in ways that were ostensibly inconsistent with the letter of the test? Given that the police manual provided for disciplinary deductions in pay for the police officers, which is generally sufficient to preclude exempt status under the FLSA, the question was whether the possible but unlikely disciplinary deductions in pay, as provided for by the police manual, were enough to render the petitioners' pay "subject to" disciplinary deductions specifically within the meaning of the salary-basis test.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court agreed with the Court of Appeals in holding that both the salary-basis test and the duties test were satisfied as to all petitioners. The Supreme Court dismissed the petitioners' argument that the regulations concerning "disciplinary actions" should not apply to public sector employees and instead deferred to the Secretary of Labor's regulations by citing Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. (1984) because it was "based on a permissible construction of the statute." The Court denied the petitioners argument that public sector employee pay is distinguished from private sector employee pay because in the public sector enforcing compliance with work rules is a necessary component of effective government, thus reinforcing the 1974 extension of the FLSA to cover virtually all public sector employees.
While Chevron refers to the interpretation of an agency's enabling statute, the Court here gave deference to the agency in interpreting its own rules and regulatory schemes and reasoned that "because the salary-basis test is a creature of the Secretary's own regulations, his interpretation of it is, under our jurisprudence, controlling unless, 'plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the regulation.'" Further, the fact that the Secretary's interpretation came in the form of a legal brief did not make it unworthy of deference since the Secretary's position was "in no way a post hoc rationalization...to defend past agency action against attack.".  Under the Secretary's view, it is not enough that the police policy manual includes some specified penalties that involve disciplinary deductions in pay because the manual lists 58 possible rule violations and a range of penalties, which does not effectively communicate that pay deductions are or should be an anticipated form of punishment. Therefore, the Court stated that "no clear inference can be drawn as to the likelihood of a sanction being applied to employees such as petitioners."
Additionally, the Supreme Court states that even if the petitioners had been correct in their arguments, they did not follow the proper procedures. Under the APA, they should have gone through the regulatory appeals process, instead of directly appealing to the courts.Nicholas R. Bednar, Defying Auer Deference, 100 Minn. L. Rev. (2015), http://www.minnesotalawreview.org/2015/06/defying-auer-deference-skidmore-solution-conservative-concerns-perez-v-mortgage-bankers-association/
Legacy
Auer deference gives agencies a highest level of deference in interpreting their own regulations. However, deference is warranted only if the language of the regulation is ambiguous unless it is plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the regulation. The case expands Chevron deference by giving the agency the highest deference.
In Chevron, there was a two-step standard of review. The Chevron standard dealt with "a formal rationale for judicial deference to an agency's interpretation of a statute." Auer did not adopt the two-step process for review in Chevron but a single level standard of deference "to an agency's permissible interpretation of its regulation."
Auer deals with the agency's interpretation of its own regulation, as opposed to the agency's interpretation of the statute, as in Chevron.
In Auer, the claim was not that the regulation was substantively unlawful or even that it violated a clear procedural prerequisite. It was that it was arbitrary and capricious not to conduct amendatory rulemaking, which might have resulted in no change. There was no basis for the court to set aside the agency's action, prior to any application for relief addressed to the agency itself.
The proper procedure for pursuit of respondent's grievance was set forth explicitly in the APA: a petition to the agency for rulemaking.
The question of whether to overturn Auer was the focus of the 2019 Supreme Court case, Kisor v. Wilkie. The Court's decision did not overturn Auer but set forth a set of conditions where courts should use the Auer deference, limiting the extent of its use.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:United States Department of Labor
Category:Metropolitan Police Department, City of St. Louis
"""

From "Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce" ==> """
Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce, 494 U.S. 652 (1990), is a United States corporate law case of the Supreme Court of the United States holding that the Michigan Campaign Finance Act, which prohibited corporations from using treasury money to make independent expenditures to support or oppose candidates in elections, did not violate the First and Fourteenth Amendments. The Court upheld the restriction on corporate speech, stating, "Corporate wealth can unfairly influence elections"; however, the Michigan law still allowed the corporation to make such expenditures from a segregated fund.
Background
The Michigan Campaign Finance Act banned corporations from spending treasury money on "independent expenditures to support or oppose candidates in elections for state offices." The Act had one loophole-if a corporation had an independent fund solely used for political purposes the law did not apply. The Michigan Chamber of Commerce sought to use its general funds to publish an advertisement in a local newspaper to support a candidate for the Michigan House of Representatives,
Opinion of the Court
Louis J. Caruso, Lansing, Michigan, argued on the side of the appellants (Austin). Richard D. McLellan, Lansing, Michigan, argued for the respondent (Michigan Chamber of Commerce).
In an opinion by Justice Marshall, the Court held the Act did not violate the First or the Fourteenth Amendments. The Court recognized a state's compelling interest in combating a "different type of corruption in the political arena: the corrosive and distorting effects of immense aggregations of wealth that are accumulated with the help of the corporate form and that have little or no correlation to the public's support for the corporation's political ideas."
Marshall concluded by noting the importance of the Act: 
Marshall was joined in the majority opinion by Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justices William Brennan, Byron White, Harry Blackmun, and John Paul Stevens. Justice Kennedy wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Scalia and O'Connor.
 Subsequent developments 
The decision was overruled by Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission, 558 U.S. 50 (2010), ruling that the First Amendment right of free speech applied to corporations.
See also
United States corporate law
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 494
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Appearance of corruption
 Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission (2010)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States elections case law
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:Legal history of Michigan
"""

From "Austin v. United States" ==> """
Austin v. United States, 509 U.S. 602 (1993), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution applies to civil forfeiture cases..
Background
Richard Lyle Austin was indicted for violating South Dakota's drug laws.Austin, 509 U.S. at 604. He pleaded guilty to one count of possession cocaine with intent to distribute and was sentenced to seven years in jail. The United States then filed an in rem action, seeking forfeiture of Austin's mobile home and auto body shop under federal statutes that provide for forfeiture of property that is used or intended for use to facilitate the transportation of controlled substances, or related materials.Austin, 509 U.S. at 60405 (citing 21 U.S.C. §§ 881(a)(4), (a)(7). Austin argued that forfeiture of his property would violate the Eighth Amendment's Excessive Fines Clause.Austin, 509 U.S. at 605.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion written by Justice Harry Blackmun, the Court held that civil forfeiture proceedings are "subject to the limitations of the Eight Amendment's Excessive Fines Clause."Austin, 509 U.S. at 622. Justice Antonin Scalia filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment, writing that the majority should not have decided whether in rem forfeitures always amount to a punishment of the owner.Austin, 509 U.S. at 626-27 (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment). Justice Anthony Kennedy also filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment which was joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justice Clarence Thomas.Austin, 509 U.S. at 628 (Kennedy, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 508
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Excessive Fines Clause case law
"""

From "Avegno v. Schmidt" ==> """
Avegno v. Schmidt, 113 U.S. 293 (1885), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that title to property confiscated during the American Civil War was properly held by the mortgagor.
Facts
The action was brought in the civil District Court for the Parish of Orleans, in the State of Louisiana. The plaintiff was heirs of the deceased Bernard Avegno, who sought to establish their title to New Orleans real estate. The case was tried without a jury, yielding a judgment for the defendants. Upon appeal to the Supreme Court of Louisiana, the judgment was affirmed. To reverse that judgment of affirmance, the plaintiffs brought this writ of error..
Occurrence facts
On April 3, 1862, Bernard Avegno, the owner of the disputed property, mortgaged it to Israel C. Harris to secure promissory notes made by Avegno, payable to his own order and endorsed by him, totaling 500, which he delivered to Harris. The mortgage contained the pact de non alienando, by which the mortgagor agreed not to sell, alienate, or encumber the mortgaged property to the prejudice of the mortgage. The notes and mortgage were afterwards transferred by Harris to Charles Morgan. The mortgage was still in force, when on January 20, 1865, the United States filed, in Louisiana District Court, a libel of information against the property, to condemn it as confiscated under the Act of July 17, 1862, 12 Stat. 589, entitled "An act to suppress insurrection, to punish treason and rebellion, and confiscate the property of rebels, and for other purposes". A writ of seizure was issued to the marshal, who, dated February 14, 1865, stated that he had seized the libeled property.
Morgan, the mortgage creditor, intervened in the suit for confiscation, demanding to be paid the amount due on his mortgage. The district court, on August 1, 1865, decreed the property forfeited to the United States. He ordered it to be sold, and dismissed Morgan's claims, on the ground that his mortgage "could not be acknowledged." The property was not sold, nor were any proceedings taken.
Procedural facts
On June 25, 1867, Morgan sued Avegno  in Circuit Court, for the enforcement of his mortgage. On July 11, the court allowed the property to be sold. On December 21, 1868, the property was purchased by Morgan.
On March 1, 1869, Morgan conveyed the premises to the defendants. On August 12, 1872, Avegno died, leaving his children as heirs. They claimed title to the property. Their petition stated:
that, by reason of such confiscation and forfeiture, all right, title, interest, and ownership of Bernard Avegno (deceased) was absolutely divested; that said real estate was during his lifetime forfeited to the United States; but that the naked ownership thereof was then vested in your petitioners, who were his legitimate children, living at the time of the rendition of said decree and judgment of condemnation and forfeiture; that on the 12th day of August, 1872, Bernard Avegno died, whereupon the title and interest of the United States in the said property came to an end, and said life estate was terminated, your petitioners being therefore entitled to the full ownership thereof.
 Arguments in court 
Absent a US proceeding for condemnation and any intervention by Morgan, he would have gotten clear title to the premises.
The plaintiffs contended that the conveyed title was void, because the judgment divested Avegno of all interest and estate in the premises, the circuit court lacked jurisdiction to allow the sale, and because the district court, which did have jurisdiction, dismissed Morgan's intervention on the ground that his mortgage "could not be acknowledged".
Morgan's interest was not divested or affected by the district court.See Day v. Micou, 18 Wall. 156; Claims of Marcuard, 20 Wall. 114. Notwithstanding the judgment, therefore Morgan had a valid mortgage superior to any claim acquired by the judgment, or that could be acquired under a subsequent sale. It did not lie with the plaintiffs to object that the United States was not a defendant to Morgan's suit. The government's standing in the property was determined by Avegno's death. Therefore, whether the government was represented in Morgan's suit was of no concern to any party. Without pointing out the necessary and proper parties to such a suit, the plaintiffs claimed that Avegno was neither, leaving no jurisdiction for the circuit court.
The defendants responded that the district court proceedings were void, because the initial seizure was invalid. Had it been valid, Avegno would have had no interest in the property.Wallach v. Van Riswick, 92 U. S. 202; Pike v. Wassell, 94 U. S. 711; French v. Wade, 102 U. S. 132.  A joint resolution passed contemporaneously with the enabling legislation was intended to benefit the owner's heirs. Its intent was to enable them to inherit ownership. In Pike v. Wassell, ubi supra, a bill, filed during the owner's lifetime by the condemned's children to protect the property from any encumbrance arising from the owner's failure to pay taxes was sustained. The court declared that in the absence of any other steward, the children might act in that capacity.
These decisions apparently sustain the plaintiff's contention that foreclosing the mortgage was without the necessary parties, and was therefore void for want of jurisdiction.
The defendants responded that because Avegno's mortgage contained the pact de non alienando (in which the mortgagor agrees not to alienate/encumber the premises to the prejudice of the mortgage), he was the only necessary party to Morgan's suit. The effect of such a stipulation was well settled in Louisiana. In Nathan v. Lee, 2 Martin N.S. 32, the effect was decided to be that
the mortgagee is not bound to pursue a third possessor, but may have the hypothecated property seized in via executina as if no change had taken place in its possessors, because any alienation or transfer made in violation of the pact de non alienando is ipso jure void, as it relates to the creditor, and that this effect of the pact is not annulled by the provisions of the Civil Code in relation to mortgages, and the rules laid down for pursuing the action of mortgage.
In Stanbrough v. McCall, 4 La. Ann. 324, the court reviewed the cases on this subject and held that where a mortgage contained the pact de non alienando, a party that purchases the property from the mortgagor cannot claim to be in any better condition than such mortgagor, and cannot plead any other exception, and that any alienation in violation of the pact is null.
These cases, and those cited in the note, establish that non alienando mortgagees may enforce mortgages by proceeding against the mortgagor alone, without regard to subsequent disposition of the property, and that this binds anyone relying on such a disposition.
In the Avegnor case,and in the later case of Shields v. Shiff, 36 La.Ann. 645 the Louisiana Supreme Court held that there was such a privity between a person whose life estate had been condemned under the Act of July 17, 1862, and his heirs, that the latter were bound by a suit and decree to enforce a mortgage executed by their ancestor containing the pact de non alienando, to which the ancestor alone had been made a party defendant. It is sustained by Wallach v. Van Riswick, ubi supra, as will appear by the following passages from that Court's opinion:
If it be contended that the heirs of Charles S. Wallach," the person whose property had been condemned,
cannot take by descent unless their father, at his death, was seized of an estate of inheritance, e.g., reversion or a remainder, it may be answered that even at common law it was not always necessary that the ancestor should be seized to enable the heir to take by descent. Shelley's Case is that where the ancestor might have taken and been seized, the heir shall inherit. Fortescue, J., in Thornby v. Fleetwood, 1 Str. 318.
If it were true that at common law the heirs could not take in any case where their ancestor was not seized at his death, the present case must be determined by the statute. Charles S. Wallach was seized of the entire fee of the land before its confiscation, and the act of Congress interposed to take from him that seizing for a limited time. That it was competent to do, attaching the limitation for the benefit of the heirs. It wrought no corruption of blood. In Lord de la Warre's Case, 11 Coke 1a, it was resolved by the justices
that there was a difference betwixt disability personal and temporary and a disability absolute and perpetual, as where one is attainted of treason and felony, that is an absolute and perpetual disability, by corruption of blood, for any of his posterity to claim any inheritance in fee simple, either as heir to him or any ancestor above him, but when one is disabled by Parliament (without any attainder) to claim the dignity for his life, it is a personal disability for his life only, and his heir, after his death, may claim as heir to him or to any ancestor above him.
There is a close analogy between that case and the present.
Without pursuing this discussion further, we repeat, that to hold that any estate or interest remained in Charles S. Wallach after the confiscation and sale of the land in controversy, would defeat the avowed purpose of the confiscation act and the only justification for its enactment, and to hold that the joint resolution was not intended for the benefit of his heirs exclusively, to enable them to take the inheritance after his death, would give preference to the guilty over the innocent. We cannot so hold.
These extracts show that the court's opinion was that title to an estate condemned under the 1862 Act passed to the owner's heirs, who did not derive their title from the United States or the confiscation.
Avegno was therefore the only possible party to the suit brought by Morgan to foreclose his mortgage. The proceedings and sale were valid and binding on the plaintiffs, and vested title in Morgan, which he conveyed to the defendants.
The plaintiffs insisted that the mortgage had been declared inoperative and void by the district court, in dismissing Morgan's attempt to condemn the mortgaged property, and that the defendants were bound by that judgment. However, this defense should have been advanced in Morgan's suit. A competent court's decree cannot be attacked by  defense that the defendant never made. Also, the district court had no jurisdiction in the matter.Bigelow v. Forrest, 9 Wall. 339; Day v. Micou, 18 Wall. 156; Claims of Marcuard, 20 Wall. 114. The record does not make clear that the district court intended to pass upon the mortgage's validity or that it had the jurisdiction to do so.
The judgment was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:19th century in New Orleans
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:United States property case law
"""

From "Avery v. Midland County" ==> """
Avery v. Midland County, 390 U.S. 474 (1968), is a United States Supreme Court case that ruled that local government districts had to be roughly equal in population.
 Background 
Having already held in 1965 in Reynolds v. Sims that disparities in legislative districts violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, the Supreme Court applied the same logic to local government districts for bodies which also have broad policy-making functions.
The case was brought by Henry Clifton Avery, Jr., more commonly known as Hank Avery, who was Mayor of the City of Midland, Texas.  He challenged the districting scheme for the Commissioners Court of Midland County, a five-member county commission with four Commissioners elected in single-member districts and the County Judge elected at-large. Texas Association of Counties  One Commissioner's district, which included almost all the City of Midland, had a population of 67,906, according to 1963 estimates. The others, all rural areas, had populations respectively, of about 852; 414; and 828.
Avery brought his case in Texas District Court in Midland. Three of the four commissioners testified at trial that population was not a major factor in the districting process. The trial court ruled for petitioner that each district under the State's constitutional apportionment standard should have "substantially the same number of people." An intermediate appellate court reversed. The Texas Supreme Court reversed that judgment, holding that under the Federal and State Constitutions the districting scheme was impermissible "for the reasons stated by the trial court." It held, however, that the work actually done by the County Commissioners "disproportionately concerns the rural areas" and that such factors as "number of qualified voters, land areas, geography, miles of county roads, and taxable values" could justify apportionment otherwise than on a basis of substantially equal populations.
 Opinion of the Court 
The five justices who struck down local district inequality based their decision on the precedent in Reynolds v. Sims. Writing for the majority, Associate Justice Byron White said, "In a word, institutions of local government have always been a major aspect of our system, and their responsible and responsive operation is today of increasing importance to the quality of life of more and more of our citizens. We therefore see little difference, in terms of the application of the Equal Protection Clause and of the principles of Reynolds v. Sims, between the exercise of state power through legislatures and its exercise by elected officials in the cities, towns, and counties."
In dissent, Justice John Marshall Harlan II asserted that the Writ of Certiorari to the Texas Supreme Court was improvidently granted in that the decision was not final, since the Texas court had ordered the County to redistrict. He also resumed his objections to the line of cases started with Reynolds v. Sims saying, "I continue to think that these adventures of the Court in the realm of political science are beyond its constitutional powers, for reasons set forth at length in my dissenting opinion in Reynolds, 377 U.S., at 589 et seq."
Justices Fortas and Stewart agreed with Justice Harlan that the Writ of Certiorari was improvidently granted as the decision was not yet final, but disagreed as to their reasoning on the merits of the case.
Justice Thurgood Marshall took no part in the deliberation of the case.
 See also 
 Rotten and pocket boroughs, an English phenomenon
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 390
 One Person, One Vote
 References 
External links
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States One Person, One Vote Legal Doctrine
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:Midland County, Texas
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Axon Enterprise, Inc. v. Federal Trade Commission" ==> """
Axon Enterprise, Inc. v. Federal Trade Commission, 598 U.S. ___ (2023), is a United States Supreme Court case related to administrative law.
 Background 
 Axon Enterprise v. FTC 
Axon Enterprise manufactures Tasers and police-worn body cameras. In May 2018, Axon purchased its competitor in the body camera market, Vievu LLC, for $13 million. The Federal Trade Commission soon began an antitrust investigation into Axon. The company offered to settle, but the FTC declined. In January 2020, Axon filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court for the District of Arizona, challenging the constitutionality of the FTC's structure. The district court dismissed the case, holding that federal law stripped it of jurisdiction to consider constitutional claims against the FTC while proceedings were underway. The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed in a 2–1 vote. Judge Patrick J. Bumatay dissented. Axon Enterprise then filed a petition for a writ of certiorari with the Supreme Court in July 2021, which was subsequently granted in January 2022.
 SEC v. Cochran 
The Securities and Exchange Commission brought an enforcement against Michelle Cochran, a certified public accountant, in April 2016 for failure to comply with the auditing standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board. After a hearing before the SEC's internal administrative law judges, the SEC imposed a fine and banned her from practicing before the SEC. While the case was still pending, the Supreme Court entered its ruling in Lucia v. SEC which held the SEC's ALJs must be appointed in accordance with the Appointments Clause. In response, the SEC reassigned Cochran's case to a new ALJ. In January 2018, Cochran filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas, challenging the constitutionality of the SEC's structure. The district court dismissed the case, holding federal law stripped it of jurisdiction to consider constitutional claims against the SEC while proceedings were underway. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed in 2–1 vote. In a divided opinion, the Fifth Circuit sitting en banc reversed the decision, holding the district court had jurisdiction to hear the claim. The SEC then filed a petition for a writ of certiorari with the Supreme Court in March 2022, which was subsequently granted in May 2022.
Arguments
The question argued by the sides was whether the language of the FTC Act (and Exchange Act) precludes district court jurisdiction over Axon and Cochran's claims. And whether even if it does, Axon and Cochran's claims fall outside the acts' statutory schemes of jurisdiction, and therefore are subject to district court jurisdiction regardless.
In discerning whether a claim falls outside a statute's review provision, the court in Thunder Basin Coal v. Reich set forth a three-factor test; courts must survey whether the claim enjoys meaningful review under the statute,  whether the claim is 'wholly collateral' to the review scheme, and whether the claim is outside the agency's expertise.Thunder Basin Coal v. Reich, 510 U.S. 200, 212 (1994). The arguments presented in the briefs and oral arguments mostly pertained to the language of the acts and the bearing of the Thunder Basin factors on the claims at hand.
The government argued that the detailed and comprehensive character of the FTC and Exchange Acts' review schemes, instructs the courts that jurisdiction provided in those schemes is exclusive.  Those schemes provide jurisdiction to appellate courts over final agency orders (Cease and desist order in the FTC Act), and so the government contended - the exhaustivity of the schemes implicitly precludes district courts jurisdiction, and any jurisdiction over matters mid-proceeding. The government cited the APA as concurrently stating that only final agency action is reviewable by courts.Consolidated response brief of federal parties, Axon Enterprise, Inc. v. FTC,  23-32. Axon and Cochran argued that the FTC and Exchange Acts can't be construed as limiting jurisdiction, because the district courts were granted original jurisdiction over constitutional claims; jurisdiction traditionally left intact unless expressly stripped away. Axon resisted the government's inference, stressing that the FTC and Exchange Acts only ever expressly grant jurisdiction and never expressly limit it.Brief of petitioner Axon Enterprise, Inc., Axon Enterprise, Inc. v. FTC  32-34. As to the APA, Axon and Cochran argued that the act only applies when the administrative regime provides adequate relief which it doesn't for the claims at hand.Transcript of Oral Argument, Axon Enterprise, Inc. v. Federal Trade Commission (21-86). Oyez. Retrieved at https://www.oyez.org/cases/2022/21-86
Axon and Cochran further argued that Thunder Basin works in their favor. First they contested that the acts' review schemes don't afford any avenue for a meaningful review of their claims. An appeal after culmination of agency action offers no remedy for their 'here-and-now' injury of being subjected to an unconstitutional process.Brief of petitioner Axon Enterprise, Inc, 35-38 Next they argued that their claims are 'wholly collateral' to the review schemes, as their claims are aimed at the very existence and structure of the agencies.Reply of petitioner Axon Enterprise, Inc., Axon Enterprise, Inc. v. Federal Trade Commission, 9-10 And third they argued that the agencies don't have the expertise needed to review their claims, no level of qualification in antitrust administrative law is of use in deciding constitutional questions.Reply of petitioner Axon Enterprise, Inc., 11-12. What is more, no agency has the authority to declare itself unconstitutional, all the more so in this case where the provision in question isn't even a part of the FTC Act.Transcript of Oral Arguments.
The government in turn disputed Axon and Cochran's analysis of the Thunder Basin factors. With regards to the first factor, the government stressed that all parts of an agency's proceeding are reviewable in an appellate court. Answering Axon's 'here-and-now' injury claim, the government cited the FTC v. Standard Oil holding that "[m]ere litigation expense, even substantial and unrecoupable cost, does not constitute irreparable injury."Consolidated response brief of federal parties,  48. Next the government attacked the purported collateralness, pressing that Axon's claims did not arise 'outside' the administrative enforcement scheme but as an integral part of it;Brief of respondents Federal Trade Commission,  Axon Enterprise, Inc. v. Federal Trade Commission, 10. real 'collateral' claims are claims such as immunity, which attack the legitimacy of the proceedings' commencement itself.Transcript of Oral Arguments. As for the lack of expertise claims, the government contended that constitutional review may be avoided altogether if the reviewee wins in the agency level, therefore premature review in the district court is ill-advised as a matter of constitutional avoidance.Consolidated response brief of federal parties,  45. The government gave further premonition: allowing for mid-proceeding appeals "would also burden reviewing courts, requiring them to engage in piecemeal review and to decide issues whose resolution might prove to have been unnecessary upon completion of the agency proceeding."Consolidated response brief of federal parties,  15.
The case's similarity to previous supreme court precedent prompted much comparing and contrasting by both sides, especially with regards to Free Enterprise Fund. Axon and Cochran described Free Enterprise Fund as nearly analogous to this case, in that both involve claims "go[ing] to the very existence of the agency... wholly collateral to the merits of any acquisition... beyond the competence of the agency. And [that in both] the agency is not in a position to provide meaningful relief."Transcript of Oral Arguments. The government however emphasized that in Free Enterprise the constitutional objections were directed at the PCAOB investigations not the agency, and were granted review by district courts precisely because they weren't agency proceedings reviewable under the review position. Moreover, much weight was given in Free Enterprise to the fact that petitioners would need to incur penalty upon themselves in order to enter appealable agency proceedings, here on the other hand, Axon and Cochran were already subject to agency proceedings.Consolidated response brief of federal parties,  49-52.
 Supreme Court 
On June 1, 2022, the Court granted certiorari to resolve the split amongst the Courts of Appeals and consolidated the case with Securities and Exchange Commission v. Cochran (Docket No. 21-1239) as both cases address substantially the same questions.The Court heard oral arguments on November 7, 2022. On April 14, 2023, the court ruled unanimously, with Gorsuch only in judgement, to reverse the Ninth Circuit's ruling but to affirm the Fifth Circuit's ruling.
 References 
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Ayers v. Watson" ==> """
Ayers v. Watson, 113 U.S. 594 (1885), was an action of trespass to try title of certain land in Bell County, Texas, originally brought in the district court of that county by Watson, the defendant in error, against the plaintiffs in error and one Anderson..
Background
The land was described in the petition as a tract lying in the County of Bell, about  northeast by north from the three forks of the Little River. The defendants excepted to the petition for insufficiency of law, and pleaded not guilty. One of them, Frank Ayers, pleaded specially that he was owner in fee simple of a tract of eleven leagues granted by the government of Coahuila and Texas to Maximo Moreno in the year 1833, describing its metes and bounds, and he alleged that the land described in the plaintiff's petition, and claimed by him under some pretended patent from the State of Texas to the heirs of one W. W. Daws, deceased, was embraced within the boundaries of said eleven-league grant, which was an elder and superior title.
Anderson also pleaded that he was occupying the Moreno grant as tenant of Ayers, and especially that , including improvements, where he resided (describing its situation) was held by him under said Moreno title; that he had been in possession of said land for more than twelve months before the institution of this suit, adversely and in good faith, and he claimed the value of his improvements if the court should hold the plaintiff entitled to recover.
The plaintiff's original petition was filed in August 1877, and the amended petition and pleas were filed in April 1879. The cause was first tried in April 1879, and again in April 1880, and on both occasions the juries disagreed. Ayers then presented a petition for the removal of the cause to the circuit court of the United States, alleging that he was a citizen of the State of Mississippi and that the plaintiff was a citizen of Texas, and that there could be a final determination of the controversy, so far as he was concerned, without the presence of the other defendants as parties in the cause. The court granted the petition, and the cause was removed, no objection to the removal being made either then or in the circuit court afterwards. But after the issuing of the present writ of error from this Court, the plaintiffs in error, at the instance of one of whom (Frank Ayers) the cause was removed, assigned for error, among other things, that the circuit court erred in taking jurisdiction of the cause.
The statement in the first part of the charge that the jury should follow the tracks of the surveyor so far as they could be discovered, and when these were not to be found, they should follow the course and distance which he gives, so far as not in conflict with tracks that are found, was correct. Had this proposition been followed in the subsequent part of the charge, it would not have been open to criticism. But when directions were given to the jury in greater detail, they were not referred to the courses and distances given by the surveyor, if they were unable to identify his tracks -- that is, if the proof on the two hackberries was insufficient -- but they were told thus:
"You will from the whole proof so fix the unmarked or disputed lines called for in the grant as in your judgment most nearly harmonizes the calls with the known corners and the undisputed lines,"
and if not able to fix these lines in this way, then to resort to the rule of quantity. This was putting the matter as if it depended on the judgment of the jury whether the lines could be run according to the survey, whereas, if not compelled by fixed monuments -- such as the plaintiff claimed the hackberry trees to be -- to run the second, or back line, in a particular manner, there was nothing in the way, so far as the evidence showed, of running the first and second lines according to the field notes, only extending the second line so as to meet the east line, the position of which was known. If the northeast corner was not determined by the hackberries, there was nothing to interfere with the location of the Moreno grant in exact accordance with the field notes except the one thing of extending the second line far enough to meet the conceded location of the eastern boundary. It did not depend on anything requiring the exercise of judgment on the part of the jury; it was a matter of course. If the position of the eastern line had not been discovered at all, and nothing had been known but the beginning corner, the field notes would have furnished the only guide for locating the survey. The position of that line being known, it controlled the survey only in respect to that line, which required the second line to be extended sufficiently to reach it. But if the two hackberry trees in that line were also identified as the true northeast corner, then the position of the north line and the length of the first course would be controlled by those trees.
Decision
The court thought there was error in not putting it to the jury with sufficient distinctness that the course and distance of the first two lines of the survey must govern if the evidence was not sufficient to fix the location of the northern line by identifying the two hackberries with those called for in the field notes for the northeast corner of the survey or by some other marks or monuments.
The judgment was reversed, with directions to grant a new trial.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States property case law
Category:Bell County, Texas
Category:Mexican Texas
"""

From "Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of Northern New England" ==> """
Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of Northern New England, 546 U.S. 320 (2006), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving a facial challenge to New Hampshire's parental notification abortion law.  The First Circuit had ruled that the law was unconstitutional and an injunction against its enforcement was proper.  The Supreme Court vacated this judgment and remanded the case, but avoided a substantive ruling on the challenged law or a reconsideration of prior Supreme Court abortion precedent.  Instead, the Court only addressed the issue of remedy, holding that invalidating a statute in its entirety "is not always necessary or justified, for lower courts may be able to render narrower declaratory and injunctive relief."
The opinion was delivered by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who had been significantly responsible for developing the Court's recent abortion jurisprudence.O'Connor was one of the three attributed authors of the plurality opinion in Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833 (1992), that adopted the "undue burden" standard for reviewing whether abortion regulations were too stringent, a standard she herself had previously formulated in her concurring opinion in Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, 492 U.S. 490 (1989).  This decision was O'Connor's last opinion on the Court before her retirement on January 31, 2006.
 Background 
In June, 2003, the New Hampshire Parental Notification Prior to Abortion Act, "an act requiring parental notification before abortions may be performed on unemancipated minors," was narrowly passed by the New Hampshire General Court.Introduced as House Bill 763-FN.  The act passed with a vote of 12-11 in the New Hampshire Senate and 187-181 in the New Hampshire House of Representatives.  It was signed into law on June 19, 2003 by Governor Craig Benson, who had lobbied heavily for the law, with an effective date of December 31, 2003.
District Court proceedings
On November 17, 2003, Planned Parenthood of Northern New England, Concord Feminist Health Center of Portsmouth, Feminist Health Center of Portsmouth, and Wayne Goldner, M.D. filed a complaint under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, seeking a declaratory judgment that the Parental Notification Act was unconstitutional and a preliminary injunction to prevent its enforcement once it became effective.  On December 29, 2003, Judge Joseph A. DiClerico, Jr. of the U.S. District Court for the District of New Hampshire issued an order finding the Parental Notification Act unconstitutional and permanently enjoining its enforcement.Order of the United States District Court of New Hampshire  (.pdf).
DiClerico found the Act unconstitutional on the following grounds:
the Act's lack of an explicit exception to protect the health of the pregnant minor, and
the narrowness of the Act's exception for abortions necessary to prevent the minor's death
DiClerico declined to rule on the plaintiffs' other claim, that the Act was unconstitutional for failing to provide specific protections for the confidentiality of a minor seeking a judicial waiver.
Court of Appeals decision
New Hampshire Attorney General Peter Heed appealed the district court's order to the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit.  Heed argued that the court should apply the "no set of circumstances" standard set forth in United States v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739 (1987).  A three judge panel composed of Chief Judge Michael Boudin, Circuit Judge Juan R. Torruella and District Judge Saris unanimously affirmed the judgment by Judge DiClerico for the same reasons he stated.Heed v. Planned Parenthood, 390 F.3d 53 (1st Cir. 2004), full text  (.pdf).
 Opinion of the Court 
Attorney General Kelly Ayotte, who replaced Heed in 2004, appealed the case to the Supreme Court of the United States over the objections of Benson's successor, Governor John Lynch.  The Supreme Court granted certiorari to review the case, which was the first case challenging an abortion law that the Court had accepted in five years.  Lynch subsequently submitted an amicus curiae brief in opposition to the Parental Notification Act.Lynch's brief was filed with the Court October 12, 2005. See .
The Court vacated the judgment of the First Circuit in a unanimous decision authored by Associate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 293 (2006).  The Court did not revisit any abortion precedents, such as its decision in Casey.
O'Connor's unanimous opinion
In its ruling the Court found that the following three propositions were established:
"States have the right to require parental involvement when a minor considers terminating her pregnancy."
"A State may not restrict access to abortions that are 'necessary, in appropriate medical judgment for preservation of the life or health of the mother.' Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, 505 U. S. 833, 879 (plurality opinion)."
"New Hampshire has not taken issue with the case’s factual basis: In a very small percentage of cases, pregnant minors need immediate abortions to avert serious and often irreversible damage to their health. New Hampshire has conceded that, under this Court’s cases, it would be unconstitutional to apply the Act in a manner that subjects minors to significant health risks."
The Court considered under what circumstances federal courts can enjoin enforcement of abortion laws if in some cases such laws would have the effect of regulating abortion more strictly than is consistent with Supreme Court precedent, as the New Hampshire law did in some circumstances.
The Court ruled that in such circumstances facial invalidation of a statute would be inappropriate if the statute could be narrowed sufficiently by judicial interpretation. It raised the question of what the appropriate judicial remedy would be if a statute's enforcement would be unconstitutional in medical emergencies.  The court ruled that "invalidating the statute entirely is not always necessary or justified, for lower courts may be able to render narrower declaratory and injunctive relief."
 Subsequent developments 
The New Hampshire law was repealed in 2007, making rehearing at the district court level moot.Planned Parenthood to have attorney's fees paid, Seacoastonline.com.
The New Hampshire parental notification law was passed again in 2011 after the Republican-controlled House and Senate overrode then-Democratic governor John Lynch's veto.
See also
 Abortion in the United States
 Abortion law
 Roe v. Wade
 Abortion debate
References
External links
Transcript of Oral Argument before the Supreme Court
 Supreme Court filings 
Brief for petitioner
Respondent
ACLU's brief in opposition to Writ of Certiorari
Brief for respondent
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:Right to abortion under the United States Constitution
Category:Planned Parenthood litigation
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:History of women in New Hampshire
Category:Legal history of New Hampshire
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
Category:Alliance Defending Freedom litigation
"""

From "Azar v. Allina Health Services" ==> """
Azar v. Allina Health Services, 587 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the Department of Health and Human Services' new policy to retroactively reduce Medicare payments must be vacated due to the Department's failure to uphold its notice-and-comment obligations., 139 S. Ct. 1804 (2019).
 Background 
In 2014, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) announced on its website the "Medicare fractions" for hospitals for the year 2012. As part of the posting, CMS declared that, when determining the "Medicare fraction" of Medicare disproportionate share hospital payments, Medicare Part C days would be included in the calculations. This decision underwent a notice-and-comment period in 2013, but the Department of Health and Human Services attempted to apply its interpretation retroactively to 2012.
Under the Social Security Act, a notice-and-comment period is required for a "rule, requirement or statement of policy" that establishes or changes a "substantive legal standard governing the scope of benefits, the payment for services, or the eligibility of individuals, entities, or organizations to furnish or receive services or benefits." 42 U.S.C. § 1395hh(a)(2). This requirement is stricter than the more common notice-and-comment requirements of the Administrative Procedures Act, which do not apply to "interpretive rules" or "general statements of policy."
 Procedural history 
After this new payment schedule was published, a group of hospitals sued the government, claiming that the change had not properly undergone a notice-and-comment period. The Department, however, argued that it was not required to hold a notice-and-comment period for the new rule, since it was only advising the public on an existing interpretation of the law and thus that the lower standard of the Administrative Procedures Act governed, rather than the stricter requirements of the Social Security Act.
The United States District Court for the District of Columbia ruled in favor of the Department and upheld the legality of the payment schedule. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit reversed, ruling in favor of the hospitals on the basis that the new payment schedule amounted to a "statement of policy" that required the notice-and-comment period specified by the Social Security Act. The Supreme Court granted certiorari.Azar v. Allina Health Services, 139 S. Ct. 51 (2018).
 Opinion of the Court 
In a 7–1 ruling, the Supreme Court upheld the appellate court's ruling. Writing for the Court, Justice Gorsuch found that the Department's decision rose to the level of changing a "substantive legal standard" within the meaning of the Social Security Act. He rejected the government's arguments that a "substantive legal standard" was the same as a "substantive rule" under the APA, and that since the change in payments did not amount to a "substantive rule" under the APA, it likewise didn't qualify as changing a "substantive legal standard." 
Justice Breyer dissented. Justice Kavanaugh, who wrote the opinion of the D.C. Circuit prior to his appointment to the Supreme Court, took no part in the consideration of this case.
 References 
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States administrative case law
"""

From "Azar v. Garza" ==> """
Garza v. Hargan (Azar v. Garza after Alex Azar's confirmation as United States Secretary of Health and Human Services) is a case before the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit regarding a juvenile undocumented immigrant in the custody of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement who sought to have an abortion.
Background
In early September 2017, a seventeen-year-old Jane Doe, was apprehended after illegally crossing the Mexico–United States border into Texas.  As an unaccompanied minor, Jane was placed into care of the Office of Refugee Resettlement.  Jane, who was then eight weeks pregnant, was sent to an ORR funded shelter where she decided to have an abortion.  A Texas judge granted Jane a judicial bypass to the state's parental consent law and allowed her to seek an abortion on September 25, 2017.
The ORR refused to allow Jane to leave the shelter to have her abortion.  In March 2017, new ORR Director Scott Lloyd had forbid federally funded shelters from taking "any action that facilitates" an abortion without his express approval.  Jane's guardian ad litem, Rochelle Garza, then sued the Acting United States Secretary of Health and Human Services, Eric Hargan, in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, alleging that the government was violating Jane's constitutional right to an abortion in the United States.
On October 18, 2017, U.S. District Judge Tanya S. Chutkan granted Jane's request for a temporary restraining order, ordering the government to allow Jane to leave the shelter to attend the pre-abortion counseling required by Texas law and to undergo the abortion.Garza v. Hargan,   On October 20, a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit granted the government's emergency motion to stay Judge Chutkan's order.  In an unsigned order by Circuit Judges Brett Kavanaugh and Karen L. Henderson, the court allowed ORR to keep Jane from leaving its shelter to undergo an abortion until October 31, provided that the government "expeditiously" placed Jane in an outside sponsor's custody.  Circuit Judge Patricia Millett wrote a dissent in which she argued the majority was imposing an undue burden on abortion in violation of Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt (2016).
On October 24, the full en banc D.C. Circuit reversed the panel majority, reimposing the district court order requiring the government to grant Jane access to an abortion.Garza v. Hargan,   Judge Millet added a concurrence reiterating the arguments in her earlier dissent. Judge Henderson dissented, arguing that an undocumented immigrant is not a "person" under the United States Constitution and so does not have rights under the Due Process Clause.  Judge Kavanaugh, joined by Judges Henderson and Thomas B. Griffith, dissented, defending the panel decision.  That day, District Judge Chutkan amended her order to allow Jane's abortion to proceed "promptly and without delay".  Jane had her pregnancy aborted on October 25.
Supreme Court
On November 3, 2017, the Solicitor General of the United States, Noel Francisco, petitioned the Supreme Court of the United States for a writ of certiorari to vacate the D.C. Circuit's ruling and moved for sanctions against Jane's lawyers at the American Civil Liberties Union.  Francisco accused David D. Cole of professional misconduct for not informing the Justice Department that Jane's abortion procedure had been rescheduled to earlier than anticipated.  According to Francisco, this wrongfully prevented the government from seeking an emergency order from the Supreme Court blocking the procedure.
On June 4, 2018, the Supreme Court granted review and vacated the judgment on the ground that the claim for injunctive relief granted by the lower court had become moot when the girl followed through with the abortion. Vacating the lower court decision prevents it from having any value as precedent.Azar v. Garcia, 584 U. S. ____ (2018). The Court did not grant the government's request for sanctions against Jane's attorneys. The opinion was unsigned.
Related developments
On December 18, 2017, Judge Chutkan granted relief to two additional pregnant girls in ORR care who had sued for access to an abortion.    On March 30, 2018, Judge Chutkan certified the pregnant girls' lawsuit as a class action and ordered the government to provide access to abortions to all girls in ORR's custody.
Further reading
 Leach, B. (2021). "At the Borders of the Body Politic: Fetal Citizens, Pregnant Migrants, and Reproductive Injustices in Immigration Detention." American Political Science Review
References
External links
Case page at SCOTUSblog
Case page at the American Civil Liberties Union
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit cases
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Immigration policy of Donald Trump
"""

From "B.B. Chemical Co. v. Ellis" ==> """
B.B. Chemical Co. v. Ellis, 314 U.S. 495 (1942), is a United States Supreme Court decision involving the patent misuse doctrine and the extent of remedies a court should award after finding a misuse that the patentee alleges it has now discontinued..  The Court ruled that to be able to enforce the patent against infringement the patentee must show that it has fully abandoned its unlawful practice and that the consequences of that practice have been fully dissipated. This was a companion case to Morton Salt Co. v. G.S. Suppiger Co.. decided on the same day.
Background
The invention
Elmer Ellis invented a method of improving the coating of fabrics for shoe insoles, and received U.S. Pat. No. 1,830,428, which he assigned to plaintiff B.B. Chemical Co. for $8000. Before Ellis's invention, it was the practice in the manufacture of shoes to reinforce insoles by cementing a layer of textile fabric material shaped to the "lip" (edge) of the insole, to reinforce the lip, thus forming a more secure anchorage for the inseam stitches. The usual practice had been to employ a strip of fabric of approximately the width of the insole, having coats of thermoplastic material which had to be heated just prior to its application to the insole in order to secure proper adhesion. The degree of heat required was dangerously high, and considerable skill on the part of the operator was required in order to produce uniform results. This was commonly known as the "hot process." There was also, a process known as the "cold process", but it was considered unsatisfactory in the trade.
thumb|250px|right|Ellis's insole fabric reinforcement
Ellis invented a method in which he coated a fabric with a rubber composition. After heating and drying, the non-tacky web was then cut into strips and wound into rolls. The next step in the process was to apply a coating of rubber cement to the pre-coated material just before the strip was applied to the insole. This application is made by the shoe manufacturer. The fabric thus coated is then at once applied to the insole and "formed in" around the lip, usually with a hand tool. This process does not require heat when it is inserted into the shoe.32 F. Supp. at 692.
The relevant claim of the patent is claim 4:
B.B. Chemical's business plan
B.B. Chemical supplied shoe manufacturers, for use in reinforcing insoles, pre-coated fabric that it had slit into strips of suitable width. If the manufacturer desired, B.B. Chemical supplied the fabric, pre-coated it, and slit it. B.B. Chemical also supplied adhesive, to be applied to the pre-coated fabric at the shoe factory immediately prior to the application of the reinforcing material to the insole, and also provided machines suitable for use in applying the adhesive to the strips, the machines being and remaining the property of B.B. Chemical. These machines were covered by patents that B.B. Chemical owned. B.B. Chemical, in addition, gave instructions to operators, serviced the machines and advised and assisted in the reinforcing operation. As compensation for the foregoing, B.B. Chemical made a single charge to the shoe manufacturers at a rate per web yard of fabric supplied. If the manufacturer did not furnish the fabric, the price of that material was added to the charge. The adhesives used by B.B. Chemical in pre-coating the fabric have all had a large rubber content but were made according to different formulae, developed from time to time by B.B. Chemical with special reference to the patent. B.B. Chemical did not grant written licenses to shoe manufacturers, nor was any such license ever requested. Neither by notice or by agreement in any form with its customers did it require them to use only B.B. Chemical's material.32 F. Supp. at 604.
Ellis subsequently developed a similar process and became a competitor of B.B. Chemical, which sued for contributory infringement of the patent.
District court ruling
The district court found that the process Ellis used was equivalent to the patented process, leaving the only issue whether B.B. Chemical misused the patent and therefore was not entitled to relief.
The district court found that B.B. Chemical's method of doing business brought it within the prohibition of Carbice Corp. v. American Patents Development Corp.. and Leitch Mfg. Co. v. Barber Co.. B.B. Chemical stressed that it did not require its customers to agree to buy the pre-coated fabric from it or grant licenses on that condition. It also stressed that the pre-coated fabric, although unpatented, was not a staple but was specially adapted for use in practicing the patented process. Moreover, as the court agreed, B.B. Chemical could not practicably practice the patent in its own factory. The district court dismissed these arguments. The Leitch case held that a "method of doing business which leads to such suppression of competition in unpatented commodities will be enough" to "prevent success in a suit against a competitor for contributory infringement." Also, "the rule was not to be limited to efforts of a patentee to control the use of staple materials." Finally: "The fact that plaintiff's method of conducting its business is the most practical method is not a controlling factor. The question cannot be decided as a matter of convenience to either plaintiff or defendant."32 F. Supp. at 698.
First Circuit ruling
B.B. Chemical appealed to the First Circuit, which affirmed the dismissal. That court said: "The plaintiff's course of business is precisely that of the patentee in Leitch Mfg. Co. v. Barber Co." The First Circuit  turned to the staple versus non-staple argument that B.B. Chemical made:
 Ruling of Supreme Court 
Chief Justice Harlan Stone delivered an opinion for a unanimous Court, affirming the judgment below.
thumb|right|200px|Chief Justice Harlan Fiske Stone
B.B. Chemical argued that the conduct of defendant Ellis went beyond that of the defendants in the Carbice and Leitch cases. Ellis's conduct "amounted to active inducement of infringement by the shoe manufacturers and to cooperation with their infringing acts." B.B. Chemical insisted that "even though, under the Carbice and Leitch cases, it has 'no right to be free from competition in the sale' of the materials, it has the right under the patent law to restrain infringement in any manner other than by the competitive sale of the unpatented materials."314 U.S. at 497.
The Court responded that "the maintenance of this suit to restrain any form of infringement is contrary to public policy, and that the district court rightly dismissed it." Furthermore:
Purgation
B.B. Chemical then asked for an exception to the misuse rule "because it is now willing to give unconditional licenses to manufacturers on a royalty basis, which it offers to do." The Court replied: "It will be appropriate to consider petitioner's right to relief when it is able to show that it has fully abandoned its present method of restraining competition in the sale of unpatented articles, and that the consequences of that practice have been fully dissipated." This rule is known as the "purging" doctrine in patent misuse law.See. e.g., Alan J. Statman, Purging the Misuse - Suggestions for a Reasonable Balance of Conflicting Policies, 21  475 (1979). See also  ("It is now, of course, familiar law that the courts will not aid a patent owner who has misused his patents to recover any of their emoluments accruing during the period of misuse or thereafter until the effect of such misuse have been dissipated, or 'purged,' as the conventional saying goes.").
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1942 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States misuse law
"""

From "Babb v. Wilkie" ==> """
Babb v. Wilkie, 589 U.S. ___ (2020), is a case of the United States Supreme Court in which the justices considered the scope of protections for federal employees in the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967. Specifically, the Court ruled that plaintiffs only need to prove that age was a motivating factor in the decision in order to sue.. However, establishing but for causation is still necessary in determining the appropriate remedy. If a plaintiff can establish that the age was the determining factor in the employment outcome, they may be entitled to compensatory damages or other relief relating to the end result of the employment decision.
This case is notable due to the significant impact the ruling can have on age discrimination complaints made by federal workers in the United States. Groups like the AARP and the NTEU filed friend-of-the-court briefs on behalf of the plaintiff. The case also received some coverage due to a reference to the popular meme OK boomer by Chief Justice John Roberts during the oral arguments. This case is also notable because it addressed a circuit split between different federal courts on this issue. Prior to the Supreme Court's ruling, federal courts have applied the 'but for' test to public-sector employees. Others, such as the Ninth Circuit, have held that a motivating factor test should be used during the summary judgment phase but not for a trial.
 Legal background 
In 1968, Congress enacted the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), which prohibits employment discrimination against workers who are 40 years of age or older. It contains provisions covering both public- and private-sector workers. The private-sector provision forbids employers from discriminating against any individual because of age; the public-sector provision requires that employment decisions be made free from any discrimination based on age. 
In 1973, the Supreme Court issued its opinion in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green. This opinion was one of the first times the Supreme Court described in detail how the burden of proof works in discrimination cases. In the McDonnell Douglas case, the Court established that plaintiffs must first establish a prima facie case for discrimination. Next, the defendant (employer) has the opportunity to produce evidence of a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its actions. If the defendant/employer does so, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff who then must try to prove that the defendant's non-discriminatory reasons are pretextual or otherwise insufficient under the law. This framework, known as the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting analysis, is now used by federal courts to interpret employment discrimination claims where no direct evidence of discriminatory intent can be found.
In 2009, the Supreme Court issued its opinion on Gross v. FBL Financial Services, Inc.. In a 5-4 opinion, the Court ruled that private-sector plaintiffs must prove that age was the "but for" cause of the adverse employment action they are suing over. That is, the plaintiff must prove that age discrimination was the determining reason for the adverse employment action (e.g. the action would not have been taken 'but for' the plaintiff's age). However, the Supreme Court's opinion did not explicitly mention public-sector workers. A later opinion, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center v. Nassar (2013) applied the same 'but for' standard to retaliation claims.
 Case background 
Noris Babb is a clinical pharmacist who started working for the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) at the CW Young Medical Center in Bay Pines, Florida in 2004. In 2009, Babb obtained an advanced designation which allowed her to practice disease state management (DSM) - an advanced scope of practice which allowed her to prescribe medications for certain conditions without consulting a physician. In 2010, the VA created the Patient Aligned Care Team (PACT) system; among other effects, this initiative allowed pharmacists who practiced DSM (including Babb) to receive a promotion. Babb, along with other pharmacists at the center, sought promotions under the new system. However, some of the pharmacists came to believe that the new requirements were being implemented in a discriminatory way. In 2011, two other pharmacists filed a complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC); Babb testified in support of these complaints. Additionally, Babb filed a complaint of her own in 2013 after management sought to remove Babb's advanced designations and denied her request for additional training or practice opportunities. In 2014, she filed a federal lawsuit against the VA, alleging that management at the medical center discriminated against her based on gender and age and also retaliated against her for protected EEOC-related activity.
 In lower courts 
Babb's lawsuit against Robert Wilkie, the United States Secretary of Veterans Affairs, was filed in July 2014 in the United States District Court for the Middle District of Florida. The Secretary filed a motion for summary judgment, which the district court granted. The court found, under the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework, that Babb had succeeded in establishing her prima facie case for discrimination; that the Secretary had offered legitimate, nondiscriminatory, and nonretaliatory reasons for the VA's actions; and that Babb could not prove that the reasons provided were pretextual. Accordingly, the court ruled in favor of the Secretary. The district court also dismissed Babb's hostile work environment claim, ruling the remarks that Babb noted in her complaint were not sufficiently severe and pervasive enough to constitute a hostile work environment.
Babb appealed the district court's decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit. In July 2018, the 11th Circuit affirmed the district court's summary judgment on the ADEA, retaliation, and hostile work environment claims. Babb appealed again, this time to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court granted her writ of certiorari and agreed to hear the case on June 28, 2019. They opted to limit their review to the issue of whether the federal-sector provision of the ADEA requires that the plaintiff prove that age was the 'but for' cause of the challenged action.
 At the Supreme Court 
Oral arguments in this case took place on January 15, 2020. Babb was represented by Roman Martinez, an attorney with the law firm of Latham & Watkins. The VA was represented by Noel Francisco, the Solicitor General of the United States.
During the oral arguments, Babb's attorney Martinez emphasized the language of the ADEA and distinguished the wording used for public-sector employees from the wording used for private-sector employees. He noted that for public sector employees, the statute requires that employment decisions be made "free from" age-related bias, which he argued was broader in scope and meaning than the language used for private-sector employees under the ADEA. He argued that Congress's intent was to bar discrimination at any point in the employment process, even if the age-related discrimination was not the final determinative factor in the decision.
Arguing for the government, Francisco countered that the VA's interpretation of the statute would harmonize the rules for both public- and private-sector employees (imposing the 'but for' standard uniformly on all categories). In addition, he argued that other statutes such as the Civil Service Reform Act would offer the remedies that Babb was seeking under the ADEA. On January 17, 2020, the Supreme Court directed both parties to file supplemental briefs on what other judicial or administrative remedies would be available (other than the ADEA) to plaintiffs like Babb. 
 References 
 External links 
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:United States Department of Veterans Affairs
Category:Ageism case law
"""

From "Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon" ==> """
Babbitt, Secretary of the Interior v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon, 515 U.S. 687 (1995), is a US Supreme Court case, decided by a 6–3 vote, in which the plaintiffs challenged the Interior Department's interpretation of the word "harm" in the Endangered Species Act (ESA).. 
Background
The Secretary of the Interior and the director of the Fish and Wildlife Service director interpreted the word harm in the definition of take in Section 9 of the Endangered Species Act to mean an act that actually kills or injures wildlife. Under the statutory language of the Interior Department Regulation, the act may include significant habitat modification or degradation if it actually kills or injures wildlife by significantly impairing essential behavioral patterns, including breeding, feeding, or sheltering.
The Interpretation of Section 9(a)(1) of the Endangered Species Act,  et seq. to provide the following protection for endangered species:
"Except as provided in sections 1535(g)(2) and 1539 of this title, with respect to any endangered species of fish or wildlife listed pursuant to section 1533 of this title it is unlawful for any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to:
(B) take any such species within the United States or the territorial sea of the  United States.
Section 3(19) of the Act defines the statutory term take:
"The term take means to harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect, or to attempt to engage in any such conduct.
The Act does not further define the terms it uses to define take. The Interior Department regulations that implement the statute, however, define the statutory term harm:
Harm in the definition of take in the Act means an act which actually kills or injures wildlife. Such act may include significant habitat modification or degradation where it actually kills or injures wildlife by significantly impairing essential behavioral patterns, including breeding, feeding, or sheltering."
thumb|Red-cockaded woodpecker
thumb|Northern spotted owl
The plaintiff was Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon, which consisted of various landowners, logging companies, and timber workers in the Pacific Northwest and the Southeast. It brought action against the Secretary of the Interior and the director of Fish and Wildlife Service to challenge the interpretation of the term take with regards to the clarification of harm in the Endangered Species Act. It argued that the red-cockaded woodpecker (Leuconotopicus borealis), an endangered species, and the northern spotted owl (Strix occidentalis caurina), a threatened species, had injured them economically by preventing them from conducting commercial business in the forestry industry.
The defendant was the Fish and Wildlife Director, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt's interpretation of the Act and his definition of the word harm.
Issue
The issue was if the interpretation of the word harm under section 9(a)(1) on takings of the Endangered Species Act includes habitat modification or destruction when it may kill or injure wildlife.
More generally, the issue was if the statute applies to commercial businesses with the unintended attention directed towards endangered species.
Lower courts
The District Court found in favor of the Interior Department and found "that Congress intended an expansive interpretation of the word 'take,' an interpretation that encompasses habitat modification."  Palila v. Hawaii Department of Land and Natural ResourcesPalila v. Haw. Dep't of Land & Natural Resources, 471 F. Supp. 985 (D. Haw. 1979), aff'd, 639 F.2d 495 (9th Cir. 1981). was also noted as using the Secretary's decision to amend the ESA without using the opportunity to change the definition of take. Even if it had found the ESA to be "silent or ambiguous," the Secretary's reasonable interpretation of the word harm was upheld.
Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. set the framework for judicial review to interpret statutes that are considered to be "silent or ambiguous.".
The Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Greater Oregon appealed.
The Court of Appeals initially affirmed the judgment of the District Court, but after granting a rehearing, it found in favor of Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Greater Oregon.  Invoking the noscitur a sociis canon of statutory construction, which holds that a word is known by the company it keeps, the court concluded that harm, like the other words in the definition of take, should be read as applying only to the perpetrator's direct application of force against the animal taken.
The Interior Department appealed.
Decision
Majority opinion
The Supreme Court held, in a decision by Justice Stevens, that the definition of harm can include "significant habitat modification or degradation where it actually kills or injures wildlife." It gave three reasons for that being a reasonable interpretation:
The definition of the word harm does not specifically include whether harm has to be direct or indirect. The definition includes habitat modification, as defined in the context of the Act.
The holding in Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill. and the intent of the ESA were "to halt and reverse the trend toward species extinction, whatever the cost." Therefore, the Secretary's regulation addresses the intent of Congress's enactment of the statute.
 In 1982, Congress granted authorization to the Secretary to issue permits under section 10 of the ESA for incidental takings. That included direct and indirect takings because the purpose of the permits would not be logical if only direct action were included under the word harm.
Concurring opinion
Justice O'Connor stated that significant habitat modification that interferes with "breeding, feeding, and sheltering" behaviors and leads to the injury or death of an animal protected by the Act qualifies as 'harm'. She further discussed proximate causation, which introduced notions of foreseeability. Harm applies to significant habitat modification, which foreseeably causes the actual injury or death to the red-cockaded woodpecker and the northern spotted owl, protected by the Act.
Scalia's dissent
Justice Scalia filed a dissent that included the argument that the regulation falls under Chevron deference, introduced by Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. Three reasons for the regulation not aligning with the interpretation of the statute were found.
There is no "chain of causality" between the time of habitat modification and the time of injury. The regulation also does not take into consideration the unforeseeable and unintended consequences of actions.
The definition of an "act" includes "an act or omission," which was modified by the Fish and Wildlife Service in 1981, which the regulation does not state.
The definition of take is a "class of acts done directly and intentionally" to specific animals and not a population. The regulation includes unlawful injuries to populations of species.
The dissent also includes the principle of noscitur a sociis, interpreting a list of words that share the same attribute just because the most of the words share an attribute. The word harm is the only word that does not include a direct action to injure or kill endangered species.
Legacy
The decision is significant because it demonstrated that "agencies cannot use cost as an excuse" for not complying with section 7(a)(2). Additionally, the court's ruling of the case falls under the "Secretary's definition of 'harm' within the Section 9 taking provision."
In Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill, the major issue concerned the completion of a dam after discovering the critical habitat of the snail darter. The ESA was amended in 1978 to include the Endangered Species Committee, known as the "God Committee," to provide exemptions to section 7. It denied an exemption, but a rider to a military appropriations bill exempted the Tellico Dam from the ESA.
The case demonstrated the significance of habitat modification under the ESA and is the first case that defined the word harm under the definition of take, which applies to actions that have direct contact, minimal, or unforeseeable effects to endangered species. The definition of harm includes changes in habitat that affect endangered species.
 References 
External links
Category:1995 in the environment
Category:1995 in United States case law
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Babbitt v. Youpee" ==> """
Babbitt v. Youpee, 519 U.S. 234 (1997), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a provision which escheats property to tribe upon owner's death any fractional interest in allotment which constitutes less than two percent of the allotment and has not produced $100 in income over the past five years, unless it is devised or descends to owner of another fractional interest in the allotment, works an unconstitutional taking.
 Background 
In the late 1800s, United States Congress initiated a program to allot Indian (Native American) tribal land to individual members of the tribes.  Over the ensuing years, the ownership of the land became increasingly fractionalized as the original owners passed their interests onto multiple heirs.  About 100 years later, Congress passed the Indian Land Consolidation Act in 1983 to deal with the problem.  Section 207 of the act provided that the land would pass, or escheat, to the tribe when the interest was 2 percent or less and earned less than $100 in the preceding year.Babbitt v. Youpee, 519 U.S. 234, 237-39 (1997).
The Act did not provide those whose land went to the tribe with any compensation.  A previous version of the Act was invalidated under the Fifth Amendment in Hodel v. Irving.  While the case was still ongoing, Congress made changes to the statute to try and address the issues identified in Hodel.Youpee, 519 U.S. at 239-40.
William Youpee was an enrolled member of the Sioux and Assiniboine Tribes.  His will devised his fractional interests in several parcels of land to several other tribal members.  An administrative law judge of the Department of the Interior found that the land should escheat to the tribal government.  It was first appealed to the Board of Indian Appeals, which stated it did not have jurisdiction to determine the constitutional claim.  The devisees then brought suit seeking relief, which the U.S. District Court granted.  The suit claimed that § 207 violated the Just Compensation Clause of the Fifth Amendment. The Ninth Circuit affirmed.Youpee, 519 U.S. at 240-42.
 Supreme Court 
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg delivered the opinion of the court.  Ginsburg noted that Congress had changed the statute, but ended up not addressing any of the constitutional concerns of Hodel.  She further noted that while the income from the land might be de minimis, nothing in the statute address the base value of the land itself.  Since the statute authorized a taking of property without compensation to the property owner, it violated the Fifth Amendment and was invalid.Youpee, 519 U.S. at 243-45.
 Dissent 
Justice John P. Stevens dissented.  He believed that Youpee had sufficient notice to prevent the loss of his interest in the property, and that the government had an interest in reducing the problems inherent in fractionalized ownership.  He would have held the statute valid.Youpee, 519 U.S. at 245-47.
 References 
External links
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Backus v. Gould" ==> """
Backus v. Gould, 48 U.S. (7 How.) 798 (1849), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the Copyright Act of 1831 requires courts to award damages from copyright infringement based on the number of copies found in the accused's possession, not the number of infringing copies that they ever printed.. At the time, at least in the case of books, a "copy" was defined as a complete reprinting or transcription of the work.
 References 
External links
Category:1849 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
"""

From "Bad Elk v. United States" ==> """
Bad Elk v. United States, 177 U.S. 529 (1900), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that an individual had the right to use force to resist an unlawful arrest and was entitled to a jury instruction to that effect.
In 1899, a tribal police officer, John Bad Elk, shot and killed another tribal police officer who was attempting to arrest Bad Elk without a warrant, on a misdemeanor charge, for a crime allegedly committed outside of the presence of the arresting officer. The Supreme Court reversed his conviction, noting that a person had the right to resist an unlawful arrest, and in the case of a death, murder may be reduced to manslaughter. The Supreme Court held the arrest to be unlawful due, in part, to the lack of a valid warrant.
This case has been widely cited on the internet, but is no longer considered good law in a growing number of jurisdictions. Most states have, either by statute or by case law, removed the unlawful arrest defense for resisting arrest.
 Background 
 Common law history 
The English common law has long recognized the right of an individual to resist with reasonable force an attempt of a police officer to make an unlawful arrest.,  250 (2009); Darrell A.H. Miller, Retail Rebellion and the Second Amendment 86  939, 948 (2011). This offered a complete defense if nonlethal force was used, at 250. and would reduce a murder charge to manslaughter if a death ensued.Miller at 948. In Hopkin Huggett's case,Hopkin Huggett's case (1666) 84 Eng. Rep. 1082 (K.B.). English officials illegally seized a man to serve in the King's army.,  682, 682-84 (2d ed. 1907); Miller at 949. Huggett and others observed this and fought to free the man. at 682-84; Miller at 949. In the course of the fight one of the King's men, John Barry, was killed and Huggett was put on trial for murder. The English court ruled that since the officer was making an unlawful arrest, the most that could be charged was manslaughter. at 682-84; Miller at 948. In 1709, in Queen v. Tooley,Queen v. Tooley (1709) 92 Eng. Rep. 349 (K.B.). the English court again found that when resisting an unlawful arrest, the death of an individual would result in a manslaughter charge instead of a murder charge.Miller at 950. When the United States separated from England, the common law was adopted by the new American courts and the right to resist unlawful arrest was clearly recognized. at 250; , 1  § 1.13(a) (5th ed.).
 Death of John Kills Back 
left|thumb|alt=map of Pine Ridge Indian Reservation|Map of Pine Ridge Indian Reservation thumb|right|alt=photo of Indian Police badge|U.S. Indian Police badge, of type in use in South Dakota in 1890
On March 8, 1899, John Bad Elk fired several shots from his pistol from or near his home on the Pine Ridge Reservation.Bad Elk v. United States, ; Craig Hemmens & Daniel Levin, ‘Not a Law at All‘: A Call for a Return to the Common Law Right to Resist Unlawful Arrest, 29  1, 14 (1999); Andrew P. Wright, Resisting Unlawful Arrests: Inviting Anarchy or Protecting Individual Freedom? 46  383, 386 (1997). At the time Bad Elk was employed as a tribal police officer for the Oglala Lakota Sioux tribe.Bad Elk, 177 U.S. at 531; Hemmens at 14; Wright at 386. Captain Gleason, who was in charge of that part of the reservation, heard the shots and asked Bad Elk to stop by his office to discuss the matter, but Bad Elk did not show up.Bad Elk, 177 U.S. at 531; The World of Law 9  22 (William Cyrus Sprague, Griffith Ogden Ellis, & Frederick R Austin eds., 1901). Gleason then ordered several other tribal police officers to arrest Bad Elk and to take him to the Pine Ridge Agency, about 25 miles away. Three officers contacted Bad Elk, who refused to go with them, telling them that he would go in the morning.Bad Elk, 177 U.S. at 532; Hemmens at 14. The officers then tried to arrest Bad Elk, who shot and killed John Kills Back. Bad Elk claimed that Kills Back had reached for his pistol and that Bad Elk fired in self-defense.Bad Elk, 177 U.S. at 532; Wright at 387. Kills Back and the other officers did not have an arrest warrant, nor was the offense one that they could arrest for without a warrant.Hemmens at 14; Wright at 386.
 Trial 
In April 1899 at Sioux Falls, Bad Elk was tried in the United States Circuit Court for the District of South Dakota for murder. At trial, Bad Elk requested a jury instruction allowing the jury to consider that he had a right to resist an unlawful arrest.Bad Elk, 177 U.S. at 533. Instead, the court gave a jury instruction that stated that Bad Elk did not have the right to resist an arrest and that Bad Elk only had the right to resist if the arresting officers used excessive force in making the arrest.Bad Elk, 177 U.S. at 533-34; Wright at 387. The jury convicted Bad Elk and sentenced him to death.Sprague at 22. His execution date was set at June 16, 1899.Death to be the Penalty: John Bad Elk Sentenced to Hang on June 16, , Apr. 27, 1899, at 22 (via Newspapers.com).
 Opinion of the Court 
thumb|right|alt=Justice Rufus Peckham portrait|Justice Peckham, author of the unanimous opinion
Justice Rufus Wheeler Peckham delivered the opinion of a unanimous court. Peckham noted that the prosecution's case and the defendant's case varied in their presentation of the facts.Bad Elk, 177 U.S. at 534; Hemmens at 14. First he noted that the prosecution did not show and the court could not find a legal basis for the arrest, that at most the firing of the pistol was a misdemeanor if it were a crime at all.Hemmens at 14; Late Legal Decisions, , June 16, 1900, at 6 (via Newspapers.com). An officer could arrest for a felony without a warrant, but to arrest for a misdemeanor, the crime had to have occurred in the officer's presence. They ruled that the captain also did not have the authority to order the arrest.Bad Elk, 177 U.S. at 534; Susan McPherson, Constitutional Law - Fourth Amendment - Warrantless Arrest for Misdemeanor Traffic Violation Does Not Violate Fourth Amendment Protection Against Unreasonable Seizure 32  265, 273 (2001-2002). The court noted that at common law, an individual had a right to use reasonable force to resist an unlawful arrest.Hemmens at 14; Wright at 387. Peckham said that the requested jury instruction was therefore material and that it was error for the trial court not to allow it.Bad Elk, 177 U.S. at 534; Late Legal Decisions, at 6. The court stated:
At common law, if a party resisted arrest by an officer without warrant and who had no right to arrest him, and if in the course of that resistance the officer was killed, the offense of the party resisting arrest would be reduced from what would have been murder if the officer had had the right to arrest, to manslaughter. What would be murder if the officer had the right to arrest might be reduced to manslaughter by the very fact that he had no such right. So an officer, at common law, was not authorized to make an arrest without a warrant, for a mere misdemeanor not committed in his presence.Bad Elk, 177 U.S. at 534; Hemmens at 15 (internal citation omitted).
The decision of the lower court was reversed and the case remanded for either a new trial or dismissal.Bad Elk, 177 U.S. at 538; Hemmens at 15; Sprague at 22; Wright at 387.
 Subsequent developments 
 Scholarly response 
The first response to the common law rule appeared in 1924, when it was questioned in a law review note which advocated abrogating the rule.Hemmens at 18.  In 1942, Harvard Law professor Sam Bass Warner, in his support of the Uniform Arrest Act, proposed that a citizen had a duty to submit to arrest, legal or not, if he reasonably believed that the arresting individual was a peace officer.Hemmens at 18-19; Miller at 953.  Warner's explanations and reasoning appear to have been "accepted without question by subsequent courts..."Hemmens at 22.  In 1969, during the height of the Civil Rights Movement, Paul Chevigny of the New York branch of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) responded that an unlawful arrest was a trespass against the person and was not consistent with Warner's explanations.Hemmens at 31; Miller at 955.
 Common and statutory law 
In the 1960s, courts began to limit the right to resist an unlawful arrest, apparently influenced by Warner and by the Model Penal Code, which had eliminated the right. at 251; Hemmens at 22-23; Miller at 953;  at § 1.13(a).  In 1965, the first court struck down the right in New Jersey.,  36 (1977); Hemmens at 24.
Although a few states adopted the Uniform Arrest Act, a majority of the states did not. The Model Penal Code in 1962 eliminated the right to resist an unlawful arrest on two grounds. at 36; Hemmens at 23.  First, there were better alternative means of resolving the issue; second, resistance would likely result in greater injury to the citizen without preventing the arrest. at 250-51; Hemmens at 24.  By 2012, only fourteen states allowed a citizen to resist an unlawful arrest.Miller, at 953.
The case also received negative treatment in subsequent Supreme Court cases, from Carroll v. United States in 1925, on arrests and vehicle searches, to Atwater v. City of Lago Vista in 2001, holding that an arrest without a warrant, even for a misdemeanor, is lawful when authorized by statute.
 Internet meme and myths 
The case has also been cited on various internet sites as giving citizens the authority to resist unlawful arrest. This claim is normally put forth in connection with a misquoted version of Plummer v. State.Plummer v. State, 34 N.E. 968 (Ind. 1893); Robery Cubby, The Right to Resist An Unlawful Arrest ,  (Dec. 10, 2014); Jon Roland, Your Right of Defense Against Unlawful Arrest,  (July 10, 1996, as modified as of May 6, 2015). One version is:
Citizens may resist unlawful arrest to the point of taking an arresting officer's life if necessary.” Plummer v. State, 136 Ind. 306 [sic]. This premise was upheld by the Supreme Court of the United States in the case: John Bad Elk v. U.S., 177 U.S. 529. The Court stated: “Where the officer is killed in the course of the disorder which naturally accompanies an attempted arrest that is resisted, the law looks with very different eyes upon the transaction, when the officer had the right to make the arrest, from what it does if the officer had no right. What may be murder in the first case might be nothing more than manslaughter in the other, or the facts might show that no offense had been committed.Scott H. Greenfield, Curb Your Catharsis,  (Sep. 16, 2013).
Modern sources citing Plummer and Bad Elk have tended to discuss the issue as defense against unlawful force; under contemporary law in most jurisdictions, a person may not use force to resist an unlawful arrest.Wright at 387-88 (covering the common law rule, but noting that as of publication, 36 of the 50 states prohibited resisting unlawful arrests); see generally Miller, at 953 (only 13 states allow resistance to an unlawful arrest). The Plummer quote has been noted to be a fabrication, not appearing in the text of the opinion.Cubby.
 Footnotes 
 References 
External links
Category:1900 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Badgerow v. Walters" ==> """
Badgerow v. Walters, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning whether and, if so, when federal courts have subject matter jurisdiction to confirm or vacate arbitration awards under the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA). The Court held that the "look through" approach established by the Court's decision in Vaden v. Discover Bank "does not apply to requests to confirm or vacate arbitral awards under Sections 9 and 10 of the FAA."
 Background 
Denise Badgerow was an employee of REJ Properties, Inc., a Louisiana financial services provider.  As part of her employment, Badgerow signed an agreement to arbitrate any disputes between her and her employer. In 2016, Badgerow was fired from her position.  Following her termination, Badgerow sued the principals of REJ Properties, alleging that she had been discriminated against due to her gender and that she had been fired in retaliation for reporting this discrimination as well as other violations of U.S. securities law.  Badgerow filed suit before the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana.  Additionally, Badgerow initiated arbitration proceedings against the principal employees of REJ Properties. 
Badgerow subsequently lost the arbitration and her cases in district court and the EEOC were both dismissed.  Following her loss in the arbitration, Badgerow filed a new case in Louisiana state court, asking the state court to vacate the arbitration award entered against her.  The principals of REJ Properties subsequently removed that case to federal court, arguing that the federal court held jurisdiction to decide the case under Sections 9 and 11 of the Federal Arbitration Act.
Both the district court and the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit agreed that they held jurisdiction to review the claim and that removal was proper.  Likewise, both courts held that Badgerow had not shown that the arbitration award should be vacated.  Badgerow subsequently appealed these decisions to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari on May 17, 2021.  Oral argument took place on November 2, 2021.
Following oral argument, Holly Barker at BloombergLaw surmised the lower court rulings in favor of jurisdiction were likely to be affirmed. By contrast, Ronald Mann writing for SCOTUSBlog suggested that "it is far from obvious" how the justices will rule in this case.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:2022 in United States case law
"""

From "Baggett v. Bullitt" ==> """
Baggett v. Bullitt, 377 U.S. 360 (1964), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a state cannot require an employee to take an unduly vague oath containing a promise of future conduct at the risk of prosecution for perjury or loss of employment, particularly where the exercise of First Amendment freedoms may thereby be deterred.
 Background 
Washington state passed two laws which required teachers and employees to swear oaths as a condition of employment.  A 1931 law required them to swear allegiance to the United States.  A 1955 law, passed in the McCarthyism era, required the employee to swear he is not a subversive person: that he does not commit, or advise, teach, abet or advocate another to commit or aid in the commission of any act intended to overthrow or alter, or assist in the overthrow or alteration, of the constitutional form of government by revolution, force or violence.
Faculty and staff of the University of Washington sued to overturn the laws.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court overturned both the 1931 law and 1955 law, holding that they were too vague, and that they violated the employees' First Amendment rights of association and speech.
 External links 
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Bailey v. Alabama" ==> """
Bailey v. Alabama, 219 U.S. 219 (1911), was a United States Supreme Court case that overturned the peonage laws of Alabama..
The Supreme Court considered the validity of the Alabama state court's ruling that Alabama statute (§ 4730 of the Code of Alabama of 1896, as amended in 1903 and 1907) was constitutional. The law read:
Alonzo Bailey was an African American from Alabama who agreed to work for The Riverside Company for one year at $12 per month. He received an advance of $15. After working for a little over a month he stopped work but did not refund any money. According to Alabama law such refusal to work and refund the money was prima facie evidence of intent to defraud. The evidence presented against Bailey at trial was testimony that he stopped working, without cause, failed to repay the $15 advanced to him and that he was a Negro.
The United States Supreme Court found that holding a person criminally liable for taking money for work not performed was akin to indentured servitude, outlawed by the Thirteenth Amendment, as it required that person to work rather than be found guilty of a crime.
 Opinion 
The Supreme Court began its majority analysis, written by Associate Justice Charles Evans Hughes, by dismissing any importance of fact that the plaintiff was a black man. The Court then analyzed the statute at issue using the Alabama Supreme Court's decision in Ex Parte Riley, 94 Ala. 82 (1892) and stated, "To justify conviction, it was necessary that this intent should be established by competent evidence, aided only by such inferences as might logically be derived from the facts proved, and should not be the subject of mere surmise or arbitrary assumption."Bailey, 219 U.S. at 232. However, after the 1903 amendment to the Alabama law at issue here, the prosecution no longer had to prove intent to injure or defraud. The Court took issue with that change stating:
The Court continued by stating that without the inference created by statute in this case, Bailey would not have been convicted. The Court then turned to the constitutionality of compulsory service as required by the law.
The Court continued by discussing the meaning of the Thirteenth Amendment and the broad reading of involuntary servitude.  Further, in discussing peonage, stated, "The essence of the thing is compulsory service in payment of a debt. A peon is one who is compelled to work for his creditor until his debt is paid."Bailey, 219 U.S. at 242.  The Court again discussed the broad interpretation of the Thirteenth Amendment, "in this explicit and comprehensive enactment, Congress was not concerned with mere names or manner of description.... It was concerned with a fact, wherever it might exist; with a condition, however named and wherever it might be established, maintained, or enforced."
Analyzing the law by its effects rather than its pretense, the Court held that a contract may expose a debtor to the responsibility for his debt but not enforced labor.
Finally, the Court states, "what the state may not do directly, it may not do indirectly."Bailey, 219 U.S. at 244. Thus, the creation of a statutory presumption to facilitate convictions for failure to pay a debt that could not be otherwise prosecuted was found to be invalid.  Further, the peonage laws of Alabama were found to be contrary to the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and therefore unconstitutional.
Justice Oliver Holmes dissented in this case. His analysis stated that adding a criminal sanction to a law with civil liability already in place goes to strengthen the law itself. Also, if a fine may be imposed, there must be punishment for nonpayment, which, in this case, is prison.  His logic continued by stating that indentured servitude, as a punishment for a crime, is expressly outside the reach of the Thirteenth Amendment:
 See also 
 Black Codes (United States)
 Indentured servitude
 References 
Further reading
New International Encyclopedia
External links
Category:1911 in United States case law
Bailey, Alonzo case
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States Thirteenth Amendment case law
Category:Debt bondage
Category:1911 in Alabama
"""

From "Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co." ==> """
Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co., 259 U.S. 20 (1922), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled the 1919 Child Labor Tax Law unconstitutional as an improper attempt by Congress to penalize employers using child labor. The Court indicated that the tax imposed by the statute was actually a penalty in disguise..
The Court later abandoned the philosophy underlying the Bailey case. For example, see United States v. Kahriger, 345 U.S. 22 (1953), overruled on other grounds, Marchetti v. United States, 390 U.S. 39 (1968).
Background
On February 24, 1919, Congress passed the Child Labor Tax Law which imposed an excise tax of 10 percent on the net profits of a company that employed children. The law defined child labor as “under the age of sixteen in any mine or quarry, and under the age of fourteen in any mill, cannery, workshop, factory, or manufacturing establishment.” The definition also included the use of children between the ages of fourteen and sixteen who worked more than eight hours a day or more than six days a week, or who worked between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.  Drexel was a furniture manufacturing company in North Carolina.
On September 21, 1921, a collector from the Bureau of Internal Revenue (now the Internal Revenue Service) assessed $6,312.79 in excise taxes for employing a child under fourteen during the 1919 tax year. Drexel paid the tax under protest and sued for a refund.
Procedural history
Drexel's main argument was that the tax was an unconstitutional attempt to regulate manufacturing. The United States argued that, the statute, as an indirect tax, did not need to meet a standard as long as it was geographically uniform. In addition, the government contended that the tax was merely an excise tax levied by Congress under its broad power of taxation under Article One of the Constitution. The lower court ruled in favor of the company.
Holding
Chief Justice Taft's Court declared the tax on child labor was unconstitutional because it was a disguised criminal penalty, not a tax, on employment of children. In addition, the Child Labor Tax Law is a regulation on businesses instead of a tax.
Taft argued the law describes a set course for businesses and when they deviate from that course, a payment is enacted. Taft said, “Scienters are associated with penalties, not with taxes.”  “[A] court must be blind not to see that the so-called tax is imposed to stop the employment of children within the age limits prescribed.” Taft said that the court must commit itself to the highest law of the land and the duty of the court, even though it requires them to refuse legislation designed to promote the highest good. He went on to say that the good sought in unconstitutional legislation leads citizens and legislators down a dangerous path of breaching the constitution and recognized standards.  In addition, Congress could take control of many areas of public interest, which the States have control over reserved by the Tenth Amendment, by enacting regulating subjects and enforcing them by a so-called “tax.”  This would break down the constitutional limitations on Congress and eliminate the sovereignty of States.  A tax is a source of revenue for the government, while a penalty is a regulation and punishment for a certain behavior.
Implications
One possible criticism is that the decision in Drexel was a reversal of the Supreme Court's position on excise taxes since the early 19th century and that this decision is out of line with Supreme Court rulings before and after.  As a general rule, the court repeatedly favored the federal power to tax. In other cases, the court has upheld Congress's excise tax on narcotics, marijuana, and firearms.  Even with the firearms case, the Court admitted the law was unmistakably a legislative purpose to regulate rather than tax.
Despite this reversal of philosophy regarding Congress's ability to regulate through the tax code, the Court's definition of the Child Labor Tax as a penalty due to its characteristics featured prominently in the majority opinion in National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius, penned by Chief Justice John Roberts in 2012. The opinion holds that the individual mandate at the center of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act does not fulfill any of the characteristics (i.e., the heavy burden of tax for even slight infractions, the requirement of scienter in levying the tax, and the use of the Department of Labor to aid in enforcement) that allowed the Court to consider the Child Labor Tax as outside of Congress’ “Power To lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises”, and therefore, the individual mandate may be considered within that power.
Previously, in Hammer v. Dagenhart, 247 U. S. 251, the Court ruled a law prohibiting the transportation in interstate commerce of goods manufactured with child labor was unconstitutional. After the court rejected both attempts by Congress to regulate child labor, Congress proposed a constitutional amendment which would give the national government the power to regulate and prohibit child labor, without a deadline for ratification by the states. The proposed amendment was never ratified, as it was made unnecessary by state child labor laws, and a later reversal of the Bailey decision after a suit against Section 212 of the Fair Labor Standards Act, which prohibited the transportation of goods in interstate commerce made from "oppressive child labor."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 259
Lochner era
Lochner v. New York (1905)
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:Child labor in the United States
Category:1922 in United States case law
Category:Taxing and Spending Clause case law
Category:Furniture companies of the United States
Category:Legal history of North Carolina
Category:History of furniture
Category:Furniture-making
Category:Burke County, North Carolina
"""

From "Bailey v. United States" ==> """
Bailey v. United States, 516 U.S. 137 (1995), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court interpreted a frequently used section of the federal criminal code.  At the time of the decision, (c) imposed a mandatory, consecutive five-year prison term on anyone who "during and in relation to any... drug trafficking crime... uses a firearm."  The lower court had sustained the defendants' convictions, defining "use" in such a way as to mean little more than mere possession.  The Supreme Court ruled instead that "use" means "active employment" of a firearm, and sent the cases back to the lower court for further proceedings.  As a result of the Court's decision in Bailey, Congress amended the statute to expressly include possession of a firearm as requiring the additional five-year prison term.
 Background 
In May 1989, Bailey was stopped in the District of Columbia for not having a front license plate on his car.  Bailey could not produce a driver's license, and the officers ordered him out of the car.  As Bailey was exiting the car, the officers saw him stuff something between the seat and the front console.  A subsequent search of the passenger compartment revealed 27 plastic bags containing a total of 30 grams of cocaine.  In the trunk of the car the officers found a loaded nine-millimeter pistol.
In June 1991, Robinson was the target of two controlled purchases of cocaine.  The police then obtained a search warrant and searched Robinson's one-bedroom apartment, where they found an unloaded .22 caliber pistol and 11 grams of crack cocaine.  They also found a marked $20 bill from one of the prior controlled purchases.
Both Bailey and Robinson were charged with numerous crimes, including violations of 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1), which forbade using or carrying a firearm during and in relation to a drug crime.  At Bailey's trial, a government witness testified that drug dealers frequently carry a firearm to protect both the drugs and themselves.  There was similar testimony at Robinson's trial.  Bailey and Robinson were both convicted of all the charges against them, including the § 924(c) charge.  They each appealed their convictions to the District of Columbia Circuit.
A three-judge panel of the court affirmed Bailey's § 924(c) conviction, but another three-judge panel reversed Robinson's.  To correct this disparity, the court consolidated both cases and reheard them en banc.  It held that "one uses a gun, i.e., avails oneself of a gun, and therefore violates [§ 924(c)(1)], whenever one puts or keeps the gun in a particular place from which one (or one's agent) can gain access to it if and when needed to facilitate a drug crime."  Because in both Bailey's and Robinson's cases the gun was sufficiently accessible and proximate to the drugs that the jury could have concluded that the gun was there to protect the drugs.  The Supreme Court agreed to review the case to resolve a split of authority among the federal courts of appeals about the meaning of the word "use" in § 924(c).
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court rejected the interpretation of the D.C. Circuit, and held that "use" of a firearm requires "active employment" of the firearm, "a use that makes the firearm an operative factor in relation to the predicate offense."  Context is important because the word "use" has so many meanings—"I use a gun to protect my house, but I've never had to use it."  The statute did not impose liability for mere possession, though Congress could easily have done so if it had wanted to.
Accordingly, the D.C. Circuit's mistake stemmed from its defining "use" by "accessibility and proximity," a standard that in practice swept up more than active employment but most instances of mere possession.  "In practice, nearly every possession of a firearm by a person engaged in drug trafficking would satisfy the standard."  Because Congress did not draft the statute to criminalize mere possession, the D.C. Circuit's gloss ran contrary to Congress's intent.
But the language of the statute by itself did not answer the real question at the heart of the case—if use was not the same as mere possession, what else beyond mere possession would the government have to prove to make out a violation of § 924(c)?  Webster's Dictionary and Black's Law Dictionary defined "use" as "[t]o convert to one's service," "to employ," "to avail oneself of," and "to carry out a purpose or action by means of."  These definitions implied action and implementation.  Furthermore, the statute also made it illegal for someone to carry a firearm in relation to a drug crime, and the Court assumed that "carrying" was meant to supply an alternative basis for a § 924(c) charge.  By limiting "use" to "active employment," the Court left room for someone to use a firearm without carrying it, as by brandishing the gun or bartering it, and to carry a firearm without using it, as by hiding it in clothing during the transaction.
In Bailey, the Supreme Court was required to clarify the meaning of the disputed statutory term “use” under § 924(c)(1), which imposed a five-year mandatory minimum sentence on a person who “uses or carries a firearm” during a crime of violence or drug trafficking crime.Bailey v. United States, 516 U.S. 137, 138-39 (1995) (quoting 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)). Cited in Brannon, Valerie C. (2018) “Statutory Interpretation: Theories, Tools, and Trends” (CRS Report No. R45153), Congressional Research Service. p.28 Ultimately, the Court assumed that Congress intended both “use” and “carry” to “have a particular, nonsuperfluous meaning,” and thereby gave “use” a more limited overtone.Bailey v. United States, 516 U.S. 137 (1995). p.146. Cited in Brannon, Valerie C. (2018) “Statutory Interpretation: Theories, Tools, and Trends” (CRS Report No. R45153), Congressional Research Service. p.28 The unanimous decision narrowed the Court’s previous decision in Smith v. United States in which the majority contended that Congress intended to give the word “use” a “broad meaning,”Smith v. United States, 508 U.S. 223 (1993). p.246 and accordingly rejected the defense’s argumentSmith v. United States, 508 U.S. 223 (1993). p.225. Cited in Brannon, Valerie C. (2018) “Statutory Interpretation: Theories, Tools, and Trends”(CRS Report No. R45153), Congressional Research Service. p.23 that the statute was limited to the use of a firearm “as a weapon.”Smith v. United States, 508 U.S. 223 (1993). p.227. Cited in Brannon, Valerie C. (2018) “Statutory Interpretation: Theories, Tools, and Trends”(CRS Report No. R45153), Congressional Research Service. p.23
Defining "use" as "active employment" required the Court to remand the cases for further proceedings.  Bailey's gun was in the trunk of his car; there was no evidence that he was actively employing the gun at the time of his arrest.  Similarly, Robinson's gun was in a locked footlocker in her bedroom closet.  But the court of appeals had not considered whether the "carry" prong supported the convictions, so the Court remanded the case for further proceedings.
 Subsequent developments 
After Bailey was issued, however, Congress responded by broadening the statute, essentially overruling the Court's decision by statutory amendment. The statute now criminalizes using or carrying a firearm in connection with a drug trafficking offense or crime of violence, as well as the mere possession of a firearm in furtherance of such an offense. This did not affect the Bailey defendants themselves, or any defendant whose "crime" had occurred before Congress amended 18 U.S.C. § 924(c) since the Constitution forbids enactment of ex post facto law.  A cascade of sentence reductions and collateral appeals followed the decision, since it effectively held that the conduct to which thousands of defendants had pleaded guilty did not constitute a crime at the time that conduct was undertaken.
References
External links
  Brief of the Solicitor General
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:1995 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Bailey v. United States (2013)" ==> """
Bailey v. United States, 568 U.S. 186 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning search and seizure.Bailey v. United States, . A 6–3 decision reversed the weapons conviction of a Long Island man who had been detained when police followed his vehicle after he left his apartment just before it was to be searched. Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote the majority opinion, and Antonin Scalia filed a concurrence. Stephen Breyer dissented.
The Second Circuit Court of Appeals had upheld the conviction. It accepted the government's argument that the Court's 1981 holding in Michigan v. Summers that persons in the immediate vicinity of a search can be detained while the search was being executed was broad enough to cover the pursuit and detention of a defendant who had left the scene in a vehicle. Kennedy's opinion held that it did not, since once Bailey had driven away none of the law-enforcement interests the earlier holding identified were involved. Scalia said that the only thing that mattered was that the vehicle was no longer in the immediate vicinity, and that balancing tests created confusion. Breyer argued that the police did, in fact, have those interests despite Bailey's departure by vehicle.
Background
On Thursday, July 28, 2005 officers of the Suffolk County, New York, police department obtained a warrant to search the basement apartment of a house for a .380-caliber handgun. The warrant was obtained based on a tip by a confidential informant who told police officers that he had seen the gun on a previous weekend when purchasing drugs at the apartment from a man named "Polo."
Before executing the search warrant, two officers surveilling the apartment observed two men exit the apartment complex, both of whom matched the description provided by the confidential informant. The officers watched the men get into a car and drive away.
The officers followed the two individuals for approximately 5 minutes or one mile, and then pulled the men over. They ordered the men out of the car and conducted a pat down search, which turned no weapons or contraband. The officers then seized the driver's keys and handcuffed both men. The officers told them men that they were not under arrest, but were being detained incident to the execution of the search warrant.
The officers drove the two men back to the apartment, which by then had been secured and searched by other officers. The search turned up multiple guns, ammunition, drugs and drug paraphernalia.  Both men were then formally placed under arrest.
Chunon L. Bailey, one of the two men arrested, was charged with possessing cocaine with the intent to distribute and possessing a firearm as a felon. He moved to suppress the evidence based on his unlawful detention after he had already left his apartment. The trial court rejected that motion, holding that the detention was justified under Michigan v. Summers. The defendant was convicted and, on appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit agreed.United States v. Bailey, 
Legal Background
In Michigan v. Summers, 452 U.S. 692 (1981), the Court adopted the categorical rule that officers executing a search warrant for contraband may detain the occupants of the premises while the search is conducted. In the ruling, three justifications were identified for detaining occupants while executing a search warrant: (1) the legitimate law enforcement interest in preventing flight in the event that incriminating evidence is found, (2) the interest in minimizing the risk of harm to the officers, and (3) the orderly completion of the search, which may be facilitated if the occupants of the premises are present. This case presents the question whether the rule of Summers extends to the detention of a former occupant who has left the immediate vicinity of the premises before the warrant is executed.
Commentary
Multiple scholars have questioned the efficacy of applying Michigan v. Summers to individuals who have departed the premises being searched.  One commentator, in examining the application of Michigan v. Summers over the course of thirty years, acknowledged the lack of clarity in the Supreme Court's original decision as to whether the categorical rule that occupants may be detained applies to "recent occupants":
He argues that this is one way in which the rule from Michigan v. Summers has been "extended well beyond what the Court’s initial rationale should reasonably allow" and, as a result, has "put at risk the very liberty interests that it was designed to protect."
 Opinion of the Court 
In a 6–3 decision, the Court reversed and remanded the Second Circuit Court's ruling, stating that it was an unreasonable seizure under the Fourth Amendment. Writing for the majority, Justice Kennedy agreed that the Michigan v. Summers ruling was broad enough to cover the pursuit and detention of a suspect who had left the scene. However, because none of the law-enforcement interests the earlier holding identified were involved, officers did not have probable cause in this case to detain the suspects a mile away from the scene before the apartment was searched, and it thus added an additional level of intrusiveness: "As demonstrated here, detention beyond the immediate vicinity can involve an initial detention away from the scene and a second detention at the residence. In between, the individual will suffer the additional indignity of a compelled transfer back to the premises".P. 15, slip op., Bailey v. United States, U.S. Sup. Ct. (February 19, 2013).
Justice Scalia concurred in the judgment. Joined by Justices Ginsburg and Kagan, he however argued that once suspects leave the immediate vicinity, the scope and balancing tests of the Michigan v. Summers ruling should no longer apply because ordinary law enforcement interests would then take over: "The Summers exception is appropriately predicated only on law enforcement's interest in carrying out the search unimpeded by violence or other disruptions ... Preventing flight is not a special governmental interest—it is indistinguishable from the ordinary interest in apprehending suspects. Similarly, the interest in inducing residents to open locked doors or containers [to facilitate the orderly completion of the search] is nothing more than the ordinary interest in investigating crime".P. 22, slip op., Bailey v. United States, U.S. Sup. Ct. (February 19, 2013).
Justice Breyer, joined with Justices Thomas and Alito, filed a dissenting opinion. Breyer argued that officers did, in fact, have those law-enforcement interests, but also had reasonable justifications for stopping the suspects away from their apartment. "Considerations related to the risks of flight, of evidence destruction, and of physical danger overcome any administrative advantages. Consider why the officers here waited until the occupants had left the block to stop them: They did so because the occupants might have been armed".P. 28, slip op., Bailey v. United States, U.S. Sup. Ct. (February 19, 2013).
 References 
External links
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:Suffolk County, New York
"""

From "Bailiff v. Tipping" ==> """
Bailiff v. Tipping, 6 U.S. (2 Cranch) 406 (1805), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a citation must accompany a writ of error in order for the court to hear the case.
 Background 
In the older common law procedure, a writ of error was a writ issued by an appellate court directing a lower court to deliver the record in the case for review. It was the most common form of remedial process available to the losing party after the final determination of the case on its merits.Black's Law Dictionary (8th ed., 2004). Similarly in the older common law context, a citation was a court-issued writ commanding a person to appear at a certain time and place in order to do something demanded in the writ, or to show cause for not doing something demanded.
At which was whether the courts of the United States have jurisdiction to hear a case in which one alien sues another alien.
The Circuit Court for the District of Kentucky held that the courts did not have jurisdiction in a case where the parties were both aliens. There was a writ of error to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
Where the writ of error lacks a citation, the writ of error must be dismissed. But see Mason v. Ship Blaireau (6 U.S. 240, 2 Cranch 240) for a case deciding the question of whether the courts of the United States may hear a case in which the parties are both aliens.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States judiciary case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:1805 in United States case law
"""

From "Baird v. State Bar of Arizona" ==> """
Baird v. State Bar of Arizona, 401 U.S. 1 (1971), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled:
In this case, a law school graduate who had passed the Arizona written bar examination had applied to be admitted to the Arizona bar, but had refused to answer a question as to whether she had ever been a member of the Communist party. On that basis, the State Bar of Arizona refused to admit her.
 See also 
 State Bar of Arizona
 Further reading 
External links
 First Amendment Center
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Legal history of Arizona
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:United States professional responsibility case law
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Baker v. Carr" ==> """
Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. 186 (1962), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that redistricting qualifies as a justiciable question under the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, thus enabling federal courts to hear Fourteenth Amendment-based redistricting cases.  The court summarized its Baker holding in a later decision as follows: "Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment limits the authority of a State Legislature in designing the geographical districts from which representatives are chosen either for the State Legislature or for the Federal House of Representatives." (Gray v. Sanders, ). The court had previously held in Gomillion v. Lightfoot that districting claims over racial discrimination could be brought under the Fifteenth Amendment.
The case arose from a lawsuit against the state of Tennessee, which had not conducted redistricting since 1901. The state of Tennessee argued that the composition of legislative districts constituted a nonjusticiable political question, as the U.S. Supreme Court had held in Colegrove v. Green (1946). In a majority opinion joined by five other justices, Associate Justice William J. Brennan Jr. held that redistricting did not qualify as a political question, though he remanded the case to the federal district court for further proceedings. Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter strongly dissented, arguing that the Court's decision cast aside history and judicial restraint and violated the separation of powers between legislatures and courts.
The case did not have any immediate effect on electoral districts, but it set an important precedent regarding the power of federal courts to address redistricting. In 1964, the Supreme Court would hand down two cases, Wesberry v. Sanders and Reynolds v. Sims, which required the United States House of Representatives and state legislatures to establish electoral districts of equal population on the principle of one person, one vote.
Background
Plaintiff Charles Baker was a Republican who lived in Shelby County, Tennessee, and had served as the mayor of Millington, Tennessee, near Memphis. The Tennessee State Constitution required that legislative districts for the Tennessee General Assembly be redrawn every ten years to provide for districts of substantially equal population (as was to be done for congressional districts). Baker's complaint was that Tennessee had not redistricted since 1901, in response to the 1900 census.
By the time of Baker's lawsuit, the population had shifted such that his district in Shelby County had about ten times as many residents as some of the rural districts. The votes of rural citizens were overrepresented compared to those of urban citizens. Baker's argument was that this discrepancy was causing him to fail to receive the "equal protection of the laws" required by the Fourteenth Amendment. Defendant Joe Carr was sued in his position as Secretary of State for Tennessee. Carr was not the person who set the district lines – the state legislature had done that – but was sued ex officio as the person who was ultimately responsible for the conduct of elections in the state and for the publication of district maps.
The state of Tennessee argued that the composition of legislative districts was essentially a political question, not a judicial one, as had been held by Colegrove v. Green,Katz, Ellis. 2006. "Colegrove v. Green." Federalism in America: An Encyclopedia. a plurality opinion of the Court in which Justice Felix Frankfurter declared that "Courts ought not to enter this political thicket." Frankfurter believed that relief for legislative malapportionment had to be won through the political process.Colegrove v. Green, 328 U.S. 556
Decision
The decision of Baker v. Carr was one of the most wrenching in the Court's history. The case had to be put over for reargument because in conference no clear majority emerged for either side of the case. Associate Justice Charles Evans Whittaker was so torn over the case that he eventually had to recuse himself for health reasons. The arduous decisional process in Baker is often blamed for Whittaker's subsequent health problems, which forced him to retire from the Court in 1962.
The opinion was finally handed down in March 1962, nearly a year after it was initially argued. The Court split 6 to 2 in ruling that Baker's case was justiciable, producing, in addition to the opinion of the Court by Justice William J. Brennan, three concurring opinions and two dissenting opinions. Brennan reformulated the political question doctrine, identifying six factors to help in determining which questions were "political" in nature. Cases that are political in nature are marked by:
 "Textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department;" as an example of this, Brennan cited issues of foreign affairs and executive war powers, arguing that cases involving such matters would be "political questions"
 "A lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving it;"
 "The impossibility of deciding without an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion;"
 "The impossibility of a court's undertaking independent resolution without expressing lack of the respect due coordinate branches of government;"
 "An unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political decision already made;"
 "The potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious pronouncements by various departments on one question."
Justice Tom C. Clark switched his vote at the last minute to a concurrence on the substance of Baker's claims, which would have enabled a majority which could have granted relief for Baker. Instead the Supreme Court remanded the case to the District Court.
The large majority in this case can in many ways be attributed to Justice Brennan, who convinced Potter Stewart that the case was a narrow ruling dealing only with the right to challenge the statute. Brennan also talked down Justices Black and Douglas from their usual absolutist positions to achieve a compromise.Eisler (1993), p. 13.
Dissent by Justices Frankfurter and Harlan
Frankfurter, joined by Justice John Marshall Harlan II, dissented vigorously and at length, arguing that the Court had cast aside history and judicial restraint, and violated the separation of powers between legislatures and Courts. He wrote:
Appellants invoke the right to vote and to have their votes counted. But they are permitted to vote and their votes are counted. They go to the polls, they cast their ballots, they send their representatives to the state councils. Their complaint is simply that the representatives are not sufficiently numerous or powerful.
Aftermath
Having declared redistricting issues justiciable in Baker, the court laid out a new test for evaluating such claims. The Court formulated the famous "one person, one vote" standard under American jurisprudence for legislative redistricting, holding that each individual had to be weighted equally in legislative apportionment. This affected numerous state legislatures that had not redistricted congressional districts for decades, despite major population shifts. It also ultimately affected the composition of state legislative districts as well, which in Alabama and numerous other states had overrepresented rural districts and underrepresented urban districts with much greater populations.
This principle was formally enunciated in Reynolds v. Sims (1964). The Court decided that in states with bicameral legislatures, as had Alabama, the state in this suit, both houses had to be apportioned on this standard. This voided the provision of the Alabama Constitution which had provided for two state senators from each county and similar provisions elsewhere. Similarly, the Tennessee Constitution had a provision that prevented counties from being split and portions of a county being attached to other counties or parts of counties in the creation of a legislative district. This was overridden under the principle of basing districts on population. Today counties are frequently split among districts in forming Tennessee State Senate districts. "One person, one vote" was first applied as a standard for Congressional districts. State legislatures were supposed to redistrict according to changes in population but many had not for decades.
Baker v. Carr and subsequent cases fundamentally changed the nature of political representation in the United States, requiring not just Tennessee but nearly every state to redistrict during the 1960s, often several times. This re-apportionment increased the political power of urban areas with greater population and reduced the influence of more rural areas.Eisler (1993), p. 11. After he left the Court, Chief Justice Earl Warren called the Baker v. Carr line of cases the most important in his tenure as Chief Justice.Schwartz, Bernard. How Justice Brennan Changed America, in Reason and Passio 33 (E. Joshua Rosenkranz and Bernard Schwartz eds., 1997).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 369
 Gomillion v. Lightfoot, 364 U.S. 339 (1960), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States that found an electoral district with boundaries created to disenfranchise African Americans violated the Fifteenth Amendment.
 Colegrove v. Green, : Disparities in Congressional districts are non-judiciable.  "The remedy for unfairness in districting is to secure State legislatures that will apportion properly, or to invoke the ample powers of Congress." (Illinois).
 Baker v. Carr, : Overturning Colegrove; Redistricting qualifies as a justiciable question.  As summarized in Gray, the decision established that Equal Protection "...limits the authority of a State Legislature in designing the geographical districts from which representatives are chosen either for the State Legislature or for the Federal House of Representatives." (Tennessee).
Subsequent Cases Regarding Size/Proportionality:
 Gray v. Sanders, : "One person, one vote." Statewide elections (US Senator, Governor, etc.) must not employ a geographical-unit system that renders some votes greater than others because it "violates the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment" and that "...once a geographical unit for which a representative is to be chosen is designated, all who participate in the election must have an equal vote..." (Georgia).
Wesberry v. Sanders, : Districts for United States House of Representatives must be approximately equal in population as established by Article 1, Section 2 of the Constitution. (Georgia).
 Reynolds v. Sims, : Districts for State Legislatures (both chambers) must be approximately equal in population as established by Equal Protection. (Alabama).
Gaffney v. Cummings, : "Minor deviations from mathematical equality among state legislative districts," such as a deviation of 7.83%, are not automatically unconstitutional but rather allowable where there are legitimate State interests.  (Connecticut).
Karcher v. Daggett, : The "equal representation" standard of Art. I, § 2, requires a "good faith" effort to ensure congressional districts be apportioned to achieve population equality.  No such good faith was used for a ~1% deviation which is therefore unconstitutional.  (New Jersey).
Evenwel v. Abbott,  District drawn using total population ('one person, one vote') are valid even when the result is wide deviation among voting population (~40%).  Ruling withheld as to whether states may alternatively draw district maps using eligible voters (rather than total population). (Texas).
Subsequent Cases Regarding Racial Composition:
City of Mobile v. Bolden,  A municipal electoral system is constitutional if it does not have a discriminatory purpose, even if it has a discriminatory effect. (Alabama)
Thornburg v. Gingles, : Three preconditions required to find a redistricting plan violates VRA §2[a]: (1) the minority group is "sufficiently large and geographically compact to constitute a majority in a single-member district," (2) is "politically cohesive" and (3) the "majority votes sufficiently as a bloc to enable it [to] usually to defeat the minority's preferred candidate."  (North Carolina).
Shaw v. Reno, : Attempt to create an additional majority-minority Congressional district challenged and held invalid because Redistricting based on race must be held to a standard of strict scrutiny under the equal protection clause. (North Carolina).
Miller v. Johnson, 515 U.S. 900 (1995): Attempt to create an additional majority-minority Congressional district challenged held invalid because it required the creation of a "geographic monstrosity" thereby violating Equal Protection of the majority, Justice Department "maximization" policy not enough of a compelling governmental interest (Georgia).
 Georgia v. Ashcroft, 539 U.S. 461 (2003): The District Court failed to consider all the relevant factors in evaluating 1997 State Senate districting plan - remanded for additional scrutiny (Georgia).
Bartlett v. Strickland, : "Cross-over" voters (members of a majority who tend to vote for the preferred candidate of the minority) should not be attributed to the minority group when calculating whether the minority constitutes a numerical majority of the voting-age population (relative to Gingles 1st criteria). (North Carolina).
Alabama Legislative Black Caucus v. Alabama, : Racial gerrymandering claims must be considered district-by-district, rather than by looking at the state as an undifferentiated whole. (Alabama).
References
Further reading
External links
 Baker v. Carr Case Brief, Lawnix.com
 "Supreme Court Landmark Case Baker v. Carr" from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
 The Political Thicket a podcast episode on the case from Radiolab More Perfect, WNYC Studios
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States One Person, One Vote Legal Doctrine
Category:United States political question doctrine case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:African-American history of Tennessee
Category:Legal history of Tennessee
Category:Tennessee General Assembly
Category:1962 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Baker v. Morton" ==> """
Baker v. Morton, 79 U.S. (12 Wall.) 150 (1870), was the second of two land claim suits to come out of Omaha, Nebraska Territory, filed in September 1860, prior to statehood.Three years earlier, the Court decided Brown v. Pierce, 74 U.S. (7 Wall.) 205 (1868), on substantially similar facts, in an appeal from the Supreme Court of Nebraska Territory. The State of Nebraska was admitted to the Union in February 1867. A claim jumper filed suit against local land barons to stake out a homestead in the area that was to become the city of Omaha. The case was important for establishing homesteaders' rights and ensuring that the future growth of Omaha would benefit everyone, not just wealthy landowners and speculators.
Details
The case of Alexander H. Baker v. William S. Morton was a case of an ill-gotten land claim. Baker was an early settler in the Omaha area who lived on  of land in an area of town then known as Orchard Hill, which is now in North Omaha..
An adjoining  plot of land was owned by a man named Brown. The Omaha Claim Club did not recognize the men as legal residents for either of the plots and threatened the two men with death if they did not turn over the titles to the land. Baker and Brown conveyed their land titles in the face of potential harm. In 1860 Baker and Brown filed suits against the Club to get their titles back. The territorial court ruled against Baker, who appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. The court ruled that the property was obtained under duress and was to be reinstated to the rightful owner.The territorial court had ruled in favor of Brown in his case, and the Omaha Claim Club members appealed. The Supreme Court affirmed the lower court. The court in the Baker case acknowledged the similarity of the facts and findings in the Brown decision, and ruled accordingly.
Legacy
Today this case is cited by legal experts as precedent in cases of contractual holdup to establish the illegal nature of the Omaha Claim Club's activities and subsequent activities that exhibit this form of collusion.
See also
 Scriptown
References
External links
Category:1870 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States land use case law
Category:Pioneer history of Omaha, Nebraska
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
"""

From "Baker v. Selden" ==> """
Baker v. Selden, 101 U.S. 99 (1879), was a leading Supreme Court of the United States copyright case cited to explain the idea-expression dichotomy.
The court held that a book did not give an author the right to exclude others from practicing what was described in the book, only right to exclude reproduction of the material in the book. Exclusive rights to a "useful art" described in a book was only available by patent.. 
thumb|A page from Selden's condensed ledger.
 Background 
In 1859, Charles Selden obtained copyright in a book he wrote called Selden's Condensed Ledger, or Book-keeping Simplified. In it the book described an improved system of book-keeping. The books contained about twenty pages of primarily book-keeping forms and only about 650 words. In addition, the books contained examples and an introduction. In the following years Selden made several other books, improving on the initial system. In total, Selden wrote six books, though, evidence suggests that they were really six editions of the same book.
Selden, however, was unsuccessful in selling his books.  He originally believed he could sell his system to several counties and the United States Department of the Treasury.  Those sales never happened.  Selden was forced to assign his interest—an interest that apparently was returned to his wife after his death in 1871.
In 1867, W.C.M. Baker produced a book describing a very similar system.  Unlike Selden, Baker was more successful at selling his book–selling it to some 40 counties within five years.
Selden's widow, Elizabeth Selden, hired an attorney, Samuel S. Fisher, a former Commissioner of Patents.  In 1872, Fisher filed suit against Baker for copyright infringement.
 Procedural history 
The District Court of Southern Ohio held that Baker's books were "in large and material part identical with and infringements of the books of Selden system".  The court ordered a permanent injunction to stop Baker from "publication, sale, or otherwise disposing of his book." The Circuit Court affirmed.
On appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States, Baker's counsel argued that Selden's work was not appropriate subject matter for copyright.
 Opinion of the Court 
The court opinion, authored by Justice Joseph P. Bradley, held that a book did not give an author the right to exclude others from practicing what was described in the book:
[W]hilst no one has a right to print or publish his book, or any material part thereof, as a book intended to convey instruction in the art, any person may practice and use the art itself which he has described and illustrated therein.
...
The copyright of a book on book-keeping cannot secure the exclusive right to make, sell, and use account books prepared upon the plan set forth in such a book.
The court wrote extensively about the distinction between patent law and copyright law.  Exclusive rights to the "useful art" described in a book was only available by patent.  The description itself was protectable by copyright.
In this sense, the Court clarified Selden merely held a copyright, not a patent. 
The conclusion to which we have come is, that blank account-books are not the subject of copyright; and that the mere copyright of Selden's book did not confer upon him the exclusive right to make and use account-books, ruled and arranged as designated by him and described and illustrated in said book.
The Court reversed the ruling of the Circuit Court. 
The decree of the Circuit Court must be reversed, and the cause remanded with instructions to dismiss the complainant's bill.
 Subsequent developments 
The principal holding of Baker v. Selden is codified in §102(b) of the Copyright Act of 1976. Baker is still heavily cited today, with more than 130 decisions citing it from 1984–2004. Although Baker v. Selden sharpened the idea-expression dichotomy, Pam Samuelson argues Baker is not the genesis of the distinction nor of the “merger” doctrine ("which holds that if an idea can only be expressed in one or a small number of ways, copyright law will not protect the expression because it has “merged” with the idea").
References
 External links 
 Copy of Selden's Condensed Ledger, the work at issue in the case, from the Library of Congress; available as a series of images or in PDF format
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1879 in United States case law
"""

From "Baldwin v. Fish & Game Commission of Montana" ==> """
Baldwin v. Fish & Game Commission of Montana, 436 U.S. 371 (1978), was a United States Supreme Court case that affirmed the right of the state of Montana to charge higher fees for out-of-state elk hunters.Baldin v. Fish & Game Commission of Montana, 436 U.S. 371 (1978) (justia.com)
Background
In the state of Montana, the fee for an elk-hunting licenses for nonresidents of the state were substantially higher than the fee for residents of the state in the 1970s.
Decision of the Court
In a 6–3 decision in favor of the state of Montana, Justice Blackmun wrote the opinion for the majority. The court found that the licensing system bore some rational relationship to legitimate state purposes. The court concluded that the nonresidents' interest in sharing the limited resource on more equal terms with residents simply did not fall within the purview of the Privileges and Immunities Clause. Equality in access to state elk was not basic to the maintenance or well-being of the union, and whatever rights or activities were fundamental under the Privileges and Immunities Clause, elk hunting by nonresidents was not one of them. The legislative choice was an economic means not unreasonably related to the preservation of a finite resource and a substantial regulatory interest of the state because it served to limit the number of hunter days.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 436
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Privileges and Immunities case law
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Baldwin v. G.A.F. Seelig, Inc." ==> """
Baldwin v. G. A. F. Seelig, Inc., 294 U.S. 511 (1935), was a United States Supreme Court case which held that a state may not regulate intrastate prices by prohibiting the importation of less expensive goods in interstate commerce. It established the principle that one state, in its dealings with another, cannot place itself in economic isolation.
 Background 
In 1933, the New York State Legislature passed a law which imposed a system of minimum prices to be paid by dealers to producers of milk. The law included a protective measure extending its application to milk from other states, thus ensuring that the prices set would not be undercut by cheaper imports. If the producer in the exporting state had been paid less for his milk than the prices fixed by the statute, it was illegal to sell or purchase the milk in New York. The purpose of the law was to assure an adequate local supply of wholesome milk and to secure the economic welfare of local producers.
G. A. F. Seelig was a milk dealer in New York City who purchased milk from its parent company in Vermont. GAF purchased approximately 220 cans of milk and cream every day, 90% of which was sold in original cans to hotels, restaurants and larger facilities, with the remaining 10% repackaged in individual bottles and sold directly to consumers. The prices paid to the producer was lower than those prescribed by the New York law. Baldwin, the state farms and market commissioner, refused to license GAF's business because the dealer declined to sign an agreement to conform to the statute. As New York officials moved to prosecute the company for trading without a license, GAF brought suit against the state, in the person of Baldwin and other officials. In 1934, the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York issued a split decision, holding that GAF had the right to resell the milk in "original packaging", but not that which had been repackaged in individual bottles. Both parties appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a unanimous decision, the law was held unconstitutional. Justice Benjamin N. Cardozo delivered the opinion of the Court. First, Cardozo held that the district court had correctly issued an injunction to enjoin enforcement of the law as it applied to the milk in original packaging. A statewide prohibition on trade in goods acquired to lower prices in interstate commerce was the equivalent of a customs tariff. Imposts or duties on interstate commerce were beyond the legislative power of the state, and could only be imposed by Congress, in accordance with the Commerce Clause. The chief purpose of the clause, Cardozo contended, was to avoid economic retaliation between states. In effect, state protectionism subverted the goal of fair and impartial competition within the union:
Viewed in this light, the state's purported primary purpose of securing the health of its citizens was equally untenable. Intervention due to health concerns could not be sustained if it adversely affected the economic well-being of the nation. Exemptions made for protectionist measures each time a state experienced discomfiture would soon bring an end to union identity:
Second, Cardozo held that the district court had erred in refusing to issue an injunction enjoining the enforcement of the law as it applied to the rebottled milk. The Court had previously employed an "original packaging"-test in evaluating the legality of commerce with other countries. However, this test could not be adapted in whole to interstate commerce: it was, in Cardozo's words, "not an ultimate principle (...) [but] an illustration of a principle."
 References 
 External links 
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Baldwin v. New York" ==> """
Baldwin v. New York, 399 U.S. 66 (1970), was a decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in which the Court ruled that defendants have a Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial for offenses requiring imprisonment of more than six months.
Background
Robert Baldwin was arrested in New York City for "jostling".  Under the New York City Criminal Court Act, his trial was conducted without a jury, despite his request for a jury trial.  Baldwin was convicted and sentenced to one year in prison, following which he appealed the case, arguing that the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution granted him the right to a jury trial.
Duncan v. Louisiana
In 1968, the Warren court incorporated the Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial and applied it to the states.  In Duncan, the defendant had been convicted of battery, which under Louisiana law was punishable by up to two years in prison.  The majority opinion, authored by Justice Byron White, noted that in 49 of the 50 states, "petty offenses" were punishable by no more than one year in jail.  Therefore, a crime with a possible two-year sentence was out of step with the common law definition of "petty" thus necessitating a right to trial by jury..
Decision
The majority opinion, authored by Justice Byron White, narrowed the decision of Duncan v. Louisiana by holding that a right to a jury trial is required for all crimes where the penalty exceeds six months imprisonment.  The opinion explicitly disagreed with the prosecution's argument that the line should be drawn between misdemeanor and felony, and noted that every other state had reduced punishment for non-jury trials to no more than six months.
References
External links
c
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Juries in the United States
"""

From "Ball v. United States" ==> """
Ball v. United States,    163 U.S. 662 (1896), is one of the earliest United States Supreme Court cases interpreting the Double Jeopardy Clause.
In 1889, defendants Millard Fillmore Ball, John C. Ball, and Robert E. Boutwell were indicted for the murder of William T. Box. The jury acquitted Millard Fillmore Ball and convicted John C. Ball and Robert E. Boutwell. The convicted defendants appealed to the Supreme Court, which reversed their convictions in 1891, holding that the indictment was insufficient. All three were indicted for the murder a second time. All three plead prior jeopardy. The trial court rejected all three pleas, and all three were convicted the second time.
On the second appeal, the Supreme Court reversed Millard Fillmore Ball's conviction. Departing from the common law rule of England, and from early decisions of the state supreme courts of New York and Massachusetts, the Court held that—under the Double Jeopardy Clause—the insufficiency of the first indictment could not remove the jeopardy bar of acquittal, as long as the first court had jurisdiction.
The Court rejected John C. Ball and Robert E. Boutwell's double jeopardy arguments, holding that they could be retried after their prior convictions were reversed on appeal. The court also rejected their remaining arguments.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 163
References
External links
Category:1896 in United States case law
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Ballew v. Georgia" ==> """
Ballew v. Georgia, 435 U.S. 223 (1978), was a case heard by the United States Supreme Court that held that a Georgia state statute authorizing criminal conviction upon the unanimous vote of a jury of five was unconstitutional.  The constitutional minimum size for a jury hearing petty criminal offenses was held to be six.Varat, J.D. et al.  Constitutional Law Cases and Materials, Concise Thirteenth Edition.  Foundation Press, New York, NY: 2009, p. 356
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 435
References
External links
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Co. v. United States" ==> """
Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Co. v. United States, 261 U.S. 592 (1923), is a US Supreme Court case on contract law. The Supreme Court held that an implied in fact contract did not exist as, “an agreement … founded upon a meeting of minds, which, although not embodied in an express  contract, is inferred, as a fact, from conduct of the parties showing, in the light  of the surrounding circumstances, their tacit understanding.”
Facts
The railway company owned 8 piers in Locust Point, Baltimore, Maryland. In October, 1917, Col. Kimball requested to lease a pier from the government for supplies arriving for shipment to Europe.  Two of the other piers owned by the railway company were destroyed by a fire. This caused the company and Col. Kimball to request for the guards. Two National guard companies were sent to Locust Point with the duty to protect the government property and the piers leased by it. The company supplied a wrecking train as quarters for the National guard. The company maintained civilian guards and a fire department for all of its property, whether leased or not.  Later, the wrecking train was moved away by the company and the troops moved into tents. The winter was cold and the soldiers suffered hardships from the weather. 
On one occasion an agent of the company suggested fitting up an unused transfer shed on the pier leased to the Government. Col. Kimball agreed but did not ask about work be done or compensation. The agent drafted plans for retrofitting the transfer shed into a barracks and showed the draft to the officer in command. The officer suggested the amount of facilities are required, but did not approve of the plans. The barracks was completed in December and the troops moved in. Two more piers were later leased to the government by the company. The barracks were occupied by the troops until May, 1919 and the piers were returned to the company in June, 1919. Compensation was not mentioned until the completion of the barracks and the draftsman told a military officer that the government should reimburse him for some of his trouble. 
The railway company filed a petition to recover money under the Dent Act of 1919, c. 94, 40 Stat. 1272 for constructing temporary barracks based on an Implied-in-fact contract, in December, 1917, through Col. Kimball with Locust Point, Baltimore, Maryland. The United States Court of Claims made no finding as to the amount expended by the company constructing the barracks. None of the officials connected with the work had any authority to order the construction of a barracks. Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Co. appealed a judgment of the United States Court of Claims.
Judgment
The judgment of the United States Court of Claims dismissing the appellant's action for compensation for costs of constructing temporary barracks to house the National Guard at piers leased by it to appellee was affirmed. The governmental officials involved in the construction at the piers had no authority to order the work so there was no express agreement. Further, the court reasoned there was no substantial basis for an implied in fact contract, because construction was voluntarily undertaken by appellant, with no mention of compensation.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 261
External links
Full text of judgment from Justia
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States contract case law
Category:1923 in United States case law
Category:Baltimore and Ohio Railroad
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:Railway litigation in 1923
"""

From "Baltimore Gas & Electric Co. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc." ==> """
Baltimore Gas & Electric Co. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 462 U.S. 87 (1983), is a United States Supreme Court decision that held valid a Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) rule that during the licensing of nuclear power plants, the permanent storage of nuclear waste should be assumed to have no environmental impact.. 
Background
42 U.S.C. § 4332(c) of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). requires government agencies to consider the environmental impact of any major federal action. For the licensing of nuclear power plants by the NRC, the environmental impact includes activities necessary to produce new nuclear fuel and to dispose of spent nuclear fuel. In 1974, the NRC adopted a rule to determine the environmental impact of the fuel cycle in plant licensing proceedings.
For the long-term storage of transuranic and high-level radioactive waste, the rule in Table S-3 assumed that there would be no environmental impact because of a "zero release" assumption. That assumption was based upon an expectation that technology would be developed to isolate the wastes from the environment.
The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) filed an action to challenge the Table S-3 rule, leading to the Supreme Court case Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 435 U.S. 519 (1978).. Then, the Supreme Court reversed the ruling by the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit that the NRC rulemaking procedures to develop the rule were inadequate. It stated that the NRC had done everything that was required by NEPA and the Administrative Procedures Act and that courts lack the authority to impose rulemaking procedures greater than those contemplated by these statutes. The case was remanded for the circuit court to determine whether the Table S-3 rule was adequately supported by the administrative record.
While the Vermont Yankee case was before the Supreme Court, the NRC proposed a new Table S-3 rule, which maintained the "zero release" assumption for the long-term storage of spent fuel. The NRC also rejected a petition filed by the NRDC that had requested for Table S-3 to include uncertainties or for the nuclear plant licensing proceedings to be allowed to consider uncertainties in emissions from spent fuel storage.
The NRDC and New York State petitioned for judicial review of the Table S-3 rule in circuit court. The circuit court ruled that "Table S-3 rules were arbitrary and capricious and inconsistent with NEPA because the Commission had not factored the consideration of uncertainties surrounding the zero-release assumption into the licensing process in such a manner that the uncertainties could potentially effect the outcome of any decision to license a particular plant."
The Supreme Court, on appeal, granted certiorari.
Decision
The Supreme Court reversed the decision of the circuit court and ruled that the NRC had complied with the requirements of NEPA. It explained that the NEPA requires that an agency must consider every significant aspect of the environmental impact of a proposed action and for the public to be informed of that. The role of a court is to ensure that the agency adequately considered and disclosed the environmental impact of its decision and that the agency's decision was not arbitrary and capricious.
Regarding the Table S-3 rule, it was the result of a lengthy proceeding in which the NRC determined that it was appropriate to evaluate the general environmental effects of the storage of nuclear wastes and not to evaluate the effects during nuclear power plant licensing proceedings.
It devices that the NRC's choice to use that generic method in the Table S-3 regulation was valid and that  courts do not have the authority to require a different rule under the APA.
See also
 Environmental impact assessment
 Environmental impact of nuclear power
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 462
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1983 in the environment
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States energy case law
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:Natural Resources Defense Council
Category:Exelon
"""

From "Balzac v. Porto Rico" ==> """
Balzac v. Porto Rico, 258 U.S. 298 (1922), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that certain provisions of the U.S. Constitution did not apply to territories not incorporated into the union. It originated when Jesús M. Balzac was prosecuted for criminal libel in a district court of Puerto Rico. Balzac declared that his rights had been violated under the Sixth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution as he was denied a trial by jury since the code of criminal procedure of Puerto Rico did not grant a jury trial in misdemeanor cases. In the appeal, the U.S. Supreme Court affirmed the judgments of the lower courts on the island in deciding that the provisions of the Constitution did not apply to a territory that belonged to the United States but was not incorporated into the Union. It has become known as one of the "Insular Cases".
Background
Jesús Maria Balzac y Balzac edited the newspaper El Baluarte.  Balzac wrote an article referring indirectly to the colonial governor at the time, Arthur Yager; the article was considered libelous by the authorities.  Pursuant to the Jones Act of 1917, which granted Puerto Ricans American citizenship among other guarantees, Balzac sought jury trial under the Sixth Amendment.  In denying the request for jury trial, the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico relied on two 1918 decisions by the United States Supreme Court:  People v. Tapia, , and People v. Muratti, also at .  These two per curiam decisions cited the earlier Insular Cases and held that provisions of the Bill of Rights were inapplicable to Puerto Rico even after the passage of the Jones Act.
Decision
thumb|Taft Court in 1921.
The unanimous opinion of the Court was delivered by Chief Justice Taft. He argued that although the Jones Act had granted citizenship to Puerto Ricans, it had not incorporated Puerto Rico into the Union. Although Puerto Rico had been under the control of the United States since the end of the Spanish–American War in 1898, the territory had not been designated for ultimate statehood, and Congress could determine which parts of the Constitution would apply. Taft distinguished Puerto Rico from the territory in the Alaska purchase, acquired from Russia in 1867, which had been held to be incorporated in Rasmussen v. United States. Thus, particular constitutional provisions were applied based on location, rather than on citizenship.
Taft's grounds for denying jury trial specifically echoed earlier Insular Cases reasoning. He argued that because Puerto Rico had been governed by Spanish civil law for four hundred years before American acquisition, the inhabitants would be unprepared for jury service. Taft argued that locals should be able to determine their own laws:
Toward the end of the opinion, the court uses "language that would lead to perpetual litigation in an effort to clarify the rights of the American citizens of Puerto Rico":Torruella, p. 98
The court leaves unresolved the exact "personal rights" that were so "fundamental" that they would extend to American citizens in Puerto Rico.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 258
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:Politics of Puerto Rico
Category:United States Sixth Amendment case law
Category:1922 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Puerto Rico
Category:1922 in Puerto Rico
Category:United States defamation case law
"""

From "Banco Nacional de Cuba v. Sabbatino" ==> """
Banco Nacional de Cuba v. Sabbatino, 376 U.S. 398 (1964), was a United States Supreme Court case that determined that the policy of United States federal courts would be to honor the Act of State Doctrine, which dictates that the propriety of decisions of other countries relating to their internal affairs would not be questioned in the courts of the United States.
 Background 
In July 1960, the Cuban government retaliated against the United States for various measures imposed against the Castro government by expropriating property held by U.S. citizens in Cuba. This included the seizure of sugar owned by a Cuban company called Compania Azucarera Vertientes-Camaguey de Cuba (C.A.V.), owned by American stockholders.
An American commodity broker, Farr, Whitlock & Co. had contracted to buy this sugar from C.A.V., but after it was seized, they bought it directly from the Cuban government. After receiving the sugar, however, Farr, Whitlock & Co. did not pay the Cuban government; instead, they paid C.A.V.'s legal representative in the U.S., Sabbatino.
Procedural history
The plaintiff, the National Bank of Cuba (acting on behalf of the Cuban government) filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York against the defendant, Sabbatino, to recover the money paid for the sugar. The district court and the Court of Appeals ruled in favor of the defendant, and the case was appealed to the Supreme Court.
The issue taken by the Supreme Court was whether to apply the Act of State doctrine, which would uphold the legality of the expropriation because it was an official act of another country, not subject to question in US courts.
The defendant contended that the doctrine was inapplicable for three reasons:
 Because the act in question was a violation of international law;
 Because the doctrine should not be applied unless the Executive branch asks the court to do so;
 Because Cuba had brought the suit as a plaintiff and had given up its sovereign immunity.
 Opinion of the court 
The court, in an opinion by Justice John Marshall Harlan II, found that the act of state doctrine did apply in this case. The court refused to hold that the expropriation violated international law, because there was no clear unity of international opinion disapproving the seizure of land or property in a country by the government of that country. It noted also that interposition of the Executive was unnecessary to prevent the courts from interfering in affairs of state, as a single court could upset delicate international negotiations through the assertion of U.S. law in another country. Finally, the Court found no bar to application of the doctrine should be imposed by the fact that Cuba had brought the suit, comparing this to the sovereign immunity enjoyed by U.S. states which can sue, but can not be sued.
The court also raised and dismissed a potential Erie doctrine problem, noting that although this suit was brought under diversity jurisdiction, federal interests so outweighed that of the state that federal common law must apply, instead of the law of the state where the suit was filed.
 White's dissent 
Justice White wrote a "dismayed" dissenting opinion, asserting that the court's application of the act of state doctrine was too rigid: more so, in fact than the doctrine as applied by other countries.
 Subsequent developments 
Not surprisingly, the Sabbatino case provoked an uproar in the U.S. Congress. Before the case could be reviewed by the district court (on remand), Congress passed the so-called Second Hickenlooper Amendment (or Sabbatino Amendment) that revoked this presumption in favor of the validity of the act of state doctrine that the Sabbatino court had established. The Amendment was retroactive and subsequently found constitutional by the district court and the Cuban bank's complaint was dismissed. This amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act has clarified that courts may proceed with an adjudication on the merits unless the President states that such adjudication may embarrass foreign policy efforts, but the amendment has been construed very narrowly by subsequent court decisions.
References
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States foreign sovereign immunity case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Cuba–United States relations
"""

From "Bank Markazi v. Peterson" ==> """
Bank Markazi v. Peterson, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case that found that a law which only applied to a specific case, identified by docket number, and eliminated all of the defenses one party had raised does not violate the separation of powers in the United States Constitution between the legislative (Congress) and judicial branches of government. The plaintiffs, in the case had initially obtained judgments against Iran for its role in supporting state-sponsored terrorism, particularly the 1983 Beirut barracks bombings and 1996 Khobar Towers bombing, and sought execution against a bank account in New York held, through European intermediaries, on behalf of Bank Markazi, the Central Bank of the Islamic Republic of Iran. The plaintiffs obtained court orders preventing the transfer of funds from the account in 2008 and initiated their lawsuit in 2010. Bank Markazi raised several defenses, including that the account was not an asset of the bank, but rather an asset of its European intermediary, under both New York state property law and §201(a) of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act. In response to concerns that existing laws were insufficient for the account to be used to settle the judgments, Congress added an amendment to a 2012 bill, codified after enactment as 22 U.S.C. § 8772, that identified the pending lawsuit by docket number, applied only to the assets in the identified case, and effectively abrogated every legal basis available to Bank Markazi to prevent the plaintiffs from executing their claims against the account. Bank Markazi then argued that § 8772 was an unconstitutional breach of the separation of power between the legislative and judicial branches of government, because it effectively directed a particular result in a single case without changing the generally applicable law. The United States District Court for the Southern District of New York and, on appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit both upheld the constitutionality of § 8772 and cleared the way for the plaintiffs to execute their judgments against the account, which held about $1.75 billion in cash.
The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari and heard oral arguments in the case in January 2016, releasing their opinion in April 2016. A 6–2 majority found that § 8772 was not unconstitutional, because it "changed the law by establishing new substantive standards"—essentially, that if Iran owns the assets, they would be available for execution against judgments against Iran—for the district court to apply to the case. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, writing for the majority, explained that the federal judiciary has long upheld laws that affect one or a very small number of subjects as a valid exercise of Congress' legislative power and that the Supreme Court had previously upheld a statute that applied to cases identified by docket number in Robertson v. Seattle Audubon Society (1992). The majority also upheld § 8772 as a valid exercise of Congress' authority over foreign affairs. Prior to the enactment of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA) in 1976, Congress and the Executive branch had authority to determine the immunity of foreign states from lawsuits. Despite transferring the authority to determine immunity to the courts through the FSIA, the majority contended that "it remains Congress' prerogative to alter a foreign state's immunity."
Chief Justice John Roberts, joined by Justice Sonia Sotomayor, dissented and harshly criticized the majority's holding. After providing historical context for the separation of powers between the legislature and judiciary found in Article III of the United States Constitution, the Roberts argued that § 8772 was an unconstitutional breach of the separation of powers between Congress and the judiciary "whereby Congress assumes the role of judge and decides a particular case in the first instance." In his view, § 8772 is not different from a hypothetical law applying to a case Smith v. Jones in which the legislature says simply "Smith wins". Roberts contended that Congress and the Executive branch have sufficient authority that they do not need to "seize" the judiciary's power to "make a political decision look like a judicial one." Quoting James Madison in Federalist No. 48, he lamented that this case "will indeed become a blueprint for extensive expansion of the legislative power at the judiciary's expense, feeding Congress's tendency to 'extend[] the sphere of its activity and draw[] all power into its impetuous vortex.'"
The decision came as Iran was seeking access to the world financial market just three months after many sanctions were lifted as a result of Iran's compliance with an agreement for curtailing development of its nuclear enrichment program. Various Iranian officials denounced the decision as "theft", "a ridicule of law and justice", and "open hostility by the United States against the Iranian people." Iran announced that they would file suit against the United States in the International Court of Justice (ICJ) for reparations if the U.S. courts begin to "plunder" assets from the Citibank account to give to the winning plaintiffs, although it is not clear if the ICJ would have jurisdiction to entertain the case.
Background
State immunity
Foreign states generally enjoy immunity from lawsuits in the United States under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA). The FSIA is the exclusive basis for U.S. courts to exercise jurisdiction over a foreign government. Prior to enactment of the FSIA in 1976, the executive branch was responsible for determining the immunity of foreign states on a case-by-case basis. By enacting the FSIA, Congress codified the guidelines for the immunity of foreign states and transferred responsibility for determining a foreign state's immunity from the executive branch to the judiciary.
The FSIA contains an exception to the immunity of foreign states for victims of state-sponsored terrorism. Prior to 2002, if a judgment was awarded against a foreign government, only assets of the foreign government that were located in the U.S. and "used for commercial activity" could have been seized to satisfy the judgment. To make judgments easier to enforce, Congress enacted the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 (TRIA) which allows judgments to be executed against "the blocked assets of [a] terrorist party." Blocked assets include assets that may be seized by the President pursuant to his authority granted by Congress.
Litigation before § 8772 was enacted 
The suit involved more than 1,300 individuals who had won several separate judgments against Iran for its supportive role in the 1983 Beirut barracks bombings, the 1996 Khobar Towers bombing, several other bombings, an assassination, and a kidnapping. After winning judgments by default, based on a clear evidentiary basis for Iran's liability, they sought writs of execution against a Citibank account in New York connected with Iran's central bank. The suits for execution against the Citibank account were consolidated into one case through various procedural mechanisms.
The named plaintiff in the case, Deborah Peterson, is the sister of a victim of the Beirut barracks bombings; joined by victims and other relatives of victims, she had won a default judgment in 2003 against Iran for its role in the bombings. Because of the large number of plaintiffs in the case—almost 1,000—the judge appointed special masters to determine each plaintiff's right to collect damages and appropriate amount of damages; in 2007, the judge entered a default judgment against Iran for $2,656,944,877 in damages.
In 2008, the plaintiffs first learned of the interests of the Central Bank of Iran (Bank Markazi) in a Citibank bank account in New York and obtained orders restraining the transfer of funds from the account. The account consisted of bonds and belonged to a Luxembourg-based bank, Clearstream Banking, S.A., which held the account on behalf of Bank Markazi and deposited interest from the bonds into Bank Markazi's Clearstream account. At some point in 2008, an account for Bank Markazi was opened with Italian bank Banca UBAE to place the interest payments from the Clearstream account, placing a second intermediary between Bank Markazi and the Citibank account. By the time of the Supreme Court hearing, the Citibank account held about $1.75 billion in cash, as the last of the bonds had matured in April 2012. In 2010, the plaintiffs initiated their lawsuit against Bank Markazi, Clearstream, Banca UBAE, and Citibank, jointly, seeking to execute against the Citibank account their judgments for damages against Iran, based on §201(a) of the TRIA, which provides that when "a person has obtained a judgment against a terrorist party ... the blocked assets of that terrorist party (including the blocked assets of any agency or instrumentality of that terrorist party) shall be subject to execution or attachment."
In February 2012, President Obama froze all assets of the Iranian government in the U.S., which included the Citibank account alleged to be controlled by Bank Markazi. However, there were concerns that existing laws were insufficient for the account to be used to settle the judgments. Bank Markazi claimed that the account was not an asset of Bank Markazi, but its intermediary, Clearstream, in relation to both TRIA and New York state property law.
Section 8772
Due to the issues raised in the case, Congress included a section within the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act, codified as 22 U.S.C. § 8772, that preempted any state law and provided that:
In response to concerns the banking industry had to early drafts of the legislation, § 8772 specified the assets that the section pertains to as:
Section 8772 also specified that the courts needed to identify "whether Iran holds equitable title to, or the beneficial interest in, the assets ...and that no other person possesses a constitutionally protected interest in the assets ...under the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States." If another person held a constitutionally protected interest in the assets, their interest in the assets would not be infringed by the law.
After § 8772 was enacted
Section 8772 eliminated all of Bank Markazi's defenses to the seizure of the account's assets, valued at approximately $1.75 billion. Bank Markazi conceded that they held "equitable title to, or beneficial interest in, the assets", per §8772(a)(2)(A), but then claimed that § 8772 violated the separation of powers in the United States Constitution between the legislative (Congress) and judicial branches of government. The United States District Court for the Southern District of New York and, on appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit both upheld the constitutionality of § 8772 and awarded the assets to the plaintiffs.
Appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States
On December 29, 2014, Bank Markazi filed a petition for certiorari with the Supreme Court of the United States, requesting the Court to consider the question: Does § 8772 violate the separation of powers by purporting to change the law for, and directing a particular result in, a single pending case? The certiorari petition was circulated to the Justices for their conference on April 3, 2015, after a brief by the respondents (Peterson) opposing certiorari and a reply brief from the petitioner (Bank Markazi) were filed in March. Following the April 3rd conference, the Court called for the Solicitor General to file a brief expressing the views of the federal government, which was filed on August 19. In May and June, the Supreme Court meets only to issue orders and opinions and does not hear oral arguments until the next term begins. The Court granted certiorari following its conference on September 28.
Oral arguments were held on January 13, 2016, with appearances by Jeffrey Lamken for the petitioner, Theodore Olson for the respondents, and Deputy Solicitor General Edwin Kneedler for the United States as amicus curiae. 
Justice Antonin Scalia was present during oral arguments. He died in February, voiding his vote in the initial vote on the case's outcome and precluding any draft opinion he may have written from being published by the Court. The Court's 6-2 opinion was delivered on April 20, 2016.
Oral argument
On January 13, 2016, during oral argument with Theodore Olson, Chief Justice John Roberts said:
His dissenting opinion is discussed in detail below.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|upright=0.6|alt=headshot portrait of Justice Ginsburg|Justice Ginsburg, who authored the majority opinion
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the majority opinion, which held that § 8772 does not infringe on the separation of powers between the legislative and judicial branches of government, considering also that the law is an exercise of congressional authority regarding foreign affairs. Justice Anthony Kennedy, Justice Clarence Thomas, Justice Stephen Breyer, Justice Samuel Alito, and Justice Elena Kagan joined the majority opinion (however, Justice Thomas did not join as to Part II-C of the opinion).
The majority began by explaining that judiciary's authority under Article III of the United States Constitution is to "'say what the law is'", quoting Marbury v. Madison (1803). "Congress, no doubt, may not usurp a court's power to interpret and apply the law to the circumstances before it"Bank Markazi, slip op. at 12 (internal citations omitted) by, for example, saying in a hypothetical case Smith v. Jones that Smith wins or compelling the courts to reexamine a case after final judgment has been issued.
Bank Markazi relied on United States v. Klein (1871) for much of its argument. In Klein, the Court questioned whether "'the legislature may prescribe rules of decision to the Judicial Department ... in cases pending before it.'"Bank Markazi, slip op. at 15 (quoting Klein, 13 Wall., at 146) The majority found that "[o]ne cannot take this language from Klein at face value"Bank Markazi, slip op. at 15 (internal citations omitted) because the power of Congress to make retroactive laws applicable to pending cases has long been recognized. The majority explained that the contemporary significance of Klein is that "Congress may not exercise its authority, including its power to regulate federal jurisdiction, in a way that requires [federal courts]...to become active participants in violating the Constitution."Bank Markazi, slip op. at 15 n. 19 (internal citations omitted) The unfairness of any retroactive legislation is "'not a sufficient reason for a court to fail to give that law its intended scope.'"Bank Markazi, slip op. at 16 (quoting Landgraf v. USI Film Products, 511 U.S. 244, 267–268 (1994)) The Constitution contains only limited constraints on the enactment of retroactive legislation:
The majority affirmed that "Congress may indeed direct courts to apply newly enacted, outcome-altering legislation in pending civil cases," citing its previous decisions in Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm, Inc. (1995), Robertson v. Seattle Audubon Society (1992), and Landgraf v. USI Film Products (1994). Accordingly, the majority found that § 8772 "changed the law by establishing new substantive standards"—essentially, that if Iran owns the assets, they would be available for execution against judgments against Iran—for the district court to apply to the case. Section 8772 left several issues for the District Court to adjudicate: it did not define its key terms "beneficial interest" and "equitable title"; whether any other party had a constitutionally protected interest in the account; and whether the assets were "held in the United States" (Clearstream argued the assets were located in Luxembourg, not New York).
The fact that the law only applied to one case does not change its validity, although the majority conceded that a narrowly crafted law affecting just one person or a limited number of people may violate the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment "if arbitrary or inadequately justified." The federal judiciary has long upheld laws that affect one or a very small number of subjects as a valid exercise of Congress' legislative power, and the Supreme Court upheld a statute that applied to cases identified by docket number in Robertson v. Seattle Audubon Society (1992).
The final portion of the majority's opinion, in which Justice Thomas did not join, upheld § 8772 as a valid exercise of Congress' authority to regulate foreign affairs. Citing Dames & Moore v. Regan (1981), a case which also involved the availability of Iranian assets for execution of judgments against Iran, the majority points out that regulating foreign-state assets—e.g. by blocking them or regulating their availability for execution against judgments—has never been found to violate the judiciary's authority. Prior to the enactment of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA), the Executive branch routinely made case-specific determinations of the scope of immunity for foreign states. Those decisions were not rejected as infringements on the judiciary's authority. Although the enactment of the FSIA in 1976 transferred authority to the courts to determine foreign-state immunity, the majority held that "it remains Congress' prerogative to alter a foreign state's immunity." When Congress enacted § 8772, it "acted comfortably within the political branches' authority over foreign sovereign immunity and foreign-state assets."
Chief Justice Roberts' dissenting opinion
thumb|upright=0.6|alt=headshot portrait of Chief Justice Roberts|Chief Justice Roberts wrote a dissenting opinion
Chief Justice John Roberts, joined by Justice Sonia Sotomayor, dissented from the majority's ruling. It was the first time that Roberts and Sotomayor were the only two dissenters in a case; they had been on the court together since 2009.
Roberts began his argument with an analogy:
In the Chief Justice's view, § 8772 violates the separation of powers in Article III "[n]o less than if [Congress] had passed a law saying 'respondents win.'" The majority responded that a more appropriate analogy to the case is if a legislature enacts a law specifying that a 2000 map supersedes a 1990 map in an ongoing property dispute in which the parties are contesting whether an ambiguous statute makes a 1990 or 2000 county map the authoritative source for establishing property boundaries.
The Chief Justice proceeded to detail the origin, purpose, and case law history of the separation of powers. Article Three of the United States Constitution establishes an independent judiciary with "distinct and inviolable authority."  Such separation of powers "safeguards individual freedom." As Alexander Hamilton wrote in Federalist No. 78, quoting Montesquieu, "'there is no liberty if the power of judging be not separated from the legislative and executive powers.'" The separation of powers between the judiciary and legislative branches was examined in detail in Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm, Inc. (1995), in which the Supreme Court found unconstitutional a statute that reopened a case after a final judgment. At the time of the framing of the Constitution, judicial and legislative powers were often intermingled. The colonial legislatures often performed many of the functions of the judiciary, such as functioning as the court of last resort, granting new trials, and providing original review, appellate review, stays of judgments, and providing other types of relief "in an effort to do what is agreeable to Right and Justice."Bank Markazi, slip op. at 3 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting) (internal citations omitted) The colonial charters of Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island gave the legislatures the authority of court of last resort. In New Hampshire, judicial appeals were directed to the governor and his council, but routinely referred to the legislature for discussion. And for over half a century, the colonial assembly of Virginia could review court judgments. The involvement of legislatures in judicial matters "intensified during the American Revolution," which "soon prompted a sense of a sharp necessity to separate the legislative from the judicial power."Bank Markazi, slip op. at 4 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting) (internal citations omitted) The interference of the legislatures in judicial matters "figur[ed] prominently in the Framers' decision to devise a system for securing liberty through the division of power." This resulted in Article Three of the United States Constitution, which forms the "central pillar of judicial independence" and places "'[t]he judicial Power of the United States' ... in 'one supreme Court', and in such 'inferior Courts'"Bank Markazi, slip op. at 6 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting) (quoting U.S. Const. art. III, §1) as Congress may establish. This judicial power extends "to all Cases, in Law and Equity, arising under this Constitution, the Laws of the United States, and Treaties made, or which shall be made, under their Authority."
The Chief Justice explained that there are three types of unconstitutional restrictions on the power of the judiciary. "'Congress cannot vest review of the decisions of Article III courts in officials of the Executive Branch'",Bank Markazi, slip op. at 7 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting) (quoting Chicago & Southern Air Lines, Inc. v. Waterman SS Corp., 333 U.S. 103, 113 (1948)) or "'retroactively command the federal courts to reopen final judgments.'"Bank Markazi, slip op. at 7 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting) (quoting Plaut, 514 U.S., at 218-219) In the Chief Justice's view, this case is a third type of unconstitutional interference with the judiciary's authority, "whereby Congress assumes the role of judge and decides a particular case in the first instance," which he believes is precisely what § 8772 does. Section 8772 foreclosed Bank Markazi's defenses that it was immune from prosecution under the FSIA, a separate juridical entity under both U.S. federal common law and international law and thus not liable for Iran's debts, and that New York state law did not permit execution of the plaintiff's judgments against its assets.  "And lest there be any doubt that Congress' sole concern was deciding this particular case ... § 8772 provided that nothing in the statute 'shall be construed ... to affect the availability, or lack thereof, of a right to satisfy a judgment in any other action against a terrorist party in any proceedings other than' [this case]."Bank Markazi, slip op. at 7 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting) (quoting )
In the hypothetical case of Smith v. Jones in which Congress enacted a statute that says "Smith wins", the majority would find it unconstitutional because it "would create no new substantive law."Bank Markazi, slip op. at 12-13 (n. 17) In the Chief Justice's view, it would: before the passage of the hypothetical statute, the law did not provide that Smith wins; after passage of the hypothetical statute, it does. For the Chief Justice, "the question is whether its action constitutes an exercise of judicial power." Both the hypothetical "Smith wins" statute and § 8772 both have the same effect, which is essentially the legislature's "'policy judgment'"Bank Markazi, slip op. at 12 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting) (quoting Bank Markazi, slip op. at 18) that one side in the case wins. He compared the majority's opinion, which found that § 8772 left plenty of issues for the District Court to adjudicate, to "a constitutional Maginot Line, easily circumvented by the simplest maneuver of taking away every defense against Smith's victory, without saying 'Smith wins.'" Section 8772 only required the courts to make two decisions—that Bank Markazi had an equitable interest in the assets and no one else did—that were both already clear before § 8772 was enacted. By the majority's view of "plenty",Bank Markazi, slip op. at 12 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting) (citing Bank Markazi, slip op. at 16-17 and n. 20)  the Chief Justice contended that, in the hypothetical case Smith v. Jones, the majority would uphold a judgment for Smith if the court finds that Jones was served notice of the lawsuit and the case was within the statute of limitations. Strongly criticizing the majority, the Chief Justice, quoting Federalist No. 48, concluded that the majority's "failure to enforce [the boundary between the judicial and legislative branches] in a case as clear as this reduces Article III to a mere 'parchment barrier against the encroaching spirit' of legislative power."Bank Markazi, slip op. at 14 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting) (quoting Federalist No. 48)
Finally, the Chief Justice distinguished this case from Dames & Moore. The actions of the president that Dames & Moore upheld did not dictate the outcome of the case, but merely specified that the claims be handled by a different tribunal. The court's decision in Dames & Moore was based on the "longstanding practice of settling the claims of U.S. nationals against foreign countries by treaty or executive agreement."Bank Markazi, slip op. at 15 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting) (internal citations omitted) (citing Dames & Moore, 453 U.S., at 679) In contrast with the majority's interpretation of Dames & Moore, "those dispositions, crucially, were not exercises of judicial power." The Chief Justice critiqued the majority's position on Dames & Moore by contending that the political branches of the government—Congress and the executive branch—have sufficient power of their own to address the issues in this case and do not need to "commandeer[] the courts to make a political decision look like a judicial one."
The Chief Justice concluded with a strong criticism of the majority's decision:
Subsequent developments
Payout to plaintiff-respondents
The ruling clears the way for the plaintiff-respondents to collect from the roughly $1.75 billion bank account, which will be enough to satisfy about 70% of their collective $2.5 billion in judgments. They will not be eligible to collect from a $1 billion fund—the Victims of State Sponsored Terrorism Fund—established by Congress in 2015 to pay victims of state-sponsored terrorism. That fund pays 30% of judgments until all applicants have received that amount; remaining funds will not be distributed until all claimants have received 30% of their judgment.
Legal community reactions
Attorney and law professor Alan Morrison, writing for The George Washington Law Review, remarked that:
Morrison expressed "concern ... that what happened here will repeat itself in other circumstances in which the equities [are] quite different". Although Morrison suggested that an individual aggrieved by such a law could bring a claim for relief under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, he argued that such a claim is unlikely to be successful because the law will likely be upheld when reviewed under the rational basis test. The rational basis test asks "there is some rational relationship between disparity of treatment and some legitimate governmental purpose."Heller v. Doe, 509 U.S. 312, 320 (1993)
Law professor Evan Zoldan, writing in the Yale Law & Policy Review Inter Alia, noted that the ruling allowed Congress to pick a winner in a particular pending case. He wrote that "By permitting Congress to direct judgment in favor of victims of terrorism, the Bank Markazi Court helped compensate hundreds of people who suffered great tragedies. But, perhaps inadvertently, the Court also conferred on Congress the expansive, and dangerous, power to target an individual for special treatment that is not applied to the population in general."
According to Stuart Newberger, an attorney who represents terror victims, the ruling could hinder foreign governments from using the judiciary to override determinations by Congress and the President regarding the availability of their assets to satisfy judgments against them. Newberger praised the ruling as "a message for any country that if Congress and the president take steps to freeze assets, make assets available to victims, that the courts are going to defer."
U.S. reactions
The decision was praised in the U.S. by the litigants, their counsel, and politicians. Theodore Olson, counsel for the respondents, praised the ruling, saying it "will bring long-overdue relief to ... victims of Iranian terrorism and their families, many of whom have waited decades for redress." Praising the court's decision, lead plaintiff Deborah Peterson found solace that "in the eyes of the law, we know who is responsible, and those who are responsible have been brought to the justice that we are capable of bringing them to here on earth."
Law professor Jimmy Gurulé said the decision "sends a powerful message to rogue states and state sponsors of terrorism that if you, directly or indirectly, provide material support for terrorism, you will be held accountable"—sentiment echoed by Mark Dubowitz, director of the Foundation for Defense of Democracies—and that "hopefully, it's also going to have a deterrent effect, or least cause Iran to think twice about supporting terrorist activity going forward." The decision was also praised by Senator Bob Menendez, who authored § 8772, and Speaker of the House Paul Ryan.
Iranian reactions
A spokesman for Iran's Ministry of Foreign Affairs condemned the ruling as "theft", "incompatible with international law", "a ridicule of justice and law" and stated that Iran "totally reject[s]" the ruling. The Iranian Foreign Ministry summoned the Swiss ambassador to Iran, who represents U.S. interests in Iran, to receive diplomatic notes, to be forwarded to the US, protesting the ruling. A week after the decision was announced, Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif wrote a letter to Secretary-General of the United Nations Ban Ki-moon urging him to use his good offices to intervene in securing the release of frozen funds and to stop interfering with Iran's international financial transactions. A U.S. State Department spokesman rejected Iran's claims, stating that the State Department "believe[s] the U.S. laws and the application of those laws by the courts of the United States comport with international law."
Iran announced that they would file suit against the United States in the International Court of Justice (ICJ) for reparations if the U.S. courts begin to "plunder" assets from the Citibank account to give to the winning plaintiffs. However, the ICJ may not be able to hear the case. The U.S. withdrew its general recognition of the ICJ's jurisdiction in response to the ICJ's ruling in Nicaragua v. United States, but a 1955 friendship treaty between Iran and the U.S. gives the ICJ jurisdiction to rule on disputes arising from provisions of the treaty. A working group has been established in the Iranian Cabinet to investigate the ruling and determine ways of reestablishing Iran's rights to the account.
Less than a month after the Supreme Court decision, Iran's parliament overwhelmingly approved—181 votes for, 6 votes against, 8 abstentions—an "emergency bill"  requiring the government to seek compensation from the U.S. for actions the U.S. has taken against Iran, including the 1953 Iranian coup d'état, which the U.S. helped restore the monarch; the Nojeh coup plot in 1980; United States support for Iraq during the Iran–Iraq war, including compensation for over 800,000 Iranians who died or were injured during the conflict; U.S. espionage in Iran; U.S. support of Israel; the alleged death of 17,000 Iranians at the hands of U.S.-supported terrorist groups; and the confiscation of Iranian assets. The bill requires the government to take "appropriate legal action" for the violation of Iranian state immunity, including the pursuit of U.S. assets in third countries, and to provide regular updates to parliament on its actions against the US.
Some Iranian officials, including the chief of the Central Bank of Iran (CBI), have placed some blame for the Citibank account's seizure on the previous administration of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who was president of Iran from 2005 to 2013. The Foreign Ministry's director for political and security affairs, Hamid Baidinejad, said it was "reckless" for the previous administration to have invested in U.S. securities. In a post on the CBI's website, its chief pointed out that: "Although CBI experts and senior officials had warned against investing in dollar denominated securities, the government of president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad went ahead and purchased it, thus paving the way for the damage done to our assets." Hamid Baeidinejad, a senior Foreign Ministry official, criticized the former head of the CBI for investing in a "hostile country".
Impact on US-Iran relations
The decision came at a delicate time for relations between Iran and Western nations, which were removing sanctions on Iran after its compliance with an agreement for curtailing development of its nuclear enrichment program. The agreement stipulated that once Iranian compliance with the terms of the agreement was verified, most sanctions against Iran would be lifted, including all sanctions imposed by the United Nations Security Council as well as nuclear-related European Union and U.S. sanctions; U.S. sanctions against Iran for terrorism, human rights abuses, and ballistic missiles would not be affected. In mid-January 2016, most sanctions were lifted. In March, the District Court for the Southern District of New York found, by default, that Iran had provided support to certain terrorist groups and individuals responsible for the September 11 attacks and awarded $10.5 billion in damages to the plaintiffs, which consisted of $3 billion to reimburse insurance companies for paid claims and $7.5 billion for victims and their families ($2 million for pain and suffering and $6.88 million in punitive damages per victim). The same judge ruled just six months earlier that there was insufficient evidence linking Saudi Arabia—which has sour relations with Iran—to the 9/11 attacks to overcome, under the terrorism exemption, Saudi Arabia's immunity under the FSIA.
thumb|Secretary of State John Kerry meeting with Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif two days after the Supreme Court's decision was released 
The Supreme Court's decision was announced while Iran's Foreign Minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, was visiting the United States. The week before the decision was announced, the head of the Central Bank of Iran had visited Washington, during the spring meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, to discuss with U.S. and foreign officials problems that remained with Iranian access to international banking, despite the lifting of sanctions.
Javad Zarif criticized the Bank Markazi decision and the "even more absurd" 9/11 decision by the New York as "the height of absurdity". Iranian President Hassan Rouhani called the decisions "open hostility by the United States against the Iranian people."
Under the nuclear agreement, an important policy objective was to ensure that the Iranian economy benefits from suspending its nuclear weapons program. In the view of commentators Ali Omidi, a professor of international relations at the University of Isfahan, and Saam Borhani, an attorney and commentator on US-Iran relations and sanctions law, the Bank Markazi decision and the 9/11 case threaten to undermine the nuclear deal and American credibility in negotiations with Iran. The head of the Nuclear Committee in Iran's parliament, Ibrahim Karkhaneh, decried the rulings as "cooperation between the American Congress, the government and courts to steal Iranian property."
See also
In re Terrorist Attacks on September 11, 2001 – litigation against Iran for its alleged role in the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks
Iran–United States relations
University of Chicago Persian antiquities crisis 
Certain Iranian Assets – ICJ case filed by Iran against the US as a result of this case
References
External links
SCOTUSblog
Opinion of 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act case law
Category:United States foreign relations case law
Category:Iran–United States relations
"""

From "Bank of America National Trust & Savings Ass'n v. 203 North LaSalle Street Partnership" ==> """
Bank of America National Trust and Savings Association v. 203 North LaSalle Street Partnership, 526 U.S. 434 (1999), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court.
Background
A $93 million loan was issued by Bank of America National Trust and Savings to 203 North LaSalle Street Partnership. The Partnership's Chicago office building was used as the principal asset in a mortgage set up to secure the loan. The Partnership filed for bankruptcy and bank began the foreclosure process on the piece of property.
Opinion of the Supreme Court
Pre-bankruptcy equity holders may not, over the objection of a senior class of impaired creditors in a Chapter 11 plan, contribute new capital and receive ownership interests in a reorganized entity, when the opportunity is given only to the old equity holders under a plan adopted without consideration of alternatives. Rather, in order not to violate the absolute priority rule, a plan conferring an interest to old equity must extend an opportunity to others who may compete for the equity (e.g. at auction) or who may propose a competing reorganization plan.
Cram down is barred if a junior interest (old equity) holder under a proposed Chapter 11 plan receives or retains property "on account of" such junior interest. 11 U.S.C. 1129(b)(2)(B). The Court, considering whether the language of the statute implied a new value exception, found "on account of" not to mean "in exchange for" or "in satisfaction of" but rather should be interpreted to mean "because of." Therefore, the absolute priority rule is triggered by a causal relationship between holding the prior claim or interest and receiving or retaining property. The Court neither decided whether the statute included a new value exception, nor decided whether the exception exists at all.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 526
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:Bank of America
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
"""

From "Bank of America, N. A. v. Caulkett" ==> """
Bank of America, N. A. v. Caulkett, 575 U.S. 790, 135 S. Ct. 1995 (2015), is a bankruptcy law case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States on June 1, 2015. In Caulkett, the Court held that 11 U.S.C. § 506(d) does not permit a Chapter 7 debtor to void a junior mortgage on the debtor's property when the amount of the debt secured by the senior mortgage on that property exceeds the property's current market value., 135 S. Ct. 1995, 1998 (2015).See also Raff Ferraioli, Bank of America, N.A. v. Caulkett: Dewsnup Lives,  (Dec. 2015) ("Dewsnup Lives"); Bruce A. Markell, Loser's Lament: Caulkett and ASARCO,  (Aug. 2015) ("Loser's Lament").
Background
"Allowed Secured Claims" in Bankruptcy
Statutory Provisions
Section 506(d) of the Bankruptcy Code provides, as a general rule, "[t]o the extent that a lien secures a claim against the debtor that is not an allowed secured claim, such lien is void." (emphasis added). Although § 506(d) provides two exceptions to this general rule, the facts of Caulkett did not implicate either of these exceptions. As used in the Bankruptcy Code, the term "claim" includes any "right to payment," and the term "lien" means a "charge against or interest in property to secure payment of a debt or performance of an obligation." (definition of "claim") and  (definition of "lien"). 
The full text of § 101(5) reads as follows:
"The term 'claim' means—
(A) right to payment, whether or not such right is reduced to judgment, liquidated, unliquidated, fixed, contingent, matured, unmatured, disputed, undisputed, legal, equitable, secured, or unsecured; or
(B) right to an equitable remedy for breach of performance if such breach gives rise to a right to payment, whether or not such right to an equitable remedy is reduced to judgment, fixed, contingent, matured, unmatured, disputed, undisputed, secured, or unsecured."
By corollary,  defines the term "debt" to mean "liability on a claim." A claim is "allowed" if proof of the claim is filed under 11 U.S.C. § 501, and the claim is not objected to by a party in interest. ("A claim or interest, proof of which is filed under section 501 of this title, is deemed allowed, unless a party in interest, including a creditor of a general partner in a partnership that is a debtor in a case under chapter 7 of this title, objects.")
As to what constitutes a "secured" claim, § 506(a) provides the following: Where a creditor's allowed claim is "secured by a lien on property in which the [bankruptcy] estate has an interest," that allowed claim "is a secured claim to the extent of the value of such creditor's interest in the estate's interest in such property ... and is an unsecured claim to the extent that the value of such creditor's interest ... is less than the amount of such allowed claim." (emphasis added). The filing of a petition in bankruptcy "creates an estate[.]" . With certain exceptions not relevant here, that estate includes "all legal or equitable interests of the debtor in property as of the commencement of the case." § 541(a)(1). This, then, is the "estate" to which § 506(a)(1) refers. In § 506(a), a creditor-lienor's "interest" in the estate's interest in certain collateral property means that creditor's lien on that property. ("In subsection (a) of [§ 506] the creditor's "interest in property" obviously means his security interest without taking account of his right to immediate possession of the collateral on default."). As a functional matter, the value of a creditor-lienor's lien generally depends on four factors:
 the "purpose of the valuation and ... the proposed disposition or use of [the collateral] property.".
 the value of the collateral property (and the estate's interest therein)
 the amount of the creditor-lienor's allowed claim
 the priority of the creditor-lienor's lien in relation to other interests in the collateral property.See generally 4 Collier on Bankruptcy ¶ 506.03[5] (16th ed. 2015) (discussing § 506(a)(1) and how courts determine "the estate's interest in the collateral, and ... the creditor's interest in that interest.")For example, consider the following situation:
Debtor Mr. X owes $200,000 to First National Bank (FNB).
Mr. X's debt to FNB is secured by a first-priority mortgage lien on Mr. X's house, which has a fair market value of $150,000.
Mr. X duly files a bankruptcy petition in Chapter 7.
FNB duly files a proof of claim under 11 U.S.C. § 501; no objections are made to FNB's claim.
Here, under § 506(a)(1), FNB would have an allowed secured claim of $150,000 and an allowed unsecured claim of $50,000. In common bankruptcy parlance, FNB's mortgage lien would be said to be "partially underwater," and FNB itself would be said to be "undersecured." To the extent that the amount of a creditor-lienor's claim exceeds the fair market value of the collateral property, that creditor's lien is said to be "underwater." Insofar as an "underwater" lien is supported by some value in the collateral property, that lien is only partially underwater. A creditor-lienor with a partially underwater lien is said to be "undersecured." See 4 Collier on Bankruptcy ¶ 506.03[4] (16th ed. 2015).
Section 506(a) thus distinguishes between "secured claims" and "unsecured" claims based on the numeric relation between (A) the value of a creditor-lienor's interest in the estate's interest in the collateral property; and (B) the amount of that creditor-lienor's allowed claim.See 4 Collier on Bankruptcy ¶ 506.03[4]  In common bankruptcy parlance, this same numeric relation is used to denominate a creditor-lienor's allowed claim as "oversecured," "fully secured," or "undersecured."See, e.g., 4 Collier on Bankruptcy ¶ 506.03[4]. Denomination of creditor-lienors' allowed claims as oversecured, fully secured, or undersecured is often extended to denominate creditor-lienors themselves as such, e.g.—a creditor-lienor with an undersecured claim is an "undersecured creditor," and so forth. E.g., Prof. John D. Ayer et al., What Every Secured Creditor (and Its Lawyer) Should Know About Chapter 11, in  31 (H. Slayton Dabney, Jr. & John W. Kibler eds., 2007) ("[A creditor-lienor] may be oversecured, fully secured, or undersecured."). In a given case, the particular denomination used depends on the particular nature of that numeric relation.See, e.g., 4 Collier on Bankruptcy ¶ 506.03[4][b]; Prof. John D. Ayer et al., What Every Secured Creditor (and Its Lawyer) Should Know About Chapter 11, in  32-35.
Oversecured Claim
A creditor-lienor's allowed claim is "oversecured" to the extent that the value of that creditor's interest in the estate's interest in the collateral property exceeds the amount of that creditor's allowed claim.E.g., 4 Collier on Bankruptcy ¶ 506.03[4].
Fully Secured Claim
A creditor-lienor's allowed claim is "fully secured" where the value of that creditor's interest in the estate's interest in the collateral property equals the amount of that creditor's allowed claim.
Undersecured Claim
A creditor-lienor's allowed claim is "undersecured" to the extent that the value of that creditor's interest in the estate's interest in the collateral property is less than the amount of that creditor's allowed claim, but greater than zero.
Dewsnup v. Timm
Dewsnup v. Timm, 502 U.S. 410 (1992), presented the Supreme Court with its first occasion to interpret 11 U.S.C. § 506(d).. See, e.g., A.W. Bailey III, Note, Dewsnup v. Timm: Judicial Sleight of Hand in Statutory Construction of the Bankruptcy Code,  (1993) ("Judicial Sleight of Hand") ("The Court used [Dewsnup] to settle a debate over contradictory attempts among the circuits to interpret sections 506(a) and 506(d) of the Bankruptcy Code."). Specifically, Dewsnup presented the question whether § 506(d) allows a Chapter 7 debtor to avoid an undersecured creditor's lien on the debtor's realty to the extent that the amount of the claim secured by that lien exceeds the collateral realty's fair market value.See Dewsnup, 502 U.S. at 411-12. The avoidance of the unsecured portion of a partially underwater lien is frequently termed "strip down". See, e.g., Lawrence Ponoroff, Hey, The Sun Is Hot And The Water's Fine: Why Not Strip Off That Lien?,  13, 16 n.14 (2013) ("Why Not Strip Off That Lien?") ("'Strip down' occurs when an undersecured lien is bifurcated and the unsecured portion is avoided."). Thus, the Supreme Court's framing of the question presented in Dewsnup:  502 U.S. at 411-12. See also Bailey, Judicial Sleight of Hand, at 319 ("The Court used [Dewsnup] to settle a debate over contradictory attempts among the circuits to interpret sections 506(a) and 506(d) of the Bankruptcy Code. The interpretive attempts applied to a Chapter 7 debtor's ability to "strip down" a  creditor's lien on real property to the current value of the property."); David G. Carlson, Bifurcation of Undersecured Claims in Bankruptcy,  (1996) ("Bifurcation of Undersecured Claims") ("In Dewsnup v. Timm, the Supreme Court granted certiorari to unloose the Gordian knot of lien stripping."). In Dewsnup, the Chapter 7 debtor's $120,000 debt to a creditor was secured by lien on certain of the debtor's realty, the fair market value of which was $39,000.Dewsnup, 502 U.S. at 412-13; In re Dewsnup, 87 Bankr. 676, 677 (Bankr. D. Utah 1987). See also Margaret Howard, Dewsnupping the Bankruptcy Code,  (1992) ("Dewsnupping"). The debtor, invoking § 506(d), sought to void that lien to the extent that the creditor-lienor's $120,000 claim exceeded the collateral realty's $39,000 fair market value, thereby "stripping down" the creditor's lien to the value of the collateral realty.Dewsnup, 502 U.S. at 413. See also Howard, Dewsnupping, at 513-14.
The Dewsnup Court held that § 506(d) does not permit a Chapter 7 debtor to "strip down" an undersecured creditor's lien on the debtor's realty to the fair market value of the collateral realty.Dewsnup, 502 U.S. at 417. See also Ponoroff, Why Not Strip Off That Lien?, at 16 ("The narrow holding of [Dewsnup] was that "strip down" of an undersecured claim is not permitted under § 506(d) in a chapter 7 case."); Howard, Dewsnupping, at 513 ("[T]he U.S. Supreme Court held in Dewsnup v. Timm that Section 506(d) of the Bankruptcy Code does not enable a Chapter 7 debtor to void a lien on overencumbered real property to the extent that the amount of the outstanding debt exceeds the property's value."). The Court concluded that the phrase "allowed secured claim" in § 506(d) meant an "allowed claim" of a creditor secured by a lien; that is, the phrase "allowed secured claim" did not have the same meaning in § 506(d) as in § 506(a)(1).See Dewsnup, 502 U.S. at 417. See also Ponoroff, Why Not Strip Off That Lien?, at 19; Margaret Howard, Secured Claims in Bankruptcy: An Essay on Missing the Point,  (1994) ("Missing the Point"); Howard, Dewsnupping, at 516-17. In so concluding, the Court acknowledged the apparent logical infirmity in its construction of § 506(d), but observed that it was not "writing on a clean slate."Dewsnup, 502 U.S. at 417 ("Were we writing on a clean slate, we might be inclined to agree with petitioner that the words "allowed secured claim" must take the same meaning in § 506(d) as in § 506(a)."). See also Adler, Creditor Rights, at 11-12. As support for that proposition, the Court cited "the pre-Code rule that liens pass through bankruptcy unaffected."Dewsnup, 502 U.S. at 417. As to that rule, the Court observed, "[u]nder the [pre-Code] Bankruptcy Act of 1898, a lien on real property passed through bankruptcy unaffected," and "[a]part from reorganization proceedings … no provision of the pre-Code statute permitted involuntary reduction of the amount of a creditor's lien for any reason other than payment on the debt." Id. at 418-19. Because the Court found "ambiguity" in the text of § 506(d), the Court was "not convinced that Congress intended to depart from" that rule.Dewsnup, 502 U.S. at 417. See, e.g., Ponoroff, Why Not Strip Down That Lien?, at 19-20; Carlson, Bifurcation of Undersecured Claims, at 17-18. Thus, the Court's conclusion: the phrase "allowed secured claim" in § 506(d) means an "allowed claim" of a creditor secured by a lien.
The Court's decision in Dewsnup was poorly received and has been subject to extensive criticism "from its inception."Caulkett, 135 S. Ct. at 2000 n.† (the "dagger footnote"). See, e.g., Dewsnup, 502 U.S. at 435-36 (Scalia, J., dissenting); In re Woolsey, 696 F.3d 1266, 1273-74 (10th Cir. 2012) (charging that Dewsnup "warped the bankruptcy code's seemingly straight path into a crooked one."); Carlson, Bifurcation of Undersecured Claims, passim; Adler, Creditor Rights, at 10-12; Newborn, Decline of Priority, passim; Howard, Dewsnupping, passim. For example, Justice Scalia's dissent in Dewsnup castigated the majority for "disregarding well-established and oft-repeated principles of statutory construction" and engaging in "'one-subsection-at-a-time' interpretation."Dewsnup, 502 U.S. at 435 (Scalia, J., dissenting). And in Bank of America National Trust and Savings Association v. 203 North LaSalle Street Partnership, 526 U.S. 434 (1999),  Justice Thomas criticized Dewsnup for "enshroud[ing] both the Courts of Appeals ... and Bankruptcy Courts" in "methodological confusion." (Thomas, J., concurring in the judgment). However, "[r]ight or wrong, the Dewsnuppian departure from the statute's plain language is the law."In re Woolsey, 696 F.3d at 1274.
Caulkett: Facts; Proceedings Below; Question Presented
Facts
The debtor, David B. Caulkett, had two mortgage liens on his house in Melbourne, Florida; Bank of America held the junior mortgage lien. In 2013, Caulkett filed a bankruptcy petition under Chapter 7 in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Middle District of Florida; at that time, the amount of the senior mortgage debt was greater than the fair market value of Caulkett's house.See Caulkett, 135 S. Ct. at 1998; Bank of Am., N.A. v. Caulkett, No. 6:14-cv-78-ORL-31, 2014 WL 7175386, at *1 (M.D. Fla. Feb. 14, 2014).
Proceedings Below
After filing in Chapter 7, Caulkett moved to void Bank of America's junior mortgage lien under § 506(d). The Bankruptcy Court granted Caulkett's motion, and Bank of America appealed. Both the District Court and the Eleventh Circuit affirmed the Bankruptcy Court's order. Thereafter, Bank of America filed a petition for a writ of certiorari in the Supreme Court, which the Court granted on November 17, 2014.Bank of Am., N.A. v. Caulkett, 135 S. Ct. 674 (2014).
Question Presented
Caulkett presented the question whether a Chapter 7 debtor may void a junior mortgage on the debtor's property under § 506(d) when the amount of the debt secured by the senior mortgage on that property exceeds the property's current value.Caulkett, 135 S. Ct. at 1998 (stating that "the question [is] whether a debtor in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceeding may void a junior mortgage under § 506(d) when the debt owed on a senior mortgage exceeds the present value of the property.")
Opinion of the Court
In Caulkett, the Court unanimously held that § 506(d) does not allow a Chapter 7 debtor to void a junior mortgage on the debtor's property when the amount of the debt secured by the senior mortgage on that property exceeds the property's current market value.See also Ferraioli, Dewsnup Lives, at § 2, ¶¶ 6-8; Markell, Loser's Lament, at ¶¶ 8-10. The Court-based this holding on its prior decision in Dewsnup, reasoning as follows: 
Dewsnup held that the phrase "allowed secured claim" in § 506(d) means an "allowed claim" of a creditor secured by a lien on property.
Bank of America's claim against Caulkett was "allowed" under § 502.
Bank of America's allowed claim was secured by a lien on property; Bank of America held the junior mortgage on Caulkett's house.
Thus, Bank of America's junior mortgage lien on Caulkett's house could not be voided under § 506(d).Caulkett, 135 S. Ct. at 1999-2000. See also Ferraioli, Dewsnup Lives, at § 2, ¶¶ 6-8; Markell, Loser's Lament, at ¶¶ 8-10.
Although the Court expressly acknowledged the logical infirmity in Dewsnup reasoning, it declined to overrule Dewsnup; noting that Caulkett had not asked the Court to do so.Caulkett, 135 S. Ct. at 2000 n.† (the "dagger footnote") ("From its inception, [Dewsnup] has been the target of criticism....Despite this criticism, the debtors have repeatedly insisted that they are not asking us to overrule Dewsnup."). See also Ferraioli, Dewsnup Lives, at § 2, ¶¶ 6-8; Markell, Loser's Lament, at ¶¶ 8-10. Justices Kennedy, Breyer, and Sotomayor did not join the "dagger footnote."Caulkett, 135 S. Ct. at 1998 n.*. Having declined to overrule Dewsnup, the Court concluded that Dewsnup dictated only one result: Section 506(d) does not allow a Chapter 7 debtor to void a junior mortgage on the debtor's property when the amount of the debt secured by the senior mortgage on that property exceeds the property's current market value.Caulkett, 135 S. Ct. at 1999-2001. See also Ferraioli, Dewsnup Lives, at § 2, ¶¶ 6-8; Markell, Loser's Lament, at ¶¶ 8-10.
Commentary and analysis
Commentators on the Caulkett decision have at turns expressed bewilderment that the Caulkett Court declined to overrule Dewsnup and wariness as to heralding the long-term reign of Dewsnup and Caulkett.See, e.g., Ferraioli, Dewsnup Lives; Markell, Loser's Lament; G. Ray Warner, A Lien Strip Tease from the Supremes re: Bank of America, N.A. v. Caulkett Bankruptcy Litigation,  (June 2, 2015), http://www.natlawreview.com/article/lien-strip-tease-supremes-re-bank-america-na-v-caulkett-bankruptcy-litigation ("A Lien Strip Tease") ("What is strange about Caulkett is that Justice Thomas, writing for the full Court, goes out of his way to criticize Dewsnup....Why not just overrule Dewsnup?  That brings us to the strangest aspect of the opinion. Not once, not twice, but three times in the short seven-page opinion, Justice Thomas states that the debtors did not ask the Court to overrule Dewsnup."); Richard E. Gottlieb, High Court Win Is No Cure-All For Subordinate-Lien Market,  (June 2, 2015), http://www.law360.com/articles/662226/high-court-win-is-no-cure-all-for-subordinate-lien-market ("No Cure-All"). For example, one commentator has described it as "strange" that the Caulkett Court "went out of [its] way to criticize Dewsnup", yet declined to take the further step of overruling it.Warner, A Lien Strip Tease. And another has remarked, more generally, that "Caulkett has kept spectators baffled as to why it did not overrule Dewsnup".Ferraioli, Dewsnup Lives. At the same time, in light of the Caulkett Court's criticism of Dewsnup, other commentators have also questioned the long-term stability of Dewsnup reign and thus—by extension—the future of Caulkett itself.See, e.g., Markell, Loser's Lament ("Does the dagger [foot]note signal that six justices are ready to put a knife through Dewsnup?"); Gottlieb, No Cure-All (as to the future of Caulkett, warning against "plac[ing] too much stock in the long-term sustainability of its precedential value, despite the unanimity of the court's opinion."). Yet for the time being, Dewsnup and Caulkett are the law.
Notes and references
All citations herein are written in Bluebook style.
Notes
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2015 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:Bank of America
Category:Melbourne, Florida
Category:Mortgage industry of the United States
"""

From "Bank of the United States v. Deveaux" ==> """
Bank of the United States v. Deveaux,  is an early US corporate law case decided by the US Supreme Court. It held that corporations have the capacity to sue in federal court on grounds of diversity under article three, section two of the United States Constitution. It was the first Supreme Court case to examine corporate rights and, while it is rarely featured prominently in US legal history, it set an important precedent for the legal rights of corporations, particularly with regard to corporate personhood. 
The court ruled that corporations composed of citizens from one state may sue on behalf of those citizens in circuit court citizens from another state. The court specifies that while corporations may sue on behalf of citizens, corporations cannot be citizens. In other words, the court ruled that while only citizens may sue in court, they may do so under a corporate name. 
 Background 
Georgian Jeffersonian politicians first provoked a court case when, in 1805, they imposed a tax on the Bank of the United States' locally held capital. Many Jeffersonian Democrats strongly opposed the chartering of a national bank as a violation of states rights and wanted to see it dissolved. However, because state governments lack the power to directly legislate federal institutions under the supremacy clause, Jeffersonian Democrats in Georgia chose another route to fight back against the Bank: taxes. The lawmakers hoped that heavy taxes on the bank would drive it out of Georgia.
The Bank decided to ignore the tax in an act of civil disobedience, hoping that a conflict with the state would bring the question of corporate rights in front of the Supreme Court.
After the Bank refused to pay the new taxes, a Georgian tax collector named Peter Deveaux decided to take matters into his own hands, forcibly confiscating two boxes of silver from the Savannah branch of the Bank. The Bank sued Deveaux in Federal court, circumventing the Georgia state court for fear of bias. The case came in front of the Supreme Court, headed by John Marshall, a Federalist and supporter of the bank.
 Syllabus 
William Cranch, the Reporter of Decision of the Supreme Court, summarized the decision of the court. A corporation aggregate composed of citizens of one state may sue a citizen of another state in the circuit court of the United States.
Where the jurisdiction of the courts of the United States depends not on the character of the parties, but upon the nature of the case, the circuit courts derive no jurisdiction from the Judiciary Act except in case of a controversy between citizens of the same state claiming lands under grants from different states.
No right is conferred on the bank by its act of incorporation to sue in the federal courts.  A corporation aggregate cannot, in its corporate capacity, be a citizen.
The duties of this Court to exercise jurisdiction where it is conferred and not to usurp it where it is not conferred are of equal obligation.  The Constitution therefore and the law are to be expounded without a leaning the one way or the other, according to those general principles which usually govern in the construction of fundamental or other laws.
A constitution, from its nature, deals in generals, not in detail.  Its framers cannot perceive minute distinctions which arise in the progress of the nation, and therefore confine it to the establishment of broad and general principles.
The Judicial Department was introduced into the American Constitution under impressions and with views which are too apparent not to be perceived by all.  However true the fact may be that the tribunals of the states will administer justice as impartially as those of the nation to parties of every description, it is not less true that the Constitution itself either entertains apprehensions on this subject or views with such indulgence the possible fears and apprehensions of suitors that it has established national tribunals for the decision of controversies between aliens and a citizen or between citizens of different states.
Judgment
Chief Justice John Marshall gave the leading decision.
See also
US corporate law
Notes
Category:United States corporate case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:John Marshall
"""

From "Banks v. Manchester" ==> """
Banks v. Manchester, 128 U.S. 244 (1888), was a United States Supreme Court ruling dealing with copyright. In 1882, to facilitate the printing of records of the Supreme Court of Ohio, the state of Ohio passed a resolution to establish a copyright held by the Supreme Court of Ohio's court reporter and advertised a contract for printing copies of the records for Ohio by the lowest bidder in exchange for obtaining exclusive publishing rights for two years. H. W. Derby & Company won the bidding war and assigned all their right and interest in the contract to Banks & Brothers. Banks then contracted the Capital Printing and Publishing Company to print the books.
Banks proceeded to print various reports, among which included Bierce et al. v. Bierce et al. and The Scioto Valley Railway Company v. McCoy. Although, for a time, exclusive to Banks's publications, G. L. Manchester published these cases in the American Law Journal, a periodical. Banks sought to stop Manchester from printing the cases. Manchester refused because judges had authored the decisions; therefore, he claimed that Banks did not have a copyright. Banks's position was that the state's copyright, held by the court reporter E. L. De Witt and licensed to them, afforded them the exclusivity.
The Court ruled that the State could not hold a copyright and affirmed its decision in Wheaton v. Peters. by stating "what a court or a judge thereof cannot confer on a reporter as the basis of a copyright in him, they cannot confer on any other person or on the state.".
References
External links
Category:1888 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Barber v. Thomas" ==> """
Barber v. Thomas, 560 U.S. 474 (2010), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held, 6–3, that prisoners incarcerated in federal prisons are entitled to up to 54 days of "good time credits" for every year they are incarcerated, allowing federal inmates to reduce their sentence by up to 54 days per year of imprisonment for exhibiting good behavior. The case concerned how the United States Federal Bureau of Prisons should calculate "good time credits": whether they should be calculated based on the length of the sentence levied by the judge, or by the time actually served by the inmate.
Background
The petitioner, Michael Barber, sought habeas corpus in a federal district court. He argued that the Bureau of Prisons "inaccurately calculated his good time credit toward the service of his federal sentence." Barber argued that the BOP should have calculated good time credit based on the sentence imposed rather than the time actually served in prison. Barber's petition was denied by the district court, on appeal the Ninth Circuit affirmed the ruling of the lower courts citing Tablada v. Daniels noting that the good time credit statute was ambiguous and the BOP's interpretation was reasonable.
 Opinion of the Court 
The court affirmed the lower court's ruling with a 6–3 vote.  Barber's attorneys argued that by allowing up to 54 days' credit for each year "of the prisoner's term of imprisonment," Congress intended federal sentences to be reduced by as much as 54 days for each year of the sentence imposed by the judge.  The government argued that the reduction applied at the end of each year that is actually served.  Under that interpretation, which prevailed, since the sentence keeps being reduced year after year, less credit in total is awarded. The difference is about one week per year for every federal prisoner serving a term of more than a year's duration. Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the majority opinion, while Justice Kennedy wrote the dissent.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 560
 References 
External links
 Transcript of Oral Arguments
 SCOTUS Wiki page
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:United States sentencing case law
"""

From "Barbier v. Connolly" ==> """
Barbier v. Connolly, 113 U.S. 27 (1885), was a United States Supreme Court in which the Court considered the application of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution to a San Francisco ordinance regulating the establishment of public laundries. The Court held that the regulation of laundries for public health and public safety reasons were clearly within the police powers of the state, and the Fourteenth Amendment was not meant to interfere with the police powers of the state.
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:Legal history of San Francisco
Category:Laundry organizations
"""

From "Barefoot v. Estelle" ==> """
Barefoot v. Estelle, 463 U.S. 880 (1983), is a United States Supreme Court case..  The Court ruled on the admissibility of clinical opinions given by two psychiatrists hired by the prosecution in answer to hypothetical questions regarding the defendant's future dangerousness and the likelihood that he would present a continuing threat to society in this Texas death penalty case. The American Psychiatric Association submitted an amicus curiae brief in support of the defendant's position that such testimony should be inadmissible and urging curtailment of psychiatric testimony regarding future dangerousness and a prohibition of such testimony based on hypothetical data. 
In Estelle v. Smith, 451 U.S. 454 (1981), the Supreme Court previously ruled on a Texas death penalty case regarding the use of a psychiatric examination to determine the defendant's competency to stand trial to predict future dangerousness.  In that case the Court held that the Fifth Amendment's privilege against self-incrimination applied to pretrial psychiatric examinations by a prosecution psychiatrist who later testified regarding the defendant's future dangerousness without warning the defendant that such evidence could be used against him. The Court reasoned that although a defendant has no generalized constitutional right to remain silent at a psychiatric examination limited to the issues of sanity or competency, full Miranda warnings must be given with respect to testimony concerning future dangerousness.
 Background 
Thomas Barefoot (February 23, 1945 – October 30, 1984) was convicted of the murder of a police officer. The same Texas jury determined, in the sentencing phase of the trial, whether Barefoot should receive the death penalty.
The Texas death-penalty statute required that the jury consider whether Barefoot would pose "future dangerousness".Specifically, the statute required that the jury determine whether the defendant would pose "a continuing threat to society".  By law, "society" includes within the prison system; thus, a defendant who could pose a risk to prison staff or other inmates would be eligible for the death penalty.  Along with other evidence, the prosecution called two psychiatrists who, answering hypothetical questions, testified that Barefoot was likely to remain a danger to society. Neither psychiatrist had examined Barefoot nor asked to do so, but each summarized their professional experience as equipping them to answer the questions accurately. One psychiatrist called Barefoot a "criminal sociopath" and said there was no treatment for this condition and that Barefoot was likely to commit acts of violence in the future. The other psychiatrist testified that Barefoot had "a fairly classical, typical, sociopathic personality disorder." He placed Barefoot in the "most severe category" of sociopaths, and on a scale of one to ten, Barefoot was "above ten". The jury considered this as well as other evidence and imposed the death penalty.
The Court ignored amicus briefs arguing that psychiatric evidence cannot be offered on such issues with any reasonable degree of certainty.
 Appeals 
Barefoot appealed to the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals which rejected his argument that this use of psychiatric testimony during the sentencing phase of his trial was unconstitutional and upheld the conviction and sentence. After denials of a writ of certiorari and of habeas corpus, petitioner filed a petition for habeas corpus in Federal District Court raising the same objections to the use of psychiatric testimony. Although the District Court rejected his claims and denied the writ, it did issue a certificate of probable cause. The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals denied a second writ of habeas corpus and denied a stay of execution. The Court of Appeals also denied a stay of execution.
The Supreme Court granted certiorari.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court upheld the denial of a stay of execution by the Court of Appeals, saying that the Court of Appeals followed the procedural guidelines for handling such applications for stays of execution on habeas corpus appeals pursuant to a certificate of probable cause. The Court also upheld the appellate court's finding on the merits of the case, reasoning that that clinical prediction testimony  was not in every case wrong and could be refuted by opposing experts, trusting the adversarial system to determine the accuracy of such statements.
 Subsequent developments 
The Court's decision in this death penalty case was very important in influencing the legal opinion regarding psychiatric predictions of dangerousness, a position with which the  American Psychiatric Association and other medical ethicists disagree, leading some experts to conclude that a psychiatrist making such statements verges on the brink of being a quack. Nevertheless, courts have been willing to accept such testimony despite the lack of empirical evidence that these predictions of future dangerousness are accurate.
However, forensic experts state that psychiatric testimony on ultimate questions at law is unreliable due to the inherent limitations of current psychiatric clinical and experimental knowledge and practice. Dr. James P. Grigson, one of the psychiatrists that testified in this case, was expelled from the American Psychiatric Association and the Texas Association of Psychiatric Physicians (TAPP) for making statements in testimony on defendants he had not examined. The TAPP said his expulsion was due not only to his replies to hypothetical questions but also for predicting dangerousness with 100% certainty.
Barefoot was executed on October 30, 1984, at the age of 39.
 See also 
 Estelle v. Smith (1981)
 List of people executed in Texas, 1982–1989
 Footnotes 
 External links 
 Interview with Attorney Douglas Becker on his role in Barefoot v. Estelle
 Hastings -  Barefoot v. Estelle
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States expert witness case law
Category:Mental health case law in the United States
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Barenblatt v. United States" ==> """
Barenblatt v. United States, 360 U.S. 109 (1959), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the actions of the House Un-American Activities Committee did not violate the First Amendment and, thus, the Court upheld Lloyd Barenblatt's conviction for contempt of Congress. The Court held that the congressional committee had authority to compel a college professor to answer questions about his Communist Party membership.
 Background 
On February 25, 1953, the House Committee on Un-American Activities began a series of investigations to determine "the character, extent and objects of Communist Party activities … carried on by [teachers] who are subject to the directives and discipline of the Communist Party." Francis Crowley was brought before the committee and testified that while he was a graduate student at the University of Michigan in 1950 he and Lloyd Barenblatt - with whom he had shared an apartment - had participated in a student club with ties to the Communist Party. Lloyd Barenblatt was subpoenaed in June 1954. Since his time as a teaching fellow at the University of Michigan, Barenblatt had been a social psychology instructor at Vassar. When he was subpoenaed to testify before the House Committee on Un-American Activities, the college refused to renew his contract.
Although Barenblatt admitted that he had been at Michigan at the time and knew Crowley he refused to answer five questions:
 Are you now a member of the Communist Party?
 Have you ever been a member of the Communist Party?
 Did you know Francis Crowley to be a member of the Communist Party?
 Were you ever involved with a student organization affiliated with the Communist Party while at the University of Michigan?
 Were you a member while a student of the University of Michigan Council of Arts, Sciences, and Professions?
Barenblatt objected to these questions on the basis that they concerned his personal and private political and religious beliefs, as well as his associative activities. He did not invoke the 5th Amendment's protection against self-incrimination. He argued that the committee was not authorized to compel testimony, he was given insufficient information about his testimony's relevance to the committee's legislative tasks, and his objections were protected by the First Amendment.
The House of Representatives held him in contempt of Congress to refusing to answer these questions, and a U.S. attorney obtained conviction against him. On appeal to the Supreme Court, Barenblatt was represented by the American Civil Liberties Union.
Decision of the Court
The Court, in a 5–4 decision, held that HUAC did not violate Barenblatt's First Amendment rights.  Justice Harlan's opinion stated that "Where First Amendment rights are asserted to bar governmental interrogation, resolution of the issue involves a balancing of the competing private and public interests."  Harlan then struck a balance in favor of the government: "That Congress has wide power to legislate in the field of Communist activity in this Country, and to conduct appropriate investigations in aid thereof, is hardly debatable.  This power rests on the right of self-preservation, the ultimate value of any society."  This governmental interest was found to outweigh Professor Barenblatt's First Amendment interest in studying, discussing, and associating with those interested in the theories of Communism.  Professor Barenblatt claimed he never sought to overthrow the government through his discussions of Communism.  Nevertheless, the Court deferred to Congress's power to investigate for legislative purposes.
Dissenting opinions
Two dissenting opinions were presented. Justice Hugo Black's dissent was concurred with by Chief Justice Earl Warren and Justice William O. Douglas. Black dissented on these grounds: First, that the term "Un-American" in the committee's mission was so vague as to make the committee's mandate void under the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment. Second, the Court's "balancing test" as to the applicability of First Amendment rights was not the way to determine the scope of freedom of speech, and if it were, the Court should have balanced the interest of society in "being able to join organizations, advocate causes and make political 'mistakes'" against the government's limited interest in making laws in the area of free speech..." Third, "the chief aim, purpose, and practice of the HUAC... is to try witnesses and punish them because they are or have been Communists or because they refuse or admit or deny Communist affiliations."
Justice William J. Brennan, also dissenting, wrote, "...no purpose for the investigation of Barenblatt is revealed by the record except exposure purely for the sake of exposure. This is not the purpose to which Barenblatt's rights under the First Amendment can validly be subordinated. An investigation in which the processes of law-making and law-evaluating are submerged entirely in exposure of individual behavior-in adjudication, of a sort, through the exposure process-is outside the constitutional pale of congressional inquiry."
Justice Black rejected the Court's balancing test: "I do not agree that laws directly abridging First Amendment freedoms can be justified by a balancing process... [The balancing test] completely leaves out the real interest in Barenblatt's silence, the interest of the people as a whole in being able to join organizations, advocate causes and make political 'mistakes' without later being subjected to governmental penalties for having dared to think for themselves."
See also
Wilkinson v. United States
House Un-American Activities Committee
Watkins v. United States
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1959 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Barker v. Wingo" ==> """
Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514 (1972), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the Sixth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, specifically the right of defendants in criminal cases to a speedy trial.  The Court held that determinations of whether or not the right to a speedy trial has been violated must be made on a case-by-case basis, and set forth four factors to be considered in the determination..
Facts and trial
On July 20, 1958, an elderly couple in Christian County, Kentucky were murdered in their home by intruders, later identified as Willie Barker and Silas Manning.
Believing that the case against Manning was the stronger of the two, and that Manning's testimony was needed to convict Barker (in his own case, Manning exercised his right under the Fifth Amendment to not incriminate himself), the prosecution chose to try Manning first, hoping that once convicted, Manning would later voluntarily testify against Barker.  At the outset of Manning's trial on October 23, 1958, the prosecution sought and obtained the first of what would be 16 continuances in Barker's trial.
The prosecution, however, encountered numerous difficulties in getting a conviction against Manning;It would take a total of six trials before Manning was convicted of both murders.  The first and fourth trials ended in a hung jury.  The second trial resulted in a conviction but was overturned on grounds of illegally obtained evidence.  The third trial also resulted in a conviction but was overturned on grounds of failure to allow a change of venue.  The fifth and sixth trials resulted in murder convictions which Manning chose not to appeal. it would not be until December 1962 that Manning would be convicted in the second of the two murders.  As the Christian County Circuit Court only held three terms each year (in February, June, and September), for each term the prosecution would seek a continuance in the Barker case, until the beginning of the following term, while the Manning cases were ongoing.Continuances were granted in the Barker case in October 1958 (#1), February 1959 (#2, in an exception to the pattern this continuance was granted for one month only), March 1959 (#3), June 1959 (#4), September 1959 (#5), February 1960 (#6), June 1960 (#7), September 1960 (#8), February 1961 (#9), June 1961 (#10), September 1961 (#11), February 1962 (#12), June 1962 (#13), September 1962 (#14), March 1963 (at the beginning of the Court's term in February 1963, the prosecution moved to set the trial date for March 19 of that year, but when that date arrived the prosecution requested and was granted Continuance #15), and June 1963 (#16).
Barker, through his counsel, did not object to any of the first eleven continuances.  But on the 12th continuance (February 1962) Barker's counsel filed a motion to dismiss on speedy trial grounds, which was rejected.  Barker's counsel did not object to the 13th or 14th continuances, but objected to the 15th continuance (March 1963 on the date of Barker's trial; the prosecution sought a continuance due to illness of the former sheriff, the chief investigating officer in the case) as well as the 16th continuance (June 1963, requested for the sheriff's continued illness; while granting the continuance the Circuit Court ruled that the matter had to come to trial at the next term or would be dismissed for lack of prosecution).
The final trial date was set for October 9, 1963 and on that date, after Barker's counsel made another unsuccessful motion to dismiss on speedy trial grounds, the trial was finally commenced; with Manning the chief prosecution witness, Barker was convicted and given a life sentence.
Appeals
Barker appealed his conviction on speedy trial grounds to the Kentucky Court of Appeals, which affirmed it in 1964.
In 1970 Barker filed a habeas corpus petition in the United States District Court for the Western District of Kentucky.  Though the District Court denied the petition, it granted Barker the right to proceed in forma pauperis and a certificate of probable cause to appeal.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed the District Court's decision in 1971.  The Sixth Circuit argued that Barker had waived any speedy trial claims up through February 1963 (which the Sixth Circuit erroneously believed was the first date that Barker's counsel objected to a further continuance)Counsel for the Commonwealth of Kentucky conceded at oral argument before the Supreme Court that Barker's counsel first objected in February 1962, not February 1963. and that the eight-month period between February and October 1963 (the period between the objection and the actual trial) was not unduly long.  Further, the Sixth Circuit ruled that granting a continuance based on the sheriff's illness was a justifiable reason for a delay.
The United States Supreme Court granted a writ of certiorari in 1972.
The Supreme Court decision
Opinion of the court
The Supreme Court first noted that "[t]he right to a speedy trial is generically different from any of the other rights enshrined in the Constitution for the protection of the accused" for three reasons:
First, the Court noted that "there is a societal interest in providing a speedy trial which exists separate from, and at times in opposition to, the interests of the accused".  The Court commented on the backlog of cases, mainly in urban courts, that often enable defendants to negotiate a plea for a lesser offense.  The Court also noted that persons released on bond had the opportunity to commit further crimes,The Court specifically commented that "[i]t must be of little comfort to the residents of Christian County, Kentucky, to know that Barker was at large on bail for over four years while accused of a vicious and brutal murder of which he was ultimately convicted." "the longer an accused is free awaiting trial, the more tempting becomes his opportunity to jump bail and escape", and that "delay between arrest and punishment may have a detrimental effect on rehabilitation."  The Court also noted that if the accused cannot make bail, that too can make rehabilitation difficult, that a lengthy pre-trial detention can be costly, and that "society loses wages which might have been earned, and it must often support families of incarcerated breadwinners."Barker, 407 U.S. at 520-21.
Second, the Court noted that "deprivation of the right may work to the accused's advantage."  As the time between arrest and trial lengthens, witnesses may become unavailable and/or their memories fade; if the witnesses were for the prosecution the case may be seriously weakened (as the prosecution has the burden to prove the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt).Barker, 407 U.S. at 521.
Finally, the Court noted that the concept is more vague than with other rights, in that the Court "cannot definitely say how long is too long in a system where justice is supposed to be swift but deliberate."
The Court then noted that there were two competing approaches as to how to handle the uncertainty regarding "how long is too long"; neither of which it accepted:
One approach (supported by the American Bar Association) was to "hold that the Constitution requires a criminal defendant to be offered a trial within a specified time period."  The Court rejected this approach, stating that there was "no constitutional basis for holding that the speedy trial right can be quantified into a specified number of days or months."Barker, 407 U.S. at 523.
The other approach was to "restrict consideration of the right to those cases in which the accused has demanded a speedy trial."  In other words, if the defendant did not specifically demand a trial, the defendant waived his/her right to appeal the matter.  The Court also rejected this approach, as it considered a speedy trial to be a fundamental right, and quoting Carnley v. Cochran the Court ruled that "[p]resuming waiver from a silent record is impermissible. The record must show, or there must be an allegation and evidence which show, that an accused was offered counsel but intelligently and understandably rejected the offer. Anything less is not waiver."Barker, 407 U.S. at 526.
As a balancing test, the Court adopted four factors to be considered in determining, on a case-by-case basis, whether a defendant has been prejudiced by the lack of a speedy trial:Barker, 407 U.S. at 530.
the length of delay,
the reason for the delay,
the time and manner in which the defendant has asserted his right, and
the degree of prejudice to the defendant which the delay has caused.
Taking these factors into consideration, though, Barker's conviction was upheld.  The court agreed that the period of time between initial arrest and trial – over five years – was "extraordinary" and that only seven months of the delay was justifiable (the period of the ex-sheriff's illness).The Court also stated that some delay to secure Manning's testimony against Barker would have been permissible, "but more than four years was too long a period, particularly since a good part of that period was attributable to the Commonwealth's failure or inability to try Manning under circumstances that comported with due process."
However, the Court also ruled that Barker was not prejudiced by the delay, since none of Barker's witnesses were harmed by the delay.  More importantly, the Court determined that Barker did not want a speedy trial (a fact that Barker's counsel conceded at oral argument).  The Court speculated that Barker's reason was his gambling on Manning's acquittal (the evidence against Manning not being strong as evidenced by two hung juries and two appellate court reversals), believing that if Manning was acquitted, he would never be tried (which Barker's counsel also conceded at oral argument).  The Court further noted that, after Barker's counsel objected to the February 1962 continuance, he did not object to the June or September 1962 continuances; only in March 1963, after Manning's convictions became final, were objections raised to further continuances (this time brought about by the ex-sheriff's illness, which Barker conceded was a justifiable reason).
Concurring opinion
Justice White, joined by Justice Brennan, concurred in the verdict, and specifically commented that an overcrowded docket would not be a reasonable basis for a delay.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 407
Continuance
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Speedy Trial Clause case law
Category:1972 in United States case law
"""

From "Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc." ==> """
Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), was a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court concerning the First Amendment and the ability of the government to outlaw certain forms of expressive conduct. It ruled that the state has the constitutional authority to ban public nudity, even as part of expressive conduct such as dancing, because it furthers a substantial government interest in protecting the morality and order of society..  This case is perhaps best summarized by a sentence in Justice Souter's concurring opinion, which is often paraphrased as "Nudity itself is not inherently expressive conduct."
Background
Two businesses—the Kitty Kat Lounge, Inc. and Glen Theatre, Inc.—operated adult entertainment establishments in South Bend, Indiana. The Kitty Kat was a club that sold alcoholic beverages in addition to employing female exotic dancers to entertain its patrons. Glen Theatre was primarily in the business of selling adult entertainment materials, such as magazines and videos, and had an enclosed "bookstore" area where customers could insert coins into a machine which would allow them to view live female exotic dancers. Both businesses sought to include fully nude dancers to their entertainment lineup, but were prevented by an Indiana statute regulating "indecent behavior."
Specifically, the statute read that dancers must wear, at a minimum, pasties and G-strings to provide basic coverage of the dancers' bodies. As this law necessarily prevented complete nudity in businesses open to the public, Kitty Kat and Glen Theatre were legally unable to offer nude dancing, prompting them to file suit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana on First Amendment grounds. The respondents, represented by Patrick Baude, professor at Indiana University School of Law - Bloomington, argued that the prohibition of complete nudity in public places was unconstitutionally overbroad. The District Court granted an injunction, against enforcement of the indecency statute.
The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the District Court's decision based on prior suit in the Indiana Supreme Court as well as the United States Supreme Court that denied the respondents' the ability to pursue relief with their current constitutional argument. The case was remanded to District Court, allowing the businesses to argue against the statute as it applied to the proposed dancing rather than claiming constitutional overbreadth.
The District Court, upon remand, declared that the dancing was not constitutionally protected speech, and the businesses appealed to the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals, which reversed the District Court's ruling. The opinions authored by the judges on the Seventh Circuit's panel accepted the argument that the statute in question unduly infringed on freedom of expression; in this case, the message of "eroticism and sexuality" that the dancers were meant to convey.Miller v. Civil City of South Bend, 887 F.2d 826 (7th Cir. 1989); on rehearing en banc, 
The Supreme Court granted certiorari. and heard oral arguments on January 8, 1991.
Opinion of the Court
On June 21, 1991, Chief Justice Rehnquist delivered the judgment of the Court, joined by Justices O'Connor and Kennedy. Justices Scalia and Souter authored their own concurring opinions, agreeing with the majority ruling but for different reasons.
The plurality reasoned that, indeed, the type of dancing the respondents sought to include in their businesses was expressive conduct under the First Amendment, albeit "only marginally so." While the plurality ceded this point, it went on to decide how much constitutional protection the conduct warranted, and whether the statute at hand was, in fact, an unacceptable infringement on the freedom of expression.
In determining the type of protection, the plurality turned to the "time, place, or manner" test as implemented in United States v. O'Brien (1968),. the four-pronged "O'Brien Test." The plurality found that enacting this sort of legislation was clearly within the constitutional authority of the state, and that the statute furthered a substantial government interest. To understand the legislative intent behind the creation of the statute, the plurality turned to the history of indecency law, noting an expansive history and breadth of adoption for such legislation. Considering available precedent from cases such as Roth v. United States (1957). and Bowers v. Hardwick (1986),. the plurality concluded that the statute furthered a government interest in order and morality.
With regards to the third part of the O'Brien Test, the plurality stated that the statute was not related to suppressing expression. The statute did not prohibit nude dancing alone, but rather all nudity in public places. While it may be in some manner "expressive" for a person to appear naked in public, the plurality determined that basically any conduct anyone engages in at any time can be considered "expressive," so merely being expressive is not enough to bring such an argument. To provide support for the logical foundations of this finding, the plurality said, 
As to the final point of the O'Brien test, the plurality contended that the statute was narrowly tailored to achieve the government interest it sought to promote. Indiana's statute was not intended as a clandestine attempt at silencing the potentially expressive conduct of a person dancing in the nude; it was "an end in itself," designed to codify the societal disapproval of nude strangers in public. Even though, as the respondents contended, the patrons in their establishments are all of legal age and all willing to see the prohibited nudity, the fact remains that, for the purposes of the constitutional question at hand, the statute was not needlessly restrictive.
In closing, the plurality reversed the ruling of the Court of Appeals. In effect, this ruling determined that it was not unconstitutional for a state to enact legislation forbidding public nudity outright, particularly if the only requirement for a person to no longer be considered "nude" was wearing some of the most revealing possible clothing.
Scalia's concurrence
Justice Scalia agreed with the plurality's overall finding, i.e. that the Appeals Court's decision must be reversed. However, he differed from the plurality by arguing that the Indiana statute did not regulate any kind of expression, merely conduct. As such, Justice Scalia believed, it was inappropriate to apply First Amendment scrutiny to the statute in the first place. Justice Scalia took a more formalistic approach to constitutional interpretation than his benchmates by looking at the text of the statute itself and, seeing no reference express or implied to the limitation of any form of expression, deciding that there can be no First Amendment question present at all. Language he used later in his opinion demonstrates the originalist views that characterized Justice Scalia's tenure on the bench.
Souter's concurrence
Justice Souter also agreed with the plurality opinion's conclusion, but wanted to elaborate further his own reasons for this agreement. In his concurrence, Justice Souter's well-known sentence, "Although such performance dancing is inherently expressive, nudity per se is not," outlines his general purpose. He states that nudity is not inherently expressive because it is merely a state, not an act. He differs from Justice Scalia by agreeing with both the plurality and the dissent that, because the state of nudity can enhance the expressive eroticism of a dance, nude dancing must be afforded some constitutional protection. He agrees in large part with the dissent, but differs by saying that the negative secondary effects (such as prostitution, violence, etc.) that the state may wish to control with such a ban are correlated only to the presence of establishments offering nude dancing, rather than the expression conveyed in the dance. In the closing of his opinion, Justice Souter notes that the establishments are perfectly free to convey their erotic message in any other way short of violating obscenity laws. To this effect, he notes in closing that "a pornographic movie featuring one of respondents ... was playing nearby without any interference from the authorities at the time these cases arose."
Dissent
Justice White authored the dissent, joined by Justices Marshall, Blackmun and Stevens. In noting his disagreement with the other Justices, Justice White argues that the third part of the O'Brien test (requiring that the law be unrelated to the suppression of free expression) is not satisfied. In pursuing legitimate government interests, the statute in place restricts conduct - nudity - that is integral to the expressive nature of the act. Citing Schad v. Borough of Mt. Ephraim (1981),. the dissent remarks that the condition of human nakedness in and of itself does not transform otherwise protected speech into unprotected speech. Justice White argues that it is precisely because of the heightened expressive impact that the state chooses to forbid public nudity, because the state desires to control the negative secondary effects such as prostitution and degradation of women. Because nudity is an essential part of the potency of the expression in question, the law unconstitutionally restricts that expression.
In popular culture
In 2013, the Elevator Repair Service theater company produced Arguendo, a theatrical reenactment of the Supreme Court arguments in this case. Its script follows the audio recordings verbatim, but its choreography incorporates elements of dance. In the play, Bruce Ennis, attorney for the dancers, eventually becomes nude. Created and directed by John Collins, the play was well received in New York and Washington, D.C.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 501
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Obscenity controversies
"""

From "Barnett Bank of Marion County, N.A. v. Nelson" ==> """
Barnett Bank of Marion County, N.A. v. Nelson, 517 U.S. 25 (1996), is a Supreme court case that ruled that states could moderate national banks if doing so does not prevent or largely interfere with the national bank's ability to exercise its powers. Later, in 2004, the OCC (Office of the Comptroller of the Currency) authorized its preemption rule which declared that a national bank's ability to exert its incidental powers which include lending and deposit taking inhibited state laws that obstruct, impair or condition” the business of banking."
Background
Under the National Bank Act, there is a dual banking system in the United States: a federal system based on national bank charters, and a state system formed on state charters. Under the act, a national bank association has the power to do what is necessary for its banking business.
In 1994, amongst a time of national bank expansion across state lines, Congress clearly declared its aim to create a path of freedom from state regulations by adopting the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 (Riegle-Neal). This act sought a new preemption standard for national banks in America by administering that national banks were subject to state consumer laws as if they were sections of a state bank except when federal law preempted the application of a state law to a national bank or if the Office of the Comptroller of Currency (OCC) concluded that a state law inclined against national banks. Courts later held that the (Riegle-Neal) act gave the OCC the ability to apply state laws even if they were not prohibited.
A Florida law prohibited Florida-licensed insurance agents from engaging in certain insurance activities such as deposits and engage in any activity incidental to receiving deposits where the agent was related with, among other things, any bank than one which was not a subordinate or associate of a bank capital company, and was located in a city with a populace of less than 5000 people. Florida's Insurance Commissioner directed Barnett to stop selling the insurance at the branch because it was banned under state statue.  
See also
 National Bank Act
 Riegle-Neal Act
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1996 in United States case law
"""

From "Barnhart v. Peabody Coal Co." ==> """
Barnhart v. Peabody Coal Co., 537 U.S. 149 (2003), was a Supreme Court of the United States case..   The case was to determine if a law instructing a government agent "shall" perform an action by a given date was intended as a 'spur to action' or a limit on whether the agent could act after the date. In this case the court held the agent could still act even after the date.
Background
The Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit Act of 1992 stated that "The Commissioner of Social Security shall, before October 1, 1993, assign each coal industry retiree eligible for benefits under the Act to an extant operating company  responsible for funding the beneficiary's benefits." The assignment to an operator, like Peabody Coal, binds the operator to pay an annual premium to the United Mine Workers of America Combined Benefit Fund, which administers the benefits.
Legal question
The question before the court was whether or not eligible retirees could be assigned to an operator after the October 1st date specified in the Act.  If the retirees could not be assigned to an operator, the company they would have been assigned to would be free of obligation. The mining companies argued the date in the Act limited the commissioner's ability to assign eligible retirees to an operator.  The commissioner argued the Act had been set to spur timely completion and that assignments could be made after that date.
Court's decision
The court held for the commissioner. Citing precedent,. the court ruled that the assignments could be made after the date and interpreted that "Congress had intended the work to be done by that date not that it could not be done after that date".
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 537
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 United States v. Navajo Nation (2009): also involved Peabody Coal Co.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United Mine Workers of America litigation
Category:Pension regulation
Category:Coal mining in the United States
Category:Peabody Energy
"""

From "Barr v. American Assn. of Political Consultants, Inc." ==> """
Barr v. American Assn. of Political Consultants, Inc., 591 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the use of robocalls made to cell phones, a practice that had been banned by the Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991 (TCPA), but which exemptions had been made by a 2015 amendment for government debt collection. The case was brought by the American Association of Political Consultants, an industry trade group, and others that desired to use robocalls to make political ads, challenging the exemption unconstitutionally favored debt collection speech over political speech. The Supreme Court, in a complex plurality decision, ruled on July 6, 2020, that the 2015 amendment to the TCPA did unconstitutionally favor debt collection speech over political speech and violated the First Amendment..
Background
The Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991 (TCPA) was enacted to help consumers deal with growing amounts of unsolicited advertising and messaging they were receiving by telephone systems. One provision was to prohibit the use of any automated call system to contact consumers on a manner which they may be charged for the call, such as on cell phones, without the consumer's prior consent, as outlined at . This effectively banned robocalls from making calls to cell phones. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) was authorized to oversee and fine those that misuse this provision, as well as giving states powers to seek civil remedies in court.
In 2015, Congress passed the Bipartisan Budget Bill as part of its normal appropriations process. It included a brief amendment to the TCPA that made an exemption to § 227(b)(1)(A)(iii) to allow for automated calls related to debts owned to the federal government.
Political advocacy groups, such as those that run polls, have generally been adverse to robocall restrictions as it limits their ability to get their message out and to measure how well a candidate is performing in informal surveys, which they feel is an important part of the election process. After the 2015 Bipartisan Budget Bill was passed, a group of advocacy groups filed suit in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina in May 2016, challenging that that new amendment was unconstitutional as it created a content-based form of discrimination on speech in violation of the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. The groups' tactic was aimed at trying to invalidate § 227(b)(1)(A)(iii) as a whole, and not just the new amendment, by showing that the limitations it placed as a whole were content-based distriction. The District Court granted summary judgement for the government asserting that while there was speech discrimination, it met the basis of strict scrutiny serving a compelling government interest, in this case, collecting on debt it was owed.
The advocacy groups appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. There, the Fourth Circuit vacated the District Court's ruling and remanded the case for further review. The Fourth agreed in the District Court's concept that there was a rationale to apply the strict scrutiny test for the government-debt speech exemption, but ruled that the District Court's application of the test was incorrect, given the nature of the TCPA was meant to be prohibitive. The Fourth Circuit also found that the amendment was severable from the original TCPA law, and thus invalidated the new amendment.
Supreme Court
The government petitioned the Supreme Court to hear the case, which the Supreme Court certified in January 2020. Oral arguments were heard on May 6, 2020, part of the block of cases that were held via teleconference due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Oral arguments focused on how the strict scrutiny tests should apply to the 2015 amendment, and whether that amendment was severable from the entire TCPA, questions that had been brought up from the Fourth Circuit's decision.
The Supreme Court issued its ruling on July 6, 2020. The Court affirmed the Fourth Circuit's decision in that the 2015 amendment, in that its exception for the government-debt clause violated the First Amendment, and because the amendment was severable from the rest of the TCPA, invalidated only that portion of the law.
 First Amendment challenge 
The 6–3 decision was complex. Six justices agreed that the government-debt amendment, or the entire TCPA, violated the First Amendment.
Justice Brett Kavanaugh wrote the plurality decision, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito. Kavanaugh agreed with the Fourth Circuit's reasoning that the 2015 amendment was a content-based restriction that should be judged by strict scrutiny, as per Reed v. Town of Gilbert, and that it failed to pass the strict scrutiny test.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote in concurrence. She too would invalidate the government-debt amendment, but stated that the amendment failed on intermediate scrutiny, rather than strict scrutiny.
Justice Neil Gorsuch would have gone further than the plurality and argued that the TCPA's entire robocall restriction is a content-based restriction that fails strict scrutiny and thus could not be constitutionally enforced.
Justice Stephen Breyer, joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Elena Kagan, dissented, stating that strict scrutiny was not the correct standard to use. Justice Breyer disagreed with language in Reed v. Gilbert. He suggested that content discrimination should not always trigger strict scrutiny. Instead, the Court should consider "First Amendment values," applying strict scrutiny in cases involving "political speech, public forums, and the expression of all viewpoints on any given issue," but use a less strict standard when a case, as here, "primarily involves commercial regulation—namely, debt collection." In Breyer's view, courts should not "use the First Amendment in a way that would threaten the workings of ordinary regulatory programs posing little threat to the free marketplace of ideas."
 Severability 
With a majority of justices agreed that the debt-collection amendment was unconstitutional, the question arose whether the amendment could be severed from the rest of the TCPA, or whether the whole law was invalid. The Court ruled 7–2 that the amendment was severable.
Seven justices followed Kavanaugh's severability analysis, and would preserve most of the TCPA. Kavanaugh's opinion noted that the TCPA has an express severability clause. Even without this clause, the Court should apply the "presumption of severability" and allow as much of the statute to stand as possible. As Kavanaugh wrote, "constitutional litigation is not a game of gotcha against Congress, where litigants can ride a discrete constitutional flaw in a statute to take down the whole, otherwise constitutional statute."
Justices Gorsuch dissented from this part of the ruling, joined by Justice Thomas. These justices would issue an injunction preventing enforcement of the TCPA, allowing political robocalls to go out to cellphones.
 Toilet flush 
The case was also brought to international media attention after a toilet was heard being flushed during oral arguments. The FCC chairman Ajit Pai stated on Twitter "...the FCC does not construe the flushing of a toilet immediately after counsel said "what the FCC has said" to reflect a substantive judgment of the Supreme Court, or of any Justice thereof, regarding an agency determination." Though it is not known for certain where the toilet flush came from, Slate alleged it came from Justice Breyer's microphone due to a history of technical difficulties with Zoom from him.
 References 
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Telemarketing
"""

From "Barr v. City of Columbia" ==> """
Barr v. City of Columbia, 378 U.S. 146 (1964), is a United States Supreme Court decision that reversed the breach of peace and criminal trespass convictions of five African Americans who were refused service at a lunch counter of a department store.. The Court held that there was insufficient evidence to support the breach of peace convictions, and reversed the criminal trespass convictions for the reasons stated in another case that was decided that same day, Bouie v. City of Columbia, which held that the retroactive application of an expanded construction of a criminal statute was barred by due process of ex post facto laws..
 Background 
Five African American students from Benedict College went to the Taylor Street Pharmacy in Columbia, South Carolina, and sat down at its lunch counter and waited for service. The store allowed persons of all races to use all facilities except for the lunch counter, which served whites only. The store manager had arranged for police to be present for any sit-in demonstrators, and then, consistent with the restaurant's policy of refusing service to blacks, the restaurant manager requested the persons to leave. When they refused, they were arrested for breach of the peace and criminal trespass. At trial the defendants their arrest, prosecution, and conviction by the state for requesting service at a restaurant that refused service to African Americans would violate the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment. The trial court convicted the students, and the Supreme Court of South Carolina affirmed in an unreported decision.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court first considered the breach of peace convictions and noted that the students had simply remained sitting at the lunch counter when asked by the manager to leave. The State had argued that the students simply remaining could cause others to breach the peace when they saw the students. The Court rejected that argument, and did not find that the evidence supported a breach of peace conviction, and reversed.
Regarding the trespass convictions, the majority opinion by Justice Black did not reach the broad question posed by the defendants as to "whether the Fourteenth Amendment of its own force forbids a State to arrest and prosecute those who, having been asked to leave a restaurant because of their color, refuse to do so."378 U.S. at 155. Instead, the Court considered its ruling in Bouie v. City of Columbia, which had been announced the same day, which found that the South Carolina Supreme Court had expanded the scope of acts that were covered under its criminal trespass statute. The Supreme Court in that case held that retroactive application of this expanded scope violated due process as an ex post facto law, and the Barr decision references that decision for its holding.
The concurring opinion of Justice Douglas simply stated that he would reverse based upon his opinions in Bell v. Maryland,. another case involving a sit-in demonstration by African American students that was announced the same day as the Barr decision. Justice Goldberg, joined by Chief Justice Warren, stated that they would reverse for the reasons stated in the majority opinion in Bell. Justices Black, Harlan, and White stated that they dissented for the same reasons stated in their Bouie dissent, that the actions in the restaurant did not constitute state action.
 Subsequent developments 
Barr v. City of Columbia was one of five cases involving segregation protests decided on June 22, 1964. The other four cases were Griffin v. Maryland,. Robinson v. Florida,. Bouie v. City of Columbia, and Bell v. Maryland. In none of these cases did the Supreme Court reach the merits of any argument addressing whether private actions of segregation which are enforced by state courts constituted a state action which violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. These decisions were announced two days after the Senate ended a filibuster and passed the bill which would become the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which outlawed segregation in public accommodations. It has been suggested that the Supreme Court refrained from reaching the merits in these cases in consideration of the Act, had it done so it would have eliminated the basis for passage of the Act.
 See also 
 Civil Rights Movement
References
External links
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States ex post facto case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:History of Columbia, South Carolina
Category:African-American history of South Carolina
Category:Lunch counters
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Restaurants in South Carolina
Category:Benedict College
"""

From "Barrett v. United States" ==> """
Barrett v. United States, 169 U.S. 218 (1898), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that South Carolina had never effectively been subdivided into separate judicial districts. Therefore, it was held, a criminal defendant allegedly tried in one district for a crime committed in the other had in fact been permissibly been tried in a separate division of a single district.
 Facts of the case 
The defendant, Charles P. Barrett, was one of a group of men in Spartanburg, South Carolina, alleged to have been involved in a conspiracy to defraud companies selling items by mail order.United States v. Barrett et al., 
65 F. 62 (C.C.D.S.C. 1894). Barrett, apparently an attorney, arranged to have post offices established in rural areas with the name of each post office being the name of another defendant (e.g. Owens, McElrath, Wyatt). Companies sending mail to those individuals would thereby be led to think that the individuals were proprietors of the respective post offices. Barrett also created a letterhead on which to send orders for goods, in order to further induce the trust of the companies from which orders were placed, and his co-conspirators ordered goods including encyclopedias, a piano, an organ, a desk, and a safe, none of which were ever paid for. The fraud was far reaching, as the trial court reported that parties coming to testify that they had been defrauded:
...came from New York and Chicago, from New Jersey and Pennsylvania, from Boston, Baltimore, and Atlanta, from Washington, Richmond, and Savannah, from Charlotte and Augusta...
Barrett and his co-conspirators were charged with conspiracy to defraud, and the trial was held in the United States circuit court in Columbia, South Carolina, before judge William H. Brawley. Several of Barrett's co-conspirators pleaded guilty, and Barrett was convicted.
 Issue of the case 
thumb|right|250px|Barrett was tried in Columbia, asserted to be in the Eastern District of South Carolina (in blue), for crimes committed in Spartanburg, asserted to be in the Western District of South Carolina (in red).
Barrett appealed, asserting that the trial was unconstitutional.Barrett v. United States, 169 U.S. at 220-21. The Vicinage Clause of the Sixth Amendment states that "in all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by law".
The United States District Court for the District of South Carolina was one of the original 13 courts established by the Judiciary Act of 1789, 1 Stat. 73, on September 24, 1789.U.S. District Courts of South Carolina, Legislative history , Federal Judicial Center. Congress had, in various pieces of legislation, subdivided South Carolina into Eastern and Western jurisdictions, and set forth the times when the circuit court of each jurisdiction would sit.Barrett v. United States, 169 U.S. at 221-25. The most recent rewording of these, adopted June 22, 1874,Barrett v. United States, 169 U.S. at 225. included a provision that:
The State of South Carolina is divided into two districts, which shall be called the eastern and western districts of the district of South Carolina. The western district includes the counties of Lancaster, Chester, York, Union, Spartanburg, Greenville, Pendleton, Abbeville, Edgefield, Newberry, Laurens and Fairfield, as they existed February 21, 1823. The eastern district includes the residue of said State.
The same act, however, provided that there would be a single district court judge, a single clerk of the court,Barrett v. United States, 169 U.S. at 229-30. a single United States Attorney, and a single United States MarshalBarrett v. United States, 169 U.S. at 226-27. appointed for the entire state of South Carolina. Barrett's claim was that the state constituted two districts and that because the crime was alleged to have been committed in Spartanburg, in the western district, his trial in Columbia had not been held before a jury of the "district wherein the crime shall have been committed".
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court, in a unanimous opinion written by Chief Justice Melville Fuller, held that Congress had never intended to divide South Carolina into separate judicial districts. The language adopted in 1874 had not been enacted by Congress but was merely a rewording of a previous statute which had been enacted in 1823. The 1823 statute was referenced in the margin of the 1874 act, and had stated: "The district of South Carolina is divided into two divisions, which will be called the eastern and western divisions of the district of South Carolina". The Supreme Court found that "Congress... seems to have construed the act of 1823, not as dividing the State into two judicial districts, as indicated in the title of the act, but into two districts in the sense of geographical divisions, which is in harmony with the language used in the body of the act".
Finding that the state of South Carolina constituted a single judicial district, the Court found it unnecessary to further examine the jurisdiction of the circuit court.Barrett v. United States, 169 U.S. at 230. Rather, it determined that Barrett was tried and convicted in the district in which the crime had been committed and that the jury had likewise been empaneled from that district.
Later developments
The case itself, standing for a particularly narrow proposition, was only cited in a handful of later decisions by other courts, and only once by the United States Supreme Court for the proposition decided in the case. That decision, Matheson v. United States,. similarly held that no constitutional error occurred when a criminal defendant accused of a crime in one part of Alaska was prosecuted in another, the territorial court having been arranged in divisions.
Congress made a more explicit effort to subdivide the District of South Carolina on March 3, 1911, by 36 Stat. 1087, 1123. South Carolina was again subdivided into Eastern and the Western Districts, with one judgeship authorized to serve both districts, effective January 1, 1912. Congress finally authorized an additional judgeship for the Western District, and assigned the sitting judge exclusively to the Eastern District, on March 3, 1915, by 38 Stat. 961. However, on October 7, 1965, by 79 Stat. 951, South Carolina was reorganized as a single judicial district with four judgeships authorized for the district court. It has since remained a single District.
References
External links
Category:1898 in South Carolina
Category:1898 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of South Carolina
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three venue case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment case law
"""

From "Barron v. Baltimore" ==> """
Barron v. Baltimore, 32 U.S. (7 Pet.) 243 (1833), is a landmark United States Supreme Court case in 1833, which helped define the concept of federalism in US constitutional law. The Court ruled that the Bill of Rights did not apply to the state governments, establishing a precedent until the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
 Background 
The city of Baltimore, Maryland initiated a public works project that involved the modification of several streams that emptied into Baltimore Harbor. City construction resulted in large amounts of sediment being deposited into the streams, which then emptied into the harbor near a profitable wharf owned and operated by John Barron. The material settled into the water near the wharf, decreasing the depth of the water to a point where it was nearly impossible for ships to approach it. As it was no longer easily accessible for ships, the business's profitability declined substantially. Barron sued the City of Baltimore for losses, arguing that he was deprived of his property without the due process afforded him by the Fifth Amendment. Barron was awarded $4,500 in compensation by the trial court, but a Maryland appellate court reversed the decision.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court heard arguments on the case on February 8 and 11 and decided on February 16, 1833. It held that the Bill of Rights, such as the Fifth Amendment's guarantee of just compensation for takings of private property for public use, are restrictions on the federal government alone. Writing for a unanimous court, Chief Justice John Marshall held that the first ten "amendments contain no expression indicating an intention to apply them to the State governments. This court cannot so apply them."
To demonstrate that Constitutional limits did not apply to states unless expressly stated, Marshall used the example of Article I, Sections 9 and 10:
Aftermath
The case was particularly important in terms of American government because it stated that the Bill of Rights did not restrict the state governments.Cortner, Richard C. 2006. "Barron v. Baltimore". Federalism in America: An Encyclopedia
The decision was initially ignored by the growing abolitionist movement, some of whom maintained that Congress could constitutionally abolish slavery, under the Bill of Rights. The case was largely unknown in the 1860s; during a debate in Congress on the Fourteenth Amendment, Congressman John Bingham had to read part of Marshall's opinion aloud to the Senate.Randy E. Barnett (2010). "Whence Comes Section One? The Abolitionist Origins of the Fourteenth Amendment." The Journal of Legal Analysis, Vol. 3, 2011.  
Later Supreme Court rulings would return to Barron to reaffirm its central holding, most notably in United States v. Cruikshank, 92 U.S. 542 (1876). However, since the early 20th century, the Supreme Court has used the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, which was interpreted to have the same meaning as the Fifth Amendment, to apply most of the Bill of Rights to the states by selective incorporation.  Therefore, as to most of the Bill of Rights, Barron and its progeny have been circumvented, if not actually overruled.
References
General references
 Jean Edward Smith, John Marshall: Definer Of A Nation, New York: Henry Holt & Company, 1996.
 Edward C. Papenfuse, Outline, Notes and Documents Concerning Barron v Baltimore, 32 U.S. 243, http://mdhistory.net/msaref06/barron/html/index.html 
External links
Original Maryland lower court documents with outline courtesy of the Maryland State Archives, http://mdsa.net
Category:1833 in United States case law
Category:History of Baltimore
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:1833 in Maryland
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Bartenwerfer v. Buckley" ==> """
Bartenwerfer v. Buckey, 598 U.S. 69 (2023), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the court held that debts incurred by fraud cannot be discharged in bankruptcy, regardless of whether the debtor committed the fraud.
 Background 
In 2012, the petitioner, Kate Bartenwerfer, and her husband lost a jury verdict after allegedly failing to disclose defects in a house that they sold in San Francisco, California. In 2013, they declared a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The petitioner argued in the bankruptcy court that she should be permitted to discharge debts relating to the fraud because she had no knowledge of the fraud by which the debt was incurred; instead, the fraud was allegedly done by her husband without her knowledge. The bankruptcy court adopted the "known or should have known" test arising out of . Under that test, a court should permit the discharge of debt unless the debtor knew or should have known that the debt was incurred through fraud. Because the petitioner demonstrated that she did not know the debt was incurred by fraud, and had no reason to know, the court concluded that the debt that she had incurred should be discharged.
In 2021, the Ninth Circuit overruled the bankruptcy court, holding that the "knew or should have known" test applied by the bankruptcy court was inconsistent with Supreme Court precedent in  and circuit precedent in . Instead, the Ninth Circuit refused to discharge the debt because the debt itself was incurred through fraud, despite that the petitioner had no knowledge of it. The ruling widened a circuit split with the Ninth, Fifth, and Eleventh Circuits on the one hand and the Seventh and Eighth Circuits on the other.
The petitioner sought certiorari to the Supreme Court later that year, and certiorari was granted in 2022.
 Supreme Court 
 Oral argument 
The Supreme Court heard oral argument on December 6, 2022. The justices focused on the language of 11 U.S.C § 523(a)(2)(A), which excepts from discharge debts incurred by "money... obtained by... actual fraud." A SCOTUSblog analyst argued that the justices' questions to counsel for the petitioner were more hostile than those to counsel for the respondent or the United States; they drew a distinction between the fraudulent origin of a debt and whether the debtor knows of that fraud.
 Decision 
On February 22, the Supreme Court unanimously held that fraudulently obtained debts cannot be discharged in bankruptcy. In so holding, the Court reasoned that the exception is triggered by whether the money was obtained by fraud; the question of who committed the fraud is irrelevant.
In her concurrence, Justice Sotomayor argued that the decision should apply only to debts obtained through the fraud of a partner or agent of the bankrupt.
 Representation 
The petitioner was represented by Sarah Harris and Lisa Blatt of Williams & Connolly; Iain Macdonald of Macdonald Fernandez; and Reno Fernandez of the Complex Appellate Litigation Group.
The respondent was represented by Zachary Tripp of Weil, Gotshal & Manges; and Janet Marie Brayer of the Law Offices of Janey Brayer.
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Bartkus v. Illinois" ==> """
Bartkus v. Illinois, 359 U.S. 121 (1959), is a decision of the U.S. Supreme Court. The decision held that coordination of federal officials with state officials did not implicate the double jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. It also held that a defendant may be acquitted of a federal crime and convicted of a state crime, even if those crimes share the same evidence, without violating the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The case established the dual sovereign exception to the Double Jeopardy Clause, enabling state and federal prosecutions for substantially similar events.
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:1959 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Tie votes of the United States Supreme Court
"""

From "Bartle v. Coleman" ==> """
Bartle v. Coleman, 19 U.S. (6 Wheat.) 475 (1821), was a United States Supreme Court case.
Background
Andrew Bartle, George Coleman, and Ferdinand Marsteller had entered into a contract with the United States government to rebuild a location called Fort Washington, possibly meaning Fort Washington (Maryland) which was captured by the British in the War of 1812.Statement of Thomas Swann, attorney for plaintiff Bartle
Arbitrators had rules that Bartle should pay Coleman.
 Opinion 
The Supreme Court reversed the judgement..
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 19
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:1821 in United States case law
"""

From "Bartlett v. Strickland" ==> """
Bartlett v. Strickland, 556 U.S. 1 (2009), is a United States Supreme Court case in which a plurality of the Court held that a minority group must constitute a numerical majority of the voting-age population in an area before section 2 of the Voting Rights Act requires the creation of a legislative district to prevent dilution of that group's votes.
The decision struck down a North Carolina redistricting plan that attempted to preserve minority voting power in a 39% black North Carolina House of Representatives district.
Justice Kennedy delivered the decision and was joined by Justices Alito and Roberts. Justice Thomas filed a concurring opinion that was joined by Justice Scalia. Justice Souter filed a dissenting opinion that was joined by Justices Stevens, Ginsburg, and Breyer. Justices Ginsburg and Breyer also filed separate dissenting opinions.
 See also 
 Thornburg v. Gingles, 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:North Carolina House of Representatives
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Bartnicki v. Vopper" ==> """
Bartnicki v. Vopper, 532 U.S. 514 (2001), is a United States Supreme Court case relieving a media defendant of liability for broadcasting a taped conversation of a labor official talking to other union members about a teachers' strike..
At trial, the parties stipulated that the taped conversation had been recorded in violation of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act. Nevertheless, the Court held the broadcast was legal.
 Background 
In 1992 and 1993 the Pennsylvania State Education Association, a teachers' union, was engaged in collective bargaining negotiations with the Wyoming Valley West School Board. In May 1993, the union's chief negotiator, Gloria Bartnicki, was surreptitiously recorded speaking by phone with union president Anthony Kane. Referring to the collective bargaining negotiations, which had grown contentious, Kane said: "If they're not gonna move for three percent, we're gonna have to go to their, their homes. . . . To blow off their front porches, we'll have to do some work on some of those guys. (PAUSES). Really, uh, really and truthfully because this is, you know, this is bad news. (UNDECIPHERABLE)."Bartnicki, 532 U.S. at 518-19.
The intercepted conversation was ultimately broadcast by Fredrick Vopper, a talk radio host. Vopper had received a tape of the conversation from Jack Yocum, who was president of a local taxpayers' association and a vocal opponent of the union. Yocum, in turn, claimed to have obtained the tape from an anonymous tipster. Thus, the identity of the individual who carried out the initial illegal act of wiretapping was not known. This presented the Court with a novel issue: Whether enforcing anti-wiretapping statutes against individuals who merely disseminate material illegally obtained by others runs afoul of the First Amendment, which protects the right of individuals to engage in speech on matters of public concern.
Decision
The Court held the radio station not liable because the radio station itself had done nothing illegal to obtain the tape. The case is often used to stand for the proposition that media defendants are not liable for broadcast material even if a third party violated the law to obtain it.
 Dissenting opinion 
Chief Justice William Rehnquist, in his dissenting opinion, was concerned with the effect that the decision would have on speech. He noted that 40 states, the District of Columbia, and the federal government had laws prohibiting knowingly disclosing (publishing) illegally intercepted electronic communications. He also argued that that disclosure would produce a chilling effect in the creation of initial, albeit electronic, speech:
 Implications 
While the Court declared the relevant wiretapping statutes unconstitutional as applied, the precedential value of the case remains unclear. Under one reading of the majority opinion, courts should apply "strict scrutiny" in reviewing restrictions on the dissemination of illegally obtained information whenever that information touches on a matter of public concern. This expansive standard would provide robust First Amendment protection to media outlets engaging in the publication of stolen materials. Application of such a rule might, for instance, insulate controversial whistleblower entities like WikiLeaks from liability for publishing government secrets. A much narrower reading is offered by Justice Stephen Breyer's concurring opinion, which was joined by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor. Breyer's concurrence would limit First Amendment protection only to instances in which the stolen information involved threats of physical harm. Others contend the opinion endorses an ad hoc balancing test, requiring courts to engage in a freeform, case-by-case analysis of the relative weight of various interests surrounding disclosure.
The behavior of the lower courts after Bartnicki indicates that in practice, the opinion is being construed narrowly. According to one commentator, writing ten years after Bartnicki was decided, "in no case reported to date has the holding in Bartnicki been applied to reach a similar conclusion in an analogous case." It thus appears that Justice Breyer's narrow construction of the holding, which sought to limit the case to its unique facts, has effectively carried the day.
Related cases
 In a 2007 case, Jean v. Massachusetts State Police, the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts held that it was legal to post a video which was lawfully obtained from another.
On April 20, 2010, the Supreme Court held in United States v. Stevens (the so-called animal torture video case) that the government, with limited exceptions, cannot hold criminally liable someone who distributes a tape of an illegal act if the person had not been complicit in the commission thereof.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 532
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
"""

From "Barton v. Barr" ==> """
Barton v. Barr, 590 U.S. __ (2020) is a Supreme Court of the United States ruling which upheld a decision by the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals that permanent residents could be rendered "inadmissible" to the United States for an offence after the initial seven years of residence under the Reed Amendment.
 Background 
Andre Martello Barton was born in Jamaica admitted to the United States in May, 1989. In 1992, he became a lawful green-card resident of the U.S. However, he was found guilty of criminal damage to property, aggravated assault,  possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony (O.C.G.A. § 16-11-106) and violations of Georgia's Controlled Substances Act.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) determined that Barton could be deported for these offences. Barton filed an appeal to cancel his deportation to the United States Attorney General under 8 U.S.C. § 1229b(a) as he had been a permanent resident for over seven years.
 Ruling 
Justice Brett Kavanaugh, writing the majority opinion, ruled that DHS could deport Barton stating "the immigration laws enacted by Congress do not allow cancellation of removal when a lawful permanent resident has amassed a criminal record of this kind."
In a dissenting opinion, Justice Sonia Sotomayor argued that as Barton had already been admitted, the Government must prove he is deportable rather than just inadmissable.
 References 
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:Deportation from the United States
Category:Jamaican-American history
"""

From "Bas v. Tingy" ==> """
Bas v. Tingy, 4 U.S. (4 Dall.) 37 (1800) was a case in maritime law, argued before the United States Supreme Court in 1800.  The parties were John Bas, owner of the private vessel Eliza which was captured by French privateers at sea, and Tingy, commander of a public armed vessel—the Ganges—which recovered the Eliza.  
The case hinged on a matter of the law of salvage, or marine salvage; two separate laws prescribed different rates of compensation for salvors, or rescuers of abandoned or captured ships.  A 1798 law stated that the owner of a ship which is recovered by a "public" vessel shall pay one-eighth of the ship's value to the salvors, as recovery fee.  A 1799 law had more complex language: if a captured ship is recovered within 24 hours, the owner shall pay the salvors one-eighth its value; if a captured ship is recovered 96 hours after its capture, the owner shall pay the salvor one-half the ship's value.  Tingy, the salvor, sought the greater compensation of one-half, while Bas, the owner, sought the lesser payment of one-eighth.  The Supreme Court affirmed the lower courts' decision, validating the later 1799 law's language: Bas would have to pay the higher rate of one-half as recovery fee.
Bas v. Tingy occurred in the political context of the Quasi-War, maritime skirmishes between the United States and France.  The case is also notable as having the only recorded opinion of associate justice Alfred Moore.
 Background 
Relations were deteriorating with France and Congress began enacting laws providing armed American ships greater ability to reclaim American ships taken by the French.  In 1798, Congress passed legislation allowing for payment of 1/8 full value of the vessel, to be paid to the recaptor, for ships reclaimed from the French.  However, in 1799, Congress enacted another law allowing the recaptors of a private vessel 1/2 salvage value of the ship, where retaken after 96 hours from the enemy.  This was to be paid by the vessel's owner and without any deduction.
On April 21, 1799, Tingy, captain of the Ganges recaptured the Eliza, belonging to Bas, after the French had taken it three weeks before.  Bas attempted to pay Tingy 1/8 value, pursuant to the 1798 law, while Tingy demanded 1/2 payment, in accordance with the 1799 law.  After lower courts ruled that Tingy was entitled to 1/2 value, the case was appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Bushrod Washington, writing first for the Court, noted that the difference between the two laws was that the 1798 dealt with ships recaptured from the French, while the 1799 law dealt with ships recaptured from the enemy.  This turned on the issue of "was France the enemy?" and the larger question of, "were we at war?"  Washington proceeded to recognize the difference between a perfect war, where Congress declares war upon another country, and an imperfect war, where Congress does not declare but rather authorizes hostilities.  Congress had, in this case, raised an army, suspended commerce with France and dissolved a treaty.  This also allowed them to defend themselves against French ships and reclaim American ships as prize.  This was, by all accounts, an imperfect war, qualifying France as an enemy under the 1799 law.
Justice Samuel Chase took a separate approach to the same conclusion, noting that in a perfect war "...operations are restricted and regulated by the jus belli, forming a part of the law of nations," but in an imperfect war "its extent and operation depend on our municipal laws."  With Congress authorizing hostilities, this was an imperfect war against France, making them the enemy and validating the 1799 law.
Justice William Paterson deemphasized the nature of the war, perfect versus imperfect, noting only that we were at war "so far as we may proceed in hostile operations."  For the duration of this war, France was the enemy, and the 1799 law applied.
 Subsequent developments 
The decision of the lower courts was affirmed.  The 1799 act of Congress governed the dispute and Captain Tingy was awarded 1/2 the value of the Eliza.
References
External links
 Bas v. Tingy at The Founders' Constitution
 Bas v. Tingy at "Restoring the Congressional Duty to Declare War," Rutgers Law Review 2011, Prof. Alfred W. Blumrosen, the Thomas A. Cowan Prof. of Law, Emeritus, Rutgers School of Law - Newark and Steven M. Blumrosen 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1800 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
"""

From "Basic Inc. v. Levinson" ==> """
Basic Inc. v. Levinson, 485 U.S. 224 (1988), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States articulated the "fraud-on-the-market theory" as giving rise to a rebuttable presumption of reliance in securities fraud cases..
 Background 
Combustion Engineering, Inc. sought to acquire Basic, Inc., and had engaged in discussions with Basic's officers and directors.  Three months after these discussions began, Basic asked the New York Stock Exchange to suspend trading in its shares and issued a release stating that it had been "approached" by another company concerning a merger.  Basic president Max Muller publicly denied Basic's involvement in any merger discussions.  The next day, Basic's board approved Combustion's tender offer for all outstanding shares.
Plaintiff Max L. Levinson was a Basic shareholder who brought a class action suit against Basic and its directors, alleging that he and other shareholders were injured by selling Basic shares at artificially depressed prices in a market affected by—and relying on—Basic's misleading statements.  Plaintiffs alleged that Basic's misrepresentations violated § 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and SEC Rule 10b-5.
The United States District Court for the Northern District of Ohio certified the class, finding that plaintiffs were entitled to a presumption of reliance on Basic's public statements, and therefore that common questions of fact or law predominated over particular questions pertaining to individual plaintiffs.  However, on the merits the court granted Basic's motion for summary judgment, finding the statements to be immaterial.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed class certification, joining a number of other circuits in accepting the fraud-on-the-market theory. The Court of Appeals also reversed and remanded the decision on summary judgment, holding that although Basic did not have an affirmative duty to disclose the merger discussions, it could not release misleading statements.  The U.S. Supreme Court then granted certiorari to resolve a circuit split on the materiality issue and determine the propriety of the fraud-on-the-market theory.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Blackmun, writing for the majority, first examined the underlying policy behind the Securities Exchange Act: to protect investors against manipulation of stock prices.  The Securities and Exchange Commission promulgated Rule 10b-5 to prevent fraud and enforce the Act's requirements.
Materiality of preliminary merger discussions
Blackmun reviewed the standards of materiality, including the holding in TSC Industries, Inc. v. Northway, Inc., that "an omitted fact is material if there is a substantial likelihood that a reasonable shareholder would consider it important in deciding how to vote.".  This standard was then expressly adopted for § 10(b) and Rule 10b-5.
The Court re-iterated that where there is a duty to disclose, management must disclose or abstain from trading.  Where there is no duty to disclose, the Court will not question the timing of disclosure.  But if management is under no duty to disclose and misrepresents a material fact, management may be held accountable.  In other words, the Court was not concerned about the timing of disclosure, only its accuracy and completeness.  The Court then went on to establish a standard for determining the materiality of merger discussions.
Blackmun reviewed and rejected the Third Circuit test that merger discussions become material only when an agreement in principle has been reached, finding that standard too "rigid" and "artificial."  Blackmun also rejected the Sixth Circuit test, which held that publicly denying the existence of merger discussions makes those discussions material by virtue of denying their existence.  He reasoned that it is not enough for a statement to be untrue if it is insignificant.  Blackmun declined to adopt a test that hinged on a single event, holding instead that the materiality of merger discussions is always a function of the probability of the completion of the merger and the magnitude of the transaction.
Reliance and the fraud-on-the-market theory
The fraud-on-the-market theory is the idea that stock prices are a function of all material information about the company and its business.  It applies in open and developed securities markets, where it can be assumed that all material information is available to investors.  The theory states that under these conditions, there is a causal link between any misstatement and any stock purchaser, because the misstatements defraud the entire market and thus affect the price of the stock.  Therefore, a material misstatement's effect on an individual purchaser is no less significant than the effect on the entire market.  The question before the court was whether this entitles an individual stock purchaser a presumption of reliance, even if the purchaser did not directly rely on the misstatements.
Observing that the reality of modern securities markets is such that face-to-face transactions are rare, Justice Blackmun noted that requiring a showing of actual reliance would effectively prevent plaintiffs from ever proceeding as a class action.  Also finding that investors often rely on market price, he found the rebuttable presumption of reliance (through the fraud-on-the-market theory) to be a reasonable compromise between the requirements of Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 23 and the securities fraud element of reliance.  Blackmun further noted that both Congress's intent and recent empirical studies reflect the idea that open markets incorporate all material information into share price.
The Court thereby adopted a rebuttable presumption of reliance, based on the fraud-on-the-market theory.  Blackmun noted that defendants could rebut the presumption by showing that there was no link between the misstatements and plaintiff's price paid or received.
The Court further noted that, should a corporation wish to maintain the confidentiality of its merger talks without denying the chance of a merger, its directors need only state that they had "no comment" regarding any potential merger.William A. Klein, Business Associations, 8th ed., Foundation Press (2012).
Blackmun vacated the decision of the Court of Appeals and remanded the case.
 References 
External links
https://www.quimbee.com/cases/basic-inc-v-levinson
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:United States securities case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Bates v. City of Little Rock" ==> """
Bates v. City of Little Rock, 361 U.S. 516 (1960), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution forbade state government to compel the disclosure of an organization's membership lists via a tax-exemption regulatory scheme.
This was a companion case to NAACP v. Alabama (1958), which also held that NAACP membership records are protected by First Amendment freedom of association, and Talley v. California (1960), which held that Talley, a civil rights activist, could not be fined for an anonymous flyer. These cases help establish the right to privacy under the First Amendment, expanded on in Roe v. Wade (1973) and Brown v. Socialist Workers '74 Campaign Committee (1982).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 361
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:1960 in United States case law
Category:History of Little Rock, Arkansas
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC" ==> """
Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC, 544 U.S. 431 (2005), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) did not preempt state law claims, brought by a group of Texas farmers, alleging that one of Dow's pesticides damaged their peanut crop..
Background
A group of 29 peanut farmers in Texas alleged that their peanut crops were severely damaged by Dow's "Strongarm" pesticide.Bates, 544 U.S. at 434. After the farmers informed Dow that they intended to file a lawsuit, Dow filed a request in federal district court for a declaratory judgment stating that a legal claim brought by the farmers would be preempted by FIFRA.Bates, 544 U.S. at 435 (noting that the Texas Deceptive Trade Practices-Consumer Protection Act, Tex. Bus. & Com. Code Ann. § 17.01 et seq. (West 2002), required the farmers to provide notice). The farmers then filed counterclaims against Dow, which alleged tort claims and violations of consumer protection laws.Bates, 544 U.S. at 435-36. The district court granted Dow's motion for summary judgment and found that all but one of the farmers' claims were preempted by FIFRA.Bates, 544 U.S. at 436 ("rejecting one claim on state-law grounds and dismissing the remainder as expressly pre-empted by 7 U.S.C. § 136v(b)"). The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court's ruling.Bates, 544 U.S. at 436. In 2004, the Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve a circuit split regarding the extent to which FIFRA preempts claims under state law.Bates, 544 U.S. at 436-37.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion written by Justice John Paul Stevens, the Court held that the farmers' claims were not preempted by FIFRA.Bates, 544 U.S. at 444 ("petitioners’ claims for defective design, defective manufacture, negligent testing, and breach of express warranty are not pre-empted"). Justice Stevens wrote that "[n]othing in the text of FIFRA would prevent a State from making the violation of a federal labeling or packaging requirement a state offense, thereby imposing its own sanctions on pesticide manufacturers who violate federal law."Bates, 544 U.S. at 442. Justice Stevens also distinguished the facts of this case from those in Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc.,. noting that FIFRA "prohibits only state-law labeling and packaging requirements that are “in addition to or different from” the labeling and packaging requirements under FIFRA."Bates, 544 U.S. at 447.
Concurring and dissenting opinions
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote a concurring opinion to emphasize "the importance of the [Environmental Protection] [A]gency's role in overseeing FIFRA's future implementation".Bates, 544 U.S. at 454-55 (Breyer, J., concurring). Justice Clarence Thomas, joined by Justice Antonin Scalia, filed an opinion concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part.Bates, 544 U.S. at 455 (Thomas, J., concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part). Justice Thomas argued that "[a] state-law cause of action, even if not specific to labeling, nevertheless imposes a labeling requirement 'in addition to or different from' FIFRA's when it attaches liability to statements on the label that do not produce liability under FIFRA."Bates, 544 U.S. at 456 (Thomas, J., concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part).
See also
 Altria Group v. Good (2008)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States federal preemption law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2005 in the environment
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:Dow Chemical Company
"""

From "Bates v. State Bar of Arizona" ==> """
Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, 433 U.S. 350 (1977), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the right of lawyers to advertise their services.. In holding that lawyer advertising was commercial speech entitled to protection under the First Amendment (incorporated against the States through the Fourteenth Amendment), the Court upset the tradition against advertising by lawyers, rejecting it as an antiquated rule of etiquette.
The Court emphasized the benefits of the information that flows to consumers through advertising, positing that lawyer advertising would make legal services more accessible to the general public and improve the overall administration of justice. The Court had previously held in Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council that advertising by pharmacists regarding the price of prescription drugs was commercial speech protected by the First Amendment.
 Background 
John Bates and Van O'Steen graduated from the Arizona State University College of Law in 1972.
Two years later, they formed a legal clinic, in order to "provide legal services at modest fees to persons of moderate income who did not qualify for governmental legal aid".  Therefore, they accepted only cases involving "routine matters, such as uncontested divorces, uncontested adoptions, simple personal bankruptcies, and changes of name" (and refused complicated cases, such as contested divorces) and kept costs down "by extensive use of paralegals, automatic typewriting equipment, and standardized forms and office procedures". "Because appellants set their prices so as to have a relatively low return on each case they handled, they depended on substantial volume" in order to make the clinic profitable.
Two years into the practice, Bates and O'Steen "concluded that their practice and clinical concept could not survive unless the availability of legal services at low cost was advertised and, in particular, fees were advertised". At the same time, the American Bar Association (ABA), whose decisions are advisory and not binding upon the bar associations of individual states, amended its rules of ethics on February 19, 1976, to endorse limited advertising by lawyers, albeit in telephone directories rather than in newspapers.  "A.B.A. Clears Way for Lawyers' Ads", Lesley Oelsner, The New York Times, February 18, 1976, p. 13  Following the model of allowable information approved by the ABA, Bates and O'Steen decided to test the constitutionality of Arizona's prohibition against advertising and, three days after the ABA vote, placed an advertisement in the Arizona Republic on February 22, 1976.
The ad read:
Do you need a lawyer?
Legal services at very reasonable fees
Divorce or legal separation — uncontested (both spouses sign papers) $175.00 plus $20.00 court filing fee
 Preparation of all court papers and instructions on how to do your own simple uncontested divorce $100.00
 Adoption — uncontested severance proceeding $225.00 plus approximately $10.00 publication cost
 Bankruptcy — non-business, no contested proceedings
Individual $250.00 plus $55.00 court filing fee
Wife and Husband $300.00 plus $110.00 court filing fee
 Change of Name $95.00 plus $20.00 court filing fee
Information regarding other types of cases furnished upon request
Legal Clinic of Bates & O'Steen
The ad was clearly labeled as an advertisement, and gave the downtown Phoenix address and phone number of the clinic.
In 1976, the State Bar of Arizona categorically forbade lawyers in that state from advertising their services.  The State Bar initiated disciplinary proceedings against Bates and O'Steen, beginning with a hearing at which the validity of the rule would not be decided, but at which the pair could introduce evidence in support of overturning the rule.  The disciplinary committee that conducted the hearing recommended that Bates and O'Steen be suspended for not less than six months.  The pair asked the Arizona Supreme Court to review the proceedings, and specifically contended that the absolute ban on lawyer advertising violated the Sherman Antitrust Act and the First Amendment.  The court rejected both claims.  The Sherman Act did not apply, the court ruled, because regulating the practice of law was an act inherent to the State of Arizona as sovereign.  Although the U.S. Supreme Court had recently ruled that, under the First Amendment, pharmacists could not be forbidden from advertising the prices of prescription drugs, the court reasoned that lawyer advertising was entitled to special considerations that took such speech out of the realm of First Amendment protection.  Nevertheless, the court reduced the sanction against Bates and O'Steen to censure only because it felt that the advertising was "done in good faith to test the constitutionality" of the ban on lawyer advertising.  A dissenting justice on the court believed that the ban on lawyer advertising impinged on the public's right to know about the activities of the legal profession, and concluded that the ban violated the First Amendment.
The U.S. Supreme Court concluded it had appellate jurisdiction over the case and set a date for oral argument. William C. Canby, Jr. argued for the appellants John Bates and Van O'Steen in the Supreme Court.  At the time, Canby was a professor of law at Arizona State University; he would later be nominated and approved as a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.  John Paul Frank argued for the appellee, the State Bar of Arizona.  Frank was a partner in the Phoenix law firm of Lewis and Roca, and also argued for the defendant in the case of Miranda v. Arizona.  Solicitor General Robert Bork argued on behalf of the U.S. government.
 Decision 
As Professor Thomas Morgan has put it,
The organized bar traditionally took the position that a lawyer was not permitted to actively publicize his services.  In effect, it was presumed that every lawyer had an established clientele, or that a lawyer's reputation for good work would inevitably lead others to seek out the lawyer's services.  Under this approach, direct publicity for lawyers was strictly controlled.Morgan, Thomas D. (2005) Legal Ethics, p. 145.  Thomson-BarBri.  .
The Court's decision rejected this tradition as a historical anachronism, which created higher barriers to entry into the legal profession and functioned to "perpetuate the market position of established attorneys."
 Sherman Act claim 
The Court agreed with the Arizona Supreme Court that the state action exemption of Parker v. Brown applied to Arizona's ban on lawyer advertising, even though the Court had previously held that the Sherman Act applied to other lawyer-regulation activities.  In Goldfarb v. Virginia State Bar, , the Court held that a minimum-fee schedule enforced by the Virginia State Bar was a "classic example of price fixing" subject to regulation under the Sherman Act. The Court distinguished this case from Goldfarb because the Supreme Court of Virginia, exercising its sovereign power to regulate the practice of law, had not required the Virginia State Bar to undertake the anticompetitive activities. By contrast, Arizona's ban on lawyer advertising was "compelled by the direction of the state acting as a sovereign" because it was promulgated by the state supreme court.  Accordingly, the Court affirmed the Arizona Supreme Court's rejection of the Sherman Act claim.
 First Amendment claim 
The Court held that speech does not escape protection under the First Amendment merely because it "proposes a mundane commercial transaction."  Furthermore, commercial speech serves significant societal interests in that it informs the public of the availability, nature, and prices of products and services, allowing them to act rationally in a free enterprise system. The listener's interest in receiving information regarding potential commercial transactions is "substantial." In fact, "the consumer's concern for the free flow of commercial speech often may be far keener than his concern for urgent political dialogue."
These reasons were central to the Court's rejection of a ban on advertising the prices of prescription drugs in Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, .  The Court held that the citizen's interest in knowing the price of certain prescription drugs at various pharmacies outweighed the desire to maintain "professionalism" among pharmacists; to prevent customers from price-shopping, which necessarily would take them away from the care of one particular pharmacist who could potentially monitor the patient for dangerous drug interactions; and to perpetuate the image of the pharmacist as a "skilled and specialized craftsman," which was argued to be crucial for recruiting new pharmacists.
By describing the holding in Virginia Pharmacy Board in this way, the result in Bates appeared a foregone conclusion.  Nevertheless, the Court in the Virginia pharmacy case expressly reserved judgment on how that same balance might be struck with respect to other professions, as to which different constitutional considerations might come into play.
Nevertheless, the Court did characterize Arizona's ban on lawyer advertising as serving to "inhibit the free flow of information and keep the public in ignorance."  It emphasized the advertisement Bates and O'Steen published was the most basic one possible – listing various services, the prices charged, and an address and telephone number.  The central point of contention in this case was that the lawyers were advertising the prices they charged for particular services.
The State Bar of Arizona appealed to a desire to maintain a certain air of "professionalism" among lawyers as justifying its ban on lawyer advertising.  Advertising, the State Bar asserted, would "undermine the attorney's sense of dignity and self-worth", "erode the client's trust in the attorney" by exposing an economic motive for representation, and "tarnish the dignified public image of the profession". But the public understands that attorneys make their living at the bar, and few attorneys deceive themselves by thinking otherwise. "Bankers and engineers advertise, and yet these professions are not regarded as undignified.  In fact, it has been suggested that the failure of lawyers to advertise creates public disillusionment with the profession."  A lack of information about the price of legal services tends to dissuade people of modest means from seeking legal representation, even when it is in their best interest to engage such representation.  Finally, insofar as the "belief that lawyers are somehow 'above' trade has become an anachronism, the historical foundation for the advertising restraint has crumbled."
Nor is advertising by lawyers inherently misleading.  The Court speculated that the "only services that lend themselves to advertising are the routine ones," precisely the services that Bates and O'Steen were advertising.  "Although the precise service demanded in each task may vary slightly, and although legal services are not fungible, these facts do not make advertising misleading so long as the attorney does the necessary work at the advertised price.  The argument that legal services are so unique that fixed rates cannot meaningfully be established is refuted by the record in this case:  The State Bar itself sponsors a Legal Services Program in which the participating attorneys agree to perform services like those advertised by the appellants at standardized rates."  And although advertising for legal services is necessarily incomplete — responsible lawyers will, of course, disclaim that all cases are "simple" ones — a rough estimate of the cost is more useful to the public than keeping them in the dark entirely.
To the extent that lawyer advertising might be said to encourage frivolous lawsuits, the Court countered that the American Bar Association had observed that the "middle 70% of our population is not being reached or served adequately by the legal profession," suggesting that a vast number of meritorious cases are being stifled for want of a lawyer willing and able to assist the client in bringing suit.  Bans on advertising, moreover, are ineffective means of reducing lawyer overhead and of maintaining the quality of legal services provided.  Finally, there was no reason to believe that allowing lawyers to advertise would result in a tidal wave of disingenuous claims for the state bar to investigate and prosecute, as Justice Powell feared would happen.  "For every attorney who overreaches through advertising, there will be thousands of others who will be candid and honest and straightforward."
Having disposed of the arguments against allowing lawyer advertising, the Court ruled that Arizona's total ban on lawyer advertising violated the free speech guarantee of the First Amendment.  But that did not mean that states were powerless to regulate lawyer advertising at all.  The Court reiterated that states were still permitted to ban "false, deceptive, or misleading" advertising by lawyers; to regulate the manner in which lawyers may solicit business in person; to require warnings and disclaimers on lawyer advertising in order to assure that the public is not misled; and impose other reasonable restrictions on the time, place, and manner of lawyer advertising.
 Dissent 
In his dissent, Justice Powell pointed out that a lawyer's primary task, even in a "routine" divorce case, is one of diagnosis and advice: to point out to the client concerns of which he might not be aware, and ensure that the client addresses those concerns. Powell thought it difficult to enumerate a value for this aspect of legal representation, and hence for consumers to sense how much diagnosis and advice they could expect for a fixed, advertised price. Consequently, it is not possible to know whether Bates's and O'Steen's assertion that their fees were "reasonable" was an accurate one.  "Whether a fee is 'very reasonable' is a matter of opinion, and not a matter of verifiable fact as the Court suggests.  One unfortunate result of today's decision is that lawyers may feel free to use a wide variety of adjectives — such as 'fair,' 'moderate,' 'low-cost,' or 'lowest in town' — to describe the bargain they offer to the public."
 Current Law Practices 
Van O'Steen is the founding partner of O'Steen & Harrison, PLC and practices personal injury and products liability.  The law firm is based in Arizona and has offices in Phoenix, Prescott and Payson.  O'Steen frequently speaks at conferences about the landmark case.  John Bates is a partner at Bates and Hausen, LLC and practices bankruptcy.
In popular culture
The ruling is referenced in the Season 1 episode "Alpine Shepherd Boy" of the TV Show Better Call Saul.
 References 
 External links 
Advertisement for Bates & O'Steen Legal Clinic, The Arizona Republic, February 22, 1976, p. A-21
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States commercial speech case law
Category:United States professional responsibility case law
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:American Bar Association
"""

From "Batson v. Kentucky" ==> """
Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986), was a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court ruling that a prosecutor's use of a peremptory challenge in a criminal case—the dismissal of jurors without stating a valid cause for doing so—may not be used to exclude jurors based solely on their race. The Court ruled that this practice violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The case gave rise to the term Batson challenge, an objection to a peremptory challenge based on the standard established by the Supreme Court's decision in this case.  Subsequent jurisprudence has resulted in the extension of Batson to civil cases (Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete Company) and cases where jurors are excluded on the basis of sex (J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B.).
The principle had been established previously by several state courts, including the California Supreme Court in 1978, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court in 1979, and the Florida Supreme Court in 1984.
Background
James Kirkland Batson was an African American man convicted of burglary and receipt of stolen goods in a Louisville, Kentucky circuit court by a jury composed entirely of white jurors. The key part of his appeal was based on the jury selection, or voir dire, phase of the trial. During this phase potential jurors are examined by the Court, the prosecution, and the defense, to determine their competence, willingness, and suitability to hear, deliberate and decide a case put to them to render a verdict. During voir dire the judge can dismiss jurors, and both the prosecution and the defense have a limited number of peremptory challenges, which are accepted on their face, as the right of the party making the challenge and which they use to excuse any juror for any reason which the particular side believes will help their case.
In this case, the judge dismissed several potential jurors for various causes.A juror challenged and removed for cause is not counted as a peremptory challenged against the side making the challenge. The defense peremptorily challenged nine potential jurors and the prosecutor, Joe Gutmann, peremptorily challenged six, including all four black persons, and a jury composed only of white persons was selected. The defense counsel moved to discharge the whole jury on the ground that the prosecutor's removal of black people from the jury pool violated petitioner's rights under the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to a jury drawn from a cross section of the community, and under the Fourteenth Amendment to equal protection of the laws. Without expressly ruling on petitioner's request for a hearing, the trial judge denied the motion, and the jury ultimately convicted the defendant.
The defendant appealed his conviction to the Kentucky Supreme Court, which affirmed the conviction. That court cited Swain v. Alabama,Swain v. Alabama, 380 U.S. 202 (1965) and held that a defendant alleging lack of a fair cross section must demonstrate systematic exclusion of a group of jurors from the panel of prospective jurors. That is, the defendant had to show that not just in his case, but as a process, juries in his community were being constructed so as to not represent a cross section of that community. Batson continued his appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari to decide whether petitioner was tried "in violation of constitutional provisions guaranteeing the defendant an impartial jury and a jury composed of persons representing a fair cross section of the community."
The Supreme Court's decision
In a 7–2 decision authored by Justice Lewis Powell, the Supreme Court ruled in Batson's favor. The court overruled Swain v. Alabama by lowering the burden of proof that a defendant must meet to make a prima facie case of purposeful discrimination. In Swain, the Court had recognized that a "State's purposeful or deliberate denial to Negroes on account of race of participation as jurors in the administration of justice violates the Equal Protection Clause", but that the defendant had the burden of proving a systematic striking of black jurors throughout the county, that is, that the peremptory challenge system as a whole was being perverted. In Batson the court ruled that the defendant could make a prima facie case for purposeful racial discrimination in jury selection by relying on the record only in his own case. The Court explained:
The Court also held that:
 A State denies a black defendant equal protection when it puts him on trial before a jury from which members of his race have been purposely excluded
 A defendant has no right to a petit jury composed in whole or in part of persons of his own race. However, the Equal Protection Clause guarantees the defendant that the State will not exclude members of his race from the jury venire on account of race, or on the false assumption that members of his race as a group are not qualified to serve as jurors
 The peremptory challenge occupies an important position in trial procedures
Justice Marshall, concurring with the majority, called the decision "historic" but added: "The decision today will not end the racial discrimination that peremptories inject into the jury-selection process. That goal can be accomplished only by eliminating peremptory challenges entirely."
Dissents
In his dissenting opinion, Chief Justice Warren Burger argued that the court's decision in Batson "sets aside the peremptory challenge, a procedure which has been part of the common law for many centuries and part of our jury system for nearly 200 years". He believed the majority was replacing peremptory challenges with something very similar to challenge for cause, but was unclear in explaining the standard to be applied. "I am at a loss to discern the governing principles here," he wrote. "I join my colleagues in wishing the nation's judges well as they struggle to grasp how to implement today's holding."
Justice Rehnquist wrote that the majority misapplied equal protection doctrine: "In my view, there is simply nothing 'unequal' about the state using its peremptory challenges to strike blacks from the jury in cases involving black defendants, so long as such challenges are also used to exclude whites in cases involving white defendants, Hispanics in cases involving Hispanic defendants, Asians in cases involving Asian defendants, and so on."
Impact
Whether the principles of Batson applied retroactively to anyone convicted previously by juries whose racial composition was influenced by peremptory challenges not consistent with this opinion was for a time uncertain. In Allen v. Hardy (1986), the Court held that it did not apply retroactively to collateral review of final convictions. In Griffith v. Kentucky (1987), it decided it would apply it in cases on direct review.
Batson challenge
The term Batson challenge describes an objection to opposing counsel's use of a peremptory challenge to exclude a juror from the jury pool based on criteria the courts have found disqualifying, as race was the sole rationale for exclusion in Batson.
In some cases, parties have appealed a verdict or judgment and asked it be invalidated because one or more peremptory challenges excluded a cognizable group from the jury. Although the Batson decision addressed jury selection in criminal trials, in 1991 the Supreme Court later extended the same rule to civil trials in Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete Company. In 1994, in  J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B.,J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B.,  the Court held that peremptory challenges based on sex alone violated the standard established in Batson as well.
The authority of Batson was reinforced by a pair of 2005 decisions, Miller-El v. DretkeMiller-El v. Dretke, 545 U.S. 231 and Johnson v. California.Johnson v. California, 545 U.S. 162. The first expanded the evidence that can be considered when establishing that a peremptory challenge was based solely on objectionable criteria. The second addressed the standard of proof by which a Batson challenge should be assessed, finding that it was sufficient to require "an inference" that discrimination was the basis for a peremptory challenge rather than proof that discrimination was "more likely than not" its basis.
Batson has been applied to the discriminatory use of peremptory strikes against judges in a California case, Superior Court v. Williams. Defense counsel objected to the prosecution's motion to disqualify an African-American judge, suspecting that the motion was racially motivated. The Court noted that use of Equal Protection in Batson to combat racially discriminatory strikes against jurors was well established and that subsequent decisions had extended these protections in other contexts. The Court held that "these principles are equally applicable to race-based challenges to judges."Superior Court v. Williams (8 Cal. App. 4th 688)
U.S. v. Blaylock
An attempt to extend Batson to cover challenges based on sexual orientation failed in 2005. The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals rejected a defendant's criminal appeal in U.S. v. Blaylock,U.S. v. Blaylock, 421 F.3d 758 because it found the prosecution had "offered legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons for striking the panel member". The court did not consider whether the Batson challenge rule applied, but its opinion expressed doubt that it did.United States v. Blaylock, No. 04-1535, August 31, 2005
SmithKline v. Abbott 
Extending Batson to cover challenges based on sexual orientation was revisited again in 2012, this time in a civil case. A three-judge panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals considered the issue in SmithKline Beecham Corporation v. Abbott Laboratories:SmithKline Beecham Corporation v. Abbott Laboratories, 740 F.3d 471 (2014) it ruled unanimously on January 21, 2014, that, based on the U.S. Supreme Court decision in United States v. Windsor,United States v. Windsor 133 S. Ct. 2675 (2013) distinctions based on sexual orientation are subject to the "heightened scrutiny" standard of review and that "equal protection prohibits peremptory strikes based on sexual orientation". Defendant Abbott Laboratories decided not to appeal further. However, at least one circuit judge sua sponte called for rehearing en banc, and on March 27 the court asked both parties to file briefs on the question. On June 24, the judges of the Ninth Circuit voted not to rehear the case en banc.
Case participants after Batson
When the Supreme Court reversed his conviction, Batson was serving a twenty-year sentence. Rather than risk a retrial, he pleaded guilty to burglary and received a five-year prison sentence. After his release, Batson was convicted of several offenses including burglary, theft, receiving stolen property, and persistent-felony convictions. He was released from prison again in January 2003 and remains on parole through 2026. 
Joe Gutmann, the prosecutor in Batson's 1982 trial, said that the Supreme Court's decision was "a good one" because it prevents lawyers from discriminating in jury selection. He teaches government and history at inner-city Louisville Central High School. He has said he removed the black members of the venire not because of their race, but because they were young and might sympathize with Batson.
Batson is a construction worker in Louisville, Kentucky, and says of the media attention the case received: "It's so old, they ought to let it go."
See also
 All-white jury
 Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete Co. (1991)
 Georgia v. McCollum (1992)
 J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B. (1994)
 Snyder v. Louisiana (2008)
 Flowers v. Mississippi (2019)
References
External links
Category:1986 in Kentucky
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:History of Louisville, Kentucky
Category:Jefferson County, Kentucky
Category:Legal history of Kentucky
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Bauer & Cie. v. O'Donnell" ==> """
Bauer & Cie. v. O'Donnell, 229 U.S. 1 (1913), was a 1913 United States Supreme Court decision involving whether a purchaser of a patented product bearing a price-fixing notice incurs guilt of patent infringement by reselling the product at a price lower than that which the notice commands. A divided Court (5–4) held that it was not.
Bauer & Cie, a German company, was the assignee of U.S. Patent No. 601,995, covering Sanatogen, a water-soluble drug product (patent medicine), advertised as the "King of Tonics" and a strength-giving "concentrated scientific food."See advertisement at right, , p.2 (June 23, 1911). A January 1913 article in Good Housekeeping stated that Sanatogen "was representative of the class of advertised tonics which make exaggerated claims and charge a high price." It added that $1 worth of Sanatogen was equivalent to 6¢ worth of milk and 1¢ worth of wheat flour. Bauer sold the patented product in the United States through its exclusive sales agent, Hehmeyer, under a license agreement.229 U.S. at 8. Sanatogen was sold with this notice on each bag:
O'Donnell, a retail druggist in Washington, DC, purchased Sanatogen at wholesale and resold the Sanatogen for less than $1. He persisted in doing this and was cut off, but he managed to continue to purchase the product from jobbers in DC "and avers that he will continue such sales." This led to the present patent infringement suit. The Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia certified the case to the Supreme Court with this question:
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|150px|Justice Day delivered the majority opinion.
Justice William R. Day delivered the majority opinion, joined by Justices White, Hughes, Lamar, Pitney. Justices McKenna, Holmes, Lurton, and Van Devanter dissented without opinion.
The Court restated the question before it as:
The patentee argued that the purpose of the restrictive notice was "to prevent ruinous competition by the cutting of prices in sales of the patented article." Day responded, however, that absent a patent the Court had held resale price fixing unlawful in Dr. Miles Medical Co. v. John D. Park & Sons Co. And Congress could, if it had wanted to, have conferred on patentees the right to impose such restrictions. He then asked:
In the Bobbs-Merrill case the Court held that the copyright was exhausted by the first sale, and:
The Court recognized that "there are differences between the copyright statute and the patent statute, and the purpose to decide the question now before us was expressly disclaimed" in Bobbs–Merrill. Nonetheless, "it is apparent that, in the respect involved in the present inquiry, there is a strong similarity between and identity of purpose in the two statutes." Both statutes grant an exclusive right to "vend." There is no difference of importance in the respective legal rights to vend books and vend products:
The patentee here insists that the purpose of notices fixing resale prices, specifically "keeping up prices and preventing competition"—is more essential to the protection of patented goods than of copyrighted books. The Court expressed doubt that this was so, but in any case it was more likely that "Congress had no intention to use the term 'vend' in one sense in the patent act and . . . in another in the copyright law." Congress intended to provide "[p}rotection in the exclusive right to sell . . . in both instances, and the terms used in the statutes are to all intents the same."229 U.S. at 13.
thumb|300px|right|Sanatogen, "crowned King of Tonics," according to this 1911 advertisement, was "a concentrated scientific food that constructively gives strength and vitality"
The only significant difference is that patent law gives an exclusive right to use and copyright law does not. The Supreme Court decision involving a post-sale restraint on which the patentee places chief reliance here is Henry v. A.B. Dick Co.224 U.S. 1 (1912). But that decision was based on the exclusive use right:
Here, the patentee has argued "that the notice in this case deals with the use of the invention, because the notice states that the package is licensed 'for sale and use at a price not less than $1,' [and] that a purchase is an acceptance of the conditions. . ." But, the Court insisted:
As in Bobbs-Merrill Co v. Straus,210 U.S. 339 (1908). with copyright, the Court ruled, restrictions could not be extended beyond the terms of the statute, which grants an exclusive right to vend but grants no "privilege to keep up prices and prevent competition by notices restricting the price at which the article may be resold." When the right to vend is exercised, patent rights are exhausted:
Commentary
● A contemporary Note in the Michigan Law Review said the case "was of vital importance to a large number of manufacturers," as was "evidenced by the various ingenious methods and devices which have since been adopted by numerous manufacturers to avoid the operation and application of the principles set forth in the decision," such as leasing and agency. The writer was surprised that "The tendency of the Supreme Court seems to be to take the view that the monopoly enjoyed by the patentee was not meant by Congress to be without limitation, and consequently to make it practically impossible for the patentee to control the retail price."
The writer maintains: "This decision by the Supreme Court was unquestionably a very great surprise to many, as it is not only directly in conflict with an almost unbroken line of decisions of the inferior federal courts," beginning with the Button-Fastener case, and "it is also nearly impossible to reconcile this decision" with Henry v. A. B. Dick Co. As for the Dick case, the writer continues, "It was generally thought that in the Dick case the Supreme Court had expressly committed itself to the doctrine that the patentee could require the user to comply with any conditions which he might choose to impose." He considers the distinction drawn with that case to be flimsy and not "clear, sound, or convincing."Note, The Right of the Patentee to Control the Resale Price, 12  394 (1914).
● A contemporary Note in the California Law Review also observed that in light of the A.B. Dick decision it was natural "that some slight surprise should be occasioned by the decision of the Supreme Court in the so-called Sanatogen case which holds that a patentee is without right to make or enforce a resale price stipulation." More accurately than the Michigan note, this note attributed the see-sawing in recent years to the changes in the personnel of a closely divided Court and successive replacements by new Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson appointees:
● Granville Munson, in a 1917 article on post-sale restraints, found the A.B. Dick and Bauer cases irreconcilable: "It is submitted the Sanatogen case and the Dick case cannot both be upheld, although the court professes to distinguish the latter." He insisted that the exclusive right to "vend" must include the right to set terms and conditions on which the patented article will be vended, and not just the right to sell or not sell: "If the word, "vend," is to have any particular meaning in the patent law, it is submitted it must be taken to refer to the conditions which may be imposed on subsales." Munson therefore concludes that "the decision in Bauer & Cie v. O'Donnell should not be supported."F. Granville Munson, Control of Patented and Copyrighted Articles after Sale, 26  L.J. 270, - (1917).
● Charles Miller was critical of the Court's decision to suppress Bauer's resale price fixing:
He added:
See also
Arizona Cartridge Remanufacturers Association Inc. v. Lexmark International Inc.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1913 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States misuse law
"""

From "Baxstrom v. Herold" ==> """
Baxstrom v. Herold, 383 U.S. 107 (1966), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that civil commitment following a prison term does not run afoul of double jeopardy principles.Bonnie, R.J. et al.  Criminal Law, Second Edition.  Foundation Press, NY: 2004, p. 664
 References 
 External links 
 Full text of the opinion from Justia.com
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:1966 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Baylis v. Travelers' Insurance Co." ==> """
Baylis v. Travelers' Insurance Company, 113 U.S. 316 (1885), was a case where after close of testimony in a trial, the defendant moved to dismiss on the ground of the insufficiency of the evidence to sustain a verdict. This motion was denied and the plaintiff asked that the case be submitted to the jury to determine the facts on the evidence. The court refused this, and plaintiff excepted. The court then ordered a verdict for plaintiff, subject to its opinion, whether the facts proved were sufficient to render defendant liable to plaintiff on the cause of action stated. Plaintiff moved for judgment on the verdict, and defendant moved for judgment on the pleadings and minutes of trial. Judgment was rendered for defendant upon an opinion of the court as to the effect of the evidence and as to the law on the facts as deduced from it by the court. Held that the plaintiff was thereby deprived of his constitutional right to a trial by jury, which he had not waived, and to which he was entitled..
Background
The case was an action brought by the plaintiff in error to recover upon a policy of insurance issued by the defendant, whereby it insured William Edward Parker Baylis, the father of the plaintiff, in the sum of $10,000, owed the plaintiff in case said assured should accidentally sustain bodily injuries which should produce death within ninety days.
The complaint alleged that the assured "on or about the 20th day of November 1872, did sustain bodily injuries accidentally, to-wit, in that wholly by accident he took certain drugs and medicines, which, as taken by him, were poisonous and deadly, when, in fact he intended to take wholly a different thing and in a different manner, and that, in consequence of said accident solely, said assured died on said 20th day of November 1872."
An issue was made by a denial in the answer of this allegation, so far as it alleged that the poisonous and deadly drugs were taken "accidentally, or by accident, or with the intent, or under the circumstances stated or mentioned in the complaint" to commit suicide.
Opinion
Justice Matthews delivered the opinion of the Court. He recited the facts and then continued:
In this particular, the court thought error was well assigned.  The right of trial by jury in the courts of the United States is expressly secured by the Seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution, and Congress has, by statute, provided for the trial of issues of fact in civil cases by the court without the intervention of a jury, only when the parties waive their right to a jury by a stipulation in writing. Rev.Stat. §§ 648, 649.
This constitutional right this Court has always guarded with jealousy. Elmore v. Grymes, 1 Pet. 469; DeWolf v. Rabaud, 1 Pet. 476; Castle v. Bullard, 23 How. 172; Hodges v. Easton, 106 U.S. 408.
For error in this particular, the judgment was reversed and the cause remanded with directions to grant a new trial.
See also
Travelers Casualty & Surety Co. of America v. Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. (2007)
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States Seventh Amendment case law
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:The Travelers Companies
Category:Drug overdose
Category:Life insurance
Category:Suicide in the United States
"""

From "Baze v. Rees" ==> """
Baze v. Rees, 553 U.S. 35 (2008), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which upheld the constitutionality of a particular method of lethal injection used for capital punishment.
Background of the case
Ralph Baze and Thomas Bowling were sentenced to death in Kentucky, each for a double-murder. They argued that executing them by lethal injection would violate the Eighth Amendment prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment. The governing legal standard required that lethal injection must not inflict "unnecessary pain", and Baze and Bowling argued that the lethal chemicals Kentucky used carried an unnecessary risk of inflicting pain during the execution. Kentucky at the time used the then-common combination of sodium thiopental, pancuronium bromide, and potassium chloride. The Supreme Court of Kentucky rejected their claim, but the U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari.
The case had nationwide implications because the specific "cocktail" used for lethal injections in Kentucky was the same one that virtually all states used for lethal injection. The U.S. Supreme Court stayed all executions in the country between September 2007 and April 2008, when it delivered its ruling and affirmed the Kentucky top court decision. It is the longest period with zero executions in the United States from 1982 to date.Lethal injection moratorium inches closer
Supreme Court's decision
The Supreme Court upheld Kentucky's method of lethal injection as constitutional by a vote of 7–2. No single opinion carried a majority. Chief Justice Roberts wrote a plurality opinion joined by Justice Kennedy and Justice Alito, that was later ruled to be the controlling opinion in Glossip v. Gross (2015).
Justice Alito wrote an opinion concurring with the plurality reasoning, while Justices Stevens, Scalia, Thomas and Breyer wrote opinions concurring in the judgment only.
Justice Ginsburg, joined by Justice Souter, wrote the lone dissent.
Plurality opinion
The plurality opinion was written by Chief Justice John Roberts and joined by Justices Anthony Kennedy and Samuel Alito, held that Kentucky's execution method was humane and constitutional. In response to the petitioners' argument that the risk of mistakes in the execution protocol was so great as to render it unconstitutional, the plurality wrote that "an isolated mishap alone does not violate the Eighth Amendment". It also stated that the first drug in a multi-drug cocktail must render the inmate unconscious. Otherwise, there is a "substantial, constitutionally unacceptable risk" that the inmate will suffer a painful suffocation.http://www.scotusblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/04/07-5439.pdf 
Stevens' concurrence
Justice John Paul Stevens concurred in the opinion of the Court, writing separately to explain his concerns with the death penalty in general.http://www.law.berkeley.edu/files/43-3_Semel.pdf  He wrote that the case questioned the "justification for the death penalty itself". He characterized the motivation behind the death penalty as an antithesis to modern values:
We are left, then, with retribution as the primary rationale for imposing the death penalty. And indeed, it is the retribution rationale that animates much of the remaining enthusiasm for the death penalty. As Lord Justice Denning argued in 1950, some crimes are so outrageous that society insists on adequate punishment, because the wrong-doer deserves it, irrespective of whether it is a deterrent or not. See Gregg, 428 U. S., at 184, n. 30. Our Eighth Amendment jurisprudence has narrowed the class of offenders eligible for the death penalty to include only those who have committed outrageous crimes defined by specific aggravating factors. It is the cruel treatment of victims that provides the most persuasive arguments for prosecutors seeking the death penalty. A natural response to such heinous crimes is a thirst for vengeance.
He further stressed concern over the process of death penalty cases where emotion plays a major role and where the safeguards for defendants may have been lowered. He cited statistics that indicated that many people sentenced to die were later found to be wrongly convicted. He concluded by stating that a penalty "with such negligible returns to the State [is] patently excessive and cruel and unusual punishment violative of the Eighth Amendment".
None of the other eight members of the Court choose to join Justice Stevens's opinion.
Scalia's concurrence
Justice Scalia, joined by Justice Thomas, wrote separately "to provide what I think is needed response to Justice Stevens' separate opinion":
In the fact of Justice Stevens' experience, the experience of all others is, it appears, of little consequence. The experience of the state legislatures and the Congress—who retain the death penalty as a form of punishment—is dismissed as "the product of habit and inattention rather than an acceptable deliberative process". The experience of social scientists whose studies indicate that the death penalty deters crime is relegated to a footnote. The experience of fellow citizens who support the death penalty is described, with only the most thinly veiled condemnation, as stemming from a "thirst for vengeance". It is Justice Stevens' experience that reigns over all.
Justice Stevens' final refuge in his cost-benefit analysis is a familiar one: There is a risk that an innocent person might be convicted and sentenced to death—though not a risk that Justice Stevens can quantify, because he lacks a single example of a person executed for a crime he did not commit in the current American system.
But of all Justice Stevens' criticisms of the death penalty, the hardest to take is his bemoaning of "the enormous costs that death penalty litigation imposes on society," including the "burden on the courts and the lack of finality for victim's families." Those costs, those burdens, and that lack of finality are in large measure the creation of Justice Stevens and other Justices opposed to the death penalty, who have "encumber[ed] [it] … with unwarranted restrictions neither contained in the text of the Constitution nor reflected in two centuries of practice under it"—the product of their policy views "not shared by the vast majority of the American people.
Dissent
See also
 Lethal injection
 Wilkerson v. Utah (1878)
 Glossip v. Gross (2015)
 Bucklew v. Precythe (2019)
Bibliography
 Linda Greenhouse. "Justices to Enter the Debate Over Lethal Injection". The New York Times, September 26, 2007.
 "Supreme Court clears way for executions to resume" Reuters, April 16, 2008.
References
External links
 Baze v. Rees on ScotusWiki
 Audio: complete recording of oral arguments before the court from Oyez.org
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Legal history of Kentucky
Category:Lethal injection
Category:Capital punishment in Kentucky
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:2008 in Kentucky
"""

From "Beacon Theatres, Inc. v. Westover" ==> """
Beacon Theatres, Inc. v. Westover, 359 U.S. 500 (1959), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States dealing with jury trials in civil matters.  The court held that where legal and equitable claims are joined in the same action, the legal claims must be tried by a jury before the equitable claims can be resolved..
Cornell Law School's Legal Information Institute summarized it like this:
The question was whether the exclusive agreement of Fox Theatres with the distributor Westover for first-run movies was reasonable.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 359
Fox Theatres
Seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution
Galloway v. United States
 Dairy Queen, Inc. v. Wood, 369 U.S. 469.
 Ross v. Berhard
References
External links
Category:United States Seventh Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1959 in United States case law
"""

From "Beal v. Doe" ==> """
Beal v. Doe, 432 U.S. 438 (1977), was a United States Supreme Court case that concerned the disbursement of federal funds in Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania statute restricted federal funding to abortion clinics. The Supreme Court ruled states are not required to treat abortion in the same manner as potential motherhood. The opinion of the Court left the central holding of the Roe v. Wade decisionabortion as a rightintact. The statute was upheld, with Justice Powell writing the majority opinion.
Background
After the Supreme Courts decision in Roe v. Wade those still opposed to abortion in the United States "turned to local legislators in an effort to curb the practice of abortion." This particular abortion case that came before the Supreme Court involved a Pennsylvania law that restricted "Medicaid-funded abortions" only to "indigent women" when deemed medically necessary.
Decision of the Supreme Court
In a 6–3 decision, Justice Powell wrote the decision for the majority. Justices Burger, Stewart, White, Rehnquist and Stevens joined Powell's opinion. The opinion did not disregard Roe; instead, Beal reaffirmed abortion as a right. The majority opinion asserts the constitutionally protected right of abortion does not mean that states have to treat potential motherhood and abortion in the same manner. Furthermore, the opinion allowed restriction of federal funding in first trimester of abortion. Powell continued by stating the law does not create poverty that hinders poor women from seeking abortion. In addition, Powell defends states preference in birth over abortion by claiming Roe does not bar preference.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 432
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:History of women in Pennsylvania
"""

From "Beard v. Banks" ==> """
Beard v. Banks, 548 U.S. 521 (2006), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court in which the petitioner, Ronald Banks, challenged the constitutionality of the Pennsylvania Department of Corrections policy of denying access to written material such as newspapers and magazines, to violent ("Level 2") inmates, on the grounds that the policy was a violation of his First Amendment rights, including freedom of speech..
 Background 
The Supreme Court previously had directed Federal Courts to defer to prison officials as experts in prison administration and security in Turner v. Safley and set forth criteria to be met in order to balance the needs of the prison with an inmate's constitutional rights.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 263 (2006).
The Pennsylvania Department of Corrections maintains a Long Term Segregation Unit (LTSU) to segregate a small number of its most violent and unmanageable inmates, those that are the most incorrigible and who continue to commit criminal acts within the prison. Level 2, the most restricted level in LTSU, does not allow inmates access to non-religious written material that is normally available, such as newspapers, magazines, or photographs. Inmates begin at Level 2, which has the most severe restrictions and deprivation, but may graduate to the less restrictive Level 1 where newspapers and magazines (but not photographs) are allowed, based on maintenance of good behavior for rehabilitation.
Ronald Banks, the plaintiff, was serving a life sentence in a Pennsylvania prison and was kept in the LTSU Level 2 unit from its inception in 2000 to 2005. He was placed there originally because he was so violent that prison officials determined that he had to be segregated within the prison. In Level 2, he spent 23 hours a day in solitary confinement. Banks filed suit in United States district court, alleging that this policy violated his First Amendment rights, including freedom of speech. The defendant, Jeffrey Beard, served as Secretary for the Pennsylvania Department of Corrections.
The Deputy Superintendent of Corrections testified in a deposition that the Department of Corrections policy was aimed at behavior modification by using written material as an incentive to encourage good behavior. The prison official testified that inmates in Level 2 confinement were deprived of privileges as punishment with the incentive that if their behavior improved they would be moved to Level 1 with its added privileges. Such rules also allegedly served prison security, as the prison official described how tightly rolled newspapers could be as effective a weapon as clubs and paper can be used to start fires.
Along with the documents, Secretary Beard filed a motion for summary judgment based on the undisputed facts, including those in the deposition. Although federal court rules gave Banks a chance to refute facts and contest these materials, he did not take this opportunity. Rather, he filed a separate motion for summary judgment, arguing that the policy had no rational basis. He argued that religious material could be used for dangerous purposes as easily as secular material. He also argued that the level of deprivation of Level 2 inmates was so great that it violated the Eighth Amendment.
The District Court ruled that neither the cases Banks cited nor the statistics he produced supported his argument and therefore granted Beard's motion, based on the facts provided, and denied Banks' motion. It ruled that the LTSU policies were rationally related to prison interests, furthering prison security and providing rehabilitation.
Banks appealed to the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, which reversed Beard's summary judgment, holding that the prison rules and regulations could not be supported by law.
The points at issue in this case were whether the LTSU prison policy violates the First Amendment rights of Level 2 inmates and whether judges should allow prison officials to determine policies that are less related to security than to beliefs about behavioral management techniques and that rely on deprivation to deter misbehavior and the increased privileges in Level 1 to inspire improved behavior.
 Opinion of the Court 
By a vote of six to two, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit and upheld the Pennsylvania prison regulations banning all reading matter, except religious or legal material, from its most unmanageable inmates as legal. The decision was based in part on Bank's failure to challenge the facts as set forth by Beard.
In this case, the Court held that the four-part test outlined in Turner v. Safley was met. 
 The policy was rationally related to the legitimate prison goal of motivating manageable behavior. 
 Although inmates did not have another way of exercising their rights, they could graduate to the more privileged Level 1. 
 Allowing inmates these rights could result in worse behavior and issues of prison security. 
 There was no alternative way to accomplish the same goals without restricting inmate rights.
 Subsequent developments 
This Supreme Court ruling was seen by some as a curtailment of prisoners' rights, and a reduction of court protection of inmates.
 References 
External links
Beard, Jeffrey (PA Dept. of Corrections) v. Banks, Ronald
Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae supporting petitioner
Reaction: Beard v. Banks
Ruling bolsters 'deprivation' of prisoner rights
Supreme Court Decision Update - Beard v. Banks
Brief for Petitioner
Brief for Respondent
Third Circuit Court of Appeals decision
application to Incarcerated Persons - Inmate Access to Print Media
History of LTSU  
Prisoners' side struggles in reading-material case 
Inmate policy does not violate First Amendment
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
"""

From "Beard v. Kindler" ==> """
Beard v. Kindler, 558 U.S. 53 (2009), is a United States Supreme Court case that deals with the federal review of state laws, known as the adequate and independent state ground doctrine.
 Background 
Joseph Kindler was convicted of murder in the state of Pennsylvania, and the jury recommended death. Kindler then challenged his conviction and sentence, but before the trial court could consider his motions Kindler escaped and fled to Canada. The court in Pennsylvania dismissed his post-verdict motions because of his flight. Canadian authorities ultimately captured Kindler, but pending his extradition to the United States he escaped again, evading capture for more than two years. Eventually, however, he was captured and extradited to the United States after his extradition was held to be valid in Kindler v Canada (Minister of Justice).
Upon his return, Kindler attempted to reinstate his post-verdict motions. The trial court denied these requests, citing Pennsylvania fugitive forfeiture laws. Kindler appealed to the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, arguing that the trial court had erred in not considering the merits of the motions. The Pennsylvania Supreme Court denied his motion. Kindler then requested federal habeas corpus relief and the District Court granted it, determining that the state fugitive forfeiture law did not provide adequate basis to bar federal review.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit affirmed, and Pennsylvania petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari. The Commonwealth argued that Kindler could not seek habeas relief in federal court because a federal court cannot review a state court's interpretation of wholly state law.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court ruled in favor of Pennsylvania, with Chief Justice Roberts delivering the opinion of the court. Under the adequate and independent state ground doctrine the Supreme Court cannot, as a general rule, review a state court's interpretation of state law. The court held that the discretionary nature of a state rule barring judicial review of an appeal or a claim does not in itself make it inadequate to also bar federal review. On remand for further consideration of the issue, the Third Circuit determined that the state court had applied its fugitive forfeiture rule as though it were mandatory, which had not been the rule at the time of Kindler's escape from prison. It reinstated the grant of habeas relief overturning Kindler's death sentenceKindler v. Horn, No. 03-9011, 642 F.3d 398 (3d Cir. Apr. 29, 2011) (reaffirming grant of penalty relief on claims that the jury instructions and verdict sheet used in the penalty-phase of trial violated Mills v. Maryland and that penalty-phase counsel was ineffective for failing to investigate and present available mitigating evidence; retroactive application of fugitive
forfeiture rule by Pennsylvania’s state courts to bar consideration of Kindler’s claims was not adequate to foreclose merits review in federal habeas proceedings). and he was subsequently resentenced to life without parole.The Philadelphia District Attorney's office withdrew the death penalty in the case on March 1, 2018. Commonwealth v. Kindler, No. CP-51-CR-0827471-1982 (Phila. Common Pleas docket), https://ujsportal.pacourts.us/Report/CpDocketSheet?docketNumber=CP-51-CR-0827471-1982&dnh=PbZhZGpfkvJ8JGrukExXvA%3D%3D.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2009 in United States case law
"""

From "Beard v. United States" ==> """
Beard v. United States, 158 U.S. 550 (1895), is a United States Supreme Court case in which self-defense in a homicide case was found not to require a duty to retreat.Criminal Law - Cases and Materials, 7th ed. 2012, Wolters Kluwer Law & Business; John Kaplan, Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder, , 
References
External links
Category:1895 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Bearden v. Georgia" ==> """
Bearden v. Georgia, 461 U.S. 660 (1983), was a landmark U.S. Supreme Court case holding that a local government can only imprison or jail someone for not paying a fine if it can be shown, by means of a hearing, that the person in question could have paid it but "willfully" chose not to do so.. 
Background
Tunnel Hill, Georgia resident, Danny Bearden was convicted of robbery for breaking into a trailer as a young man. As a result, he was ordered to pay a $500 fine and $250 in restitution, which he was initially paying off until he lost his job and couldn't find another one. This left him unable to pay the rest of his fines and fees, for which Georgia sent him to prison. Bearden's case was handled by Jim Lohr, a court-appointed attorney who had graduated from law school only a few years earlier. Lohr spent hours researching in the library before the case.
Ruling
On May 24, 1983, the Supreme Court ruled 5-4 that imprisoning Bearden violated his Fourteenth Amendment rights to "fundamental rights". In the Court's opinion, Sandra Day O'Connor, the Supreme Court's most junior Associate Justice at the time, wrote that it was "fundamentally unfair" for Georgia to have imprisoned Bearden. The ruling held that local governments "must inquire into the reasons for the failure to pay" when dealing with revocation cases for people who failed to pay a fine, and that only if the probationer "willfully refused to pay or failed to make sufficient bona fide efforts legally to acquire the resources to pay" can they be imprisoned or jailed. The ruling also held that courts must consider alternatives to imprisonment and determine that they are insufficient to "meet the state's interest in punishment and deterrence" before sending someone to prison for nonpayment of a fine.
Impact
Although the Bearden ruling required that the defendant in a case regarding not paying court fines can only be imprisoned if they "willfully" chose not to pay them, the Court did not define what "willfully" meant in this context. This has frequently led to judges having to determine whether someone who did not pay a fine was too poor to do so or not. Some attorneys with many poor clients have argued that the requirement in Bearden that judges consider a defendant's ability to pay is almost never enforced. In 2015, the American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit on behalf of Kevin Thompson, who had spent five days in a Georgia jail for not paying a traffic ticket, arguing that Bearden was intended to prevent just such situations from happening. Thompson's lawyer also claimed that the court did not consider alternatives to imprisonment, like community service, as required by Bearden.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 461
Tate v. Short
Williams v. Illinois
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:Debtors' prisons
"""

From "Beauharnais v. Illinois" ==> """
Beauharnais v. Illinois, 343 U.S. 250 (1952), was a case that came before the United States Supreme Court in 1952. It upheld an Illinois law making it illegal to publish or exhibit any writing or picture portraying the "depravity, criminality, unchastity, or lack of virtue of a class of citizens of any race, color, creed or religion". It is most known for giving a legal basis to some degree that forms of hate speech that may be deemed to breach US libel law are not protected by the First Amendment.
The petitioner in Beauharnais distributed a leaflet "setting forth a petition calling on the Mayor and City Council of Chicago 'to halt the further encroachment, harassment and invasion of white people, their property, neighborhoods and persons, by the Negro.'" His criminal conviction by the trial court was sustained by the Illinois Supreme Court, and upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court after it rejected a Fourteenth Amendment due process challenge.
In his opinion, Justice Frankfurter argued that the speech conducted by the defendant had breached libel and so was reasoned to be outside the protection of the First and Fourteenth Amendments.
In his dissenting opinion, Associate Justice Black quoted Pyrrhus of Epirus by alluding to the term Pyrrhic victory: "If minority groups hail this holding as their victory, they might consider the possible relevancy of this ancient remark: 'Another such victory and I am undone'".
Subsequent history
Although Beauharnais has not been overturned, subsequent Supreme Court decisions such as New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964), R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul (1992), and Brandenburg v. Ohio (1969) have adopted a more speech-protective position.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 343
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Vinson Court
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 References 
External links
Category:1952 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
"""

From "Becerra v. Empire Health Foundation" ==> """
Becerra v. Empire Health Foundation, For Valley Hospital Medical Center, 597 U. S. ____ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court clarified which patients hospitals are allowed to be reimbursed by Medicare for treating, and at what rate. In a 5-4 opinion written by Justice Elena Kagan, the Court held that "in calculating the Medicare fraction, individuals “entitled to [Medicare Part A] benefits” are all those qualifying for the program, regardless of whether they receive Medicare payments for part or all of a hospital stay."
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Elena Kagan authored the majority opinion of the Court, which reversed the opinion of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit and remanded the case to that court for further proceedings consistent with the opinion.
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2022 in United States case law
"""

From "Beck v. Alabama" ==> """
Beck v. Alabama, 447 U.S. 625 (1980), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a jury must be allowed to consider lesser included offenses, not just capital offense or acquittal.
Background
Beck was participating in a robbery when his accomplice intentionally killed someone. Beck was tried for capital murder. Under the Code of Alabama, Section 13-11-2 (1975), the requisite intent to kill could not be supplied by the felony murder doctrine. Felony murder was thus a lesser-included offense of the capital crime of robbery with an intentional killing. Under the statute, the judge was specifically prohibited from giving the jury the option of convicting for the lesser-included offense. Absent the statutory ban on such an instruction, Beck's testimony would have entitled him to an instruction on felony murder
Lower Courts
In the lower courts, Beck attacked the ban on the grounds that the Alabama statute was the same as the mandatory death penalty statutes that the Court had been striking down in recent holdings.
Decision of the Supreme Court
Though the lower courts disagreed, the Supreme Court held that the death sentence may not constitutionally be imposed after a jury verdict of guilt of a capital offense where the jury was not permitted to consider a verdict of guilt of a lesser included offense.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 447
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:Capital punishment in Alabama
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:1980 in Alabama
"""

From "Beck v. Ohio" ==> """
Beck v. Ohio, 379 U.S. 89 (1964), is a United States Supreme Court decision concerning evidence obtained as part of an unlawful arrest. Reversing the Ohio Supreme Court's decision, the U.S. Supreme Court held that Ohio police arrested defendant without probable cause, so the criminally-punishable evidence found on his person during an incidental search was inadmissible. Accordingly, the U.S. Supreme Court vacated defendant's conviction.
Facts
Receiving unspecified "information" and "reports" concerning William Beck and his current whereabouts, policeman in Cleveland, Ohio stopped him in his automobile and placed him under arrest without a warrant on November 10, 1961 for "a clearing house operation, scheme of chance.". As incidental to arrest, they searched, firstly, his car and found nothing noteworthy. At the police station, however, they searched his person and discovered, "beneath the sock of his leg," an envelope containing a number of clearing house slips, a then-illegal possession in Ohio for which he was charged in Cleveland Municipal Court.
Beck filed a motion to suppress the slips, arguing that they were seized in violation of the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments, but the Ohio Courts overruled after a hearing. Beck was eventually convicted at trial, with the slips being the primary basis of that verdict. On appeal, both the Ohio Court of Appeals and the Ohio Supreme Court (the highest in the state) affirmed his conviction on the belief that the searches were part of a lawful arrest and thus valid, despite the lack of a warrant.
Question
Did the policeman's arrest and incidental search of William Beck person violate Beck's rights under the Fourth Amendment and Fourteenth Amendment, and if so, should the criminally-punishable slips be suppressed as evidence?
Holding
The majority (Stewart, joined by Warren, Douglas, Brennan, White, Goldberg) overturned the Ohio Supreme Court ruling, invalidating the arrest and all evidence obtained therefrom. They found that the policemen's justification for the arrest (especially their description of the informer) was too vague and that their suspicion relied too much on Beck's prior arrests and convictions. The Court concluded that the "record in this case does not contain a single objective fact to support a belief by the officers that the petitioner was engaged in criminal activity at the time they arrested him."Beck, 379 U.S. at 95.
The court did acknowledge that the policemen may have received information from someone, but they felt the prosecution "needed to show with considerably more specificity" what the information said, who the informer was, and why the police found the informer reliable. Otherwise, a showing of probable cause was absent. On that note, Justice Potter Stewart concluded thus: "We may assume that the officers acted in good faith.  But good faith on the part of the arresting officer is not enough.  If subjective good faith alone were the test, the protections of the Fourth Amendment would evaporate, and the people would be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, only in the discretion of the police."Beck, 379 U.S. at 97.
The Supreme Court had three dissenters, Justice Clark, Justice Black, and Justice Harlan. Clark, with Black joining, contended that the U.S. Supreme Court should honor the probable cause determination of any State's highest court, else "this Court will be continually disputing with state and federal courts over the minutiae of facts in every search and seizure case."Beck, 379 U.S. at 99 (Clark, J., dissenting). Justice Harlan's argument was that the police had probable cause because the informer, however vague his identity and information were, said that Beck would be at "East 115th Street and Beulah," and the police did, indeed, find Beck at such place. This correspondence, Harlan felt, was enough to establish informer's reliability and, thus, enough to establish probable cause.Beck, 379 U.S. at 101-03 (Harlan, J., dissenting). Clark, Black, and Harlan would have affirmed Beck's conviction.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Beck v. Washington" ==> """
Beck v. Washington, 369 U.S. 541 (1962) is a United States Supreme Court case which ruled that intensive and voluminous news coverage in the vicinity where the defendant was indicted and tried did not violate the Due Process or Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1962 in United States case law
Category:Grand Jury Clause case law
"""

From "Becker v. Montgomery" ==> """
Becker v. Montgomery, 532 U.S. 757 (2001) is a Supreme Court case that addressed Rule 11(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and whether the failure to sign a notice of appeal requires a court to dismiss the appeal.
Facts
Dale G. Becker, an Ohio prisoner, represented himself in a civil rights action to contest the conditions of his confinement. The United States District Court for the Southern District of Ohio dismissed Becker's complaint. Becker appealed, and filed his notice of appeal using a government-printed form. Where the form asked for "Counsel for Appellant" Becker typed his name but did not provide his signature. The District Court granted Becker leave to proceed in forma pauperis on appeal, but the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals dismissed the appeal on its own motion, holding that the notice of appeal was fatally defective for lack of a signature, which the Court of Appeals deemed a 'jurisdictional' defect. 
Opinion
In a unanimous opinion delivered by Justice Ginsburg, the Court held that the federal rules require signature on notice of appeal, but the failure of a party to sign timely notice of appeal did not require the Court of Appeals to dismiss, as the lapse was curable and not a jurisdictional impediment. The only rule of civil procedure requiring that all papers filed in the district court be signed is Rule 11(a), which requires the signing of notices of appeal; a signature requirement is not among the specifications for notices of appeal set forth in the appellate court rules. Rule 11(a) states that the omission of a signature may be corrected within 30 days of filing. Since Becker was never given the opportunity to correct the omission before the Sixth Circuit dismissed his appeal, the Court reversed the dismissal.  This was Justice Ginsburg's first majority opinion to cite an internet source. 
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
"""

From "Beckles v. United States" ==> """
Beckles v. United States, 580 U.S. ___ (2017), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court evaluated whether the residual clause in the United States Advisory Sentencing GuidelinesUnited States Sentencing Commission, Guidelines Manual §4B1.2(a)(2) (Nov. 2006) (USSG). was unconstitutionally vague.Beckles v. United States, No. 15–8544 580 U.S. ___ (2017), slip. op. at 1, 3.Leah M. Litman & Luke C. Beasley, How the Sentencing Commission Does and Does Not Matter in Beckles v. United States, 165 U. PA. L. REV. ONLINE 33 (2016).
On November 28, 2016, oral arguments were heard, where a private attorney appeared for the accused, Deputy U.S. Solicitor General Michael Dreeben appeared for the government, and a professor appeared as a court appointed amicus curiae to defend the lower court's opinion.
On March 6, 2017, the Supreme Court delivered judgment in favor of the government, voting unanimously to affirm the lower court.The Supreme Court, 2016 Term — Leading Cases, 131 HARV. L. REV. 293 (2017). In an opinion written by Justice Clarence Thomas, the Court held that "the  advisory Guidelines are not subject to vagueness challenges under the Due Process Clause" of the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution.Beckles, slip op. at 1.
Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote a brief concurrence.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg concurred only in the judgment, stressing that the commentary to the Guidelines specifically mentioned Beckles' offense.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor also concurred only in the judgment, agreeing with Ginsburg that the commentary to the Guidelines applied to Beckles, but going on to opine that the Guidelines as a whole may still be unconstitutionally vague.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2017 in United States case law
"""

From "BedRoc Limited, LLC v. United States" ==> """
BedRoc Limited, LLC v. United States, 541 U.S. 176 (2004), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court decided sand and gravel are not "valuable minerals" reserved to the United States Government under the Pittman Underground Water Act of 1919. The Court sided in a 6–3 decision with the petitioner, BedRoc Limited, and reversed the decision of the Ninth Circuit Court. BedRoc Limited had removed sand and gravel from lands obtained under the Pittman Act, and the United States, the respondent, argued those were reserved to the U.S. Government under that law.
William Rehnquist wrote the majority opinion, that relied on a textualist approach, and was joined by three justices. He argued sand and gravel were not considered "valuable minerals" in Nevada when the Pittman Act was passed in 1919. A concurring opinion was written by Clarence Thomas, and joined by another justice. Two justices joined John P. Stevens' dissenting opinion, that relied on legislative history and a previous decision of the Supreme Court.
 Background 
In 1940, Newton and Mabel Butler patented  of land under the Pittman Underground Water Act (). The land was situated in Lincoln County, Nevada,  north of Las Vegas. A tenant started extracting sand and gravel in the early 1990s. The land was sold to Earl Williams in 1993, and he continued to remove sand and gravel from the land. That same year, Williams received two trespass notices from the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), that argued he was removing mineral materials from public lands. Williams challenged the notices, but the BLM ruled that the government held a reservation to the "valuable minerals" on the land..
In 1995, BedRoc Limited, LLC bought the land, and continued to remove sand and gravel under an interim agreement with the Department of the Interior. Under the agreement, BedRoc Limited had to place money in escrow from the sale of each cubic yard of sand and gravel that the company removed, pending a final resolution. A year later, BedRoc Limited transferred  of the land to Western Elite, Inc. The Interior Board of Land Appeals upheld the decision by the BLM in 1997, relying on the legislative history of the Pittman Act and on Congress' intent.
Subsequently, BedRoc Limited filed an action to quiet title in the United States District Court of Nevada. BedRoc Limited demanded ownership of the sand and gravel, while the American government asked for trespass damages. On May 24, 1999, Justice Philip Martin Pro of the Court decided that sand and gravel were "valuable minerals" reserved to the American government under the Pittman Act. The Court asked itself whether sand and gravel were minerals, whether they were valuable, and whether the "nonmineral" certification of the Pittman Act had any influence. The Court argued sand and gravel were minerals, and decided they were valuable under the Pittman Act based on Congress' intent and on debates. Besides, the Court argued lands containing minerals could be classified as nonmineral.
BedRoc Limited appealed to the Ninth Circuit Court, and Western Elite was added as a plaintiff. The three-judge panel consisting of Judges Michael Daly Hawkins, Susan P. Graber, and Richard C. Tallman argued on November 7, 2002, and affirmed the decision by the District Court. The opinion was written by Graber. After concluding the language of the Pittman Act itself was ambiguous, the Court deserted to the purpose of the law and to the legislative history. The Ninth Circuit Court decided sand and gravel were "valuable minerals" reserved to the United States, because there was a market for sand and gravel when the Pittman Act was enacted, and because Congress intended the reservation of the Pittman Act to be the same as the mineral reservation of the Stock-Raising Homestead Act. The Court said "the mineral reservation [was] to be read broadly in the light of the agricultural purpose [of the law]". BedRoc argued a site-specific analysis had to be used to determine whether sand and gravel were valuable, but the Court disagreed.
The Supreme Court granted certiorari on September 30, 2003, and the oral argument occurred on January 20 of the following year. During the argument, BedRoc Limited was represented by R. Timothy McCrum, while the United States Government was represented by Thomas L. Sansonetti. All justices asked questions or made remarks except for Clarence Thomas.
 Legal background 
The patent to the land was granted under the Pittman Underground Water Act, that went into effect in 1919. Under that law, the Secretary of the Interior could grant patents to people who established a water supply. It only applied to Nevada. The eighth section of the Pittman Act stated that each patent contained "a reservation to the United States of all the coal and other valuable minerals in the lands" and the right for the government to "prospect for, mine and remove the same" under the laws in force during a disposal of the minerals.BedRoc Limited, 541 U.S. at 179.
The Supreme Court cited Watt v. Western Nuclear, Inc., a 1983 Supreme Court decision, in which the Court interpreted the mineral reservation of the Stock-Raising Homestead Act (SRHA), that was enacted in 1916. The Supreme Court decided gravel was a mineral reserved to the government under the SRHA. The Court looked at whether gravel was part of the surface estate, which belongs to the patentee, or to the mineral estate, which belongs to the government. It decided substances are reserved to the government when they are mineral in character, can be removed from the soil, can be used for commercial purposes, and when there is no reason for the substance to be included in the surface estate. The mineral reservation of the SRHA differs from the one of the Pittman Act, as the SRHA does not include the word "valuable".BedRoc Limited, 541 U.S. at 181.
 Opinion of the court 
The Court decided on March 31, 2004, and delivered three opinions. The majority opinion was supported by four justices, the concurring opinion by two, and the dissenting opinion by three. The majority argued sand and gravel were not valuable when the law was passed in 1919 according to common sense, while the dissenting opinion said the emphasis on the word "valuable" was unjust, and said it was Congress' intent to include sand and gravel in the reservation. The concurring opinion acknowledged the emphasis on valuable was unjust, while saying the word "mineral" itself includes the requirement of commercial purpose as was decided in Watt v. Western Nuclear, Inc.
 Majority opinion 
thumb|135px|Chief Justice William Rehnquist
The majority opinion was written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, and joined by Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Antonin Scalia, and Anthony Kennedy. Adopting a textualist approach, the majority held that sand and gravel were not "valuable minerals" reserved to the government. The Court said it would not extend its decision in Watt v. Western Nuclear, Inc. to say that sand and gravel are valuable minerals. According to the majority, the Court had to focus on the meaning of the law when it was enacted, and it asked itself "whether the sand and gravel found in Nevada were commonly regarded as "valuable minerals" in 1919". According to the majority, common sense said no, as sand and gravel were abundant, had no intrinsic value, and were commercially worthless in Nevada in 1919. The Court said sand and gravel could not be mistaken for "valuable minerals" no matter if they would be regarded as minerals.BedRoc Limited, 541 U.S. at 177.
Furthermore, the Pittman Underground Water Act stated the disposal had to happen "in accordance with the provisions of the coal and mineral land laws in force at the time of such disposal". The Court said Congress was referring to the General Mining Act of 1872, that stated "all valuable mineral deposits in lands belonging to the United States" were "free and open to exploration and purchase". The majority said it was undeniable that "common sand and gravel could not constitute a locatable "valuable mineral deposit" under the General Mining Act".BedRoc Limited, 541 U.S. at 186.
The majority did not consider the legislative history as it did in Watt v. Western Nuclear, Inc., as the Pittman Act explicitly used the word "valuable" in contrast to the Stock-Raising Homestead Act (SRHA). Because of the absence of the word "valuable" in the SRHA, the Court had to speculate about Congress' intent in Watt v. Western Nuclear, Inc. Furthermore, by deciding in favor of the plaintiff, the Court left its principle that "land grants are construed favorably to the Government... and if there are doubts they are reserved for the Government, not against it", which it called an "established rule" in Wat v. Western Nuclear, Inc.
left|thumb|140px|Justice Clarence Thomas
 Concurring opinion 
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a concurring opinion, that was joined by Justice Stephen Breyer.BedRoc Limited, 541 U.S. at 187-89 (Thomas, J., concurring in the judgment). Thomas agreed with the dissenting opinion that no distinction could be made between the mineral reservation in the Pittman Underground Water Act and in the Stock-Raising Homestead Act (SRHA). He, however, argued that sand and gravel are not part of the mineral reservations of both laws, disagreeing with Watt v. Western Nuclear, Inc.
Thomas argued the emphasis the majority lays on the word "valuable" was unjust, as the Pittman Act uses "valuable minerals" and "minerals" interchangeably. Thomas said both phrases therefore were meant as synonymous. Moreover, Thomas said if "valuable" was the source of the requirement that the minerals should have commercial worth, that would be inconsistent with Watt v. Western Nuclear, Inc., because that decision said that a substance was a mineral when it could be used for commercial purposes. Thomas, in his opinion, disagreed with the conclusion of Watt v. Western Nuclear, Inc. He did not agree that sand and gravel are minerals under the SRHA only because, hypothetically, "they could have been used for commercial purposes," when the SRHA was passed. Thomas agreed with the majority opinion that according to common sense and the statutory context sand and gravel could not be used for commercial purposes when the Pittman Act was passed in 1919. Thomas wrote in his opinion that he did not advocate overruling Watt v. Western Nuclear, Inc. despite disagreeing with the decision.BedRoc Limited, 541 U.S. at 189 (Thomas, J., concurring in the judgment).
 Dissenting opinion 
thumb|140px|Justice John P. Stevens
Justice John P. Stevens wrote a dissenting opinion, that was joined by Justices David Souter and Ruth Bader Ginsburg.BedRoc Limited, 541 U.S. at 190-92 (Stevens, J., dissenting). Stevens said the majority opinion depended entirely on the word "valuable", and he rejected this emphasis. He said the reservation of the Pittman Underground Water Act was meant to be the same as that of the Stock-Raising Homestead Act (SRHA).BedRoc Limited, 541 U.S. at 191-92 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
Stevens called it highly unlikely that Congress meant to make a distinction between the reservation of the Pittman Act and the one of the SRHA, as it would be illogical that Congress would have wanted a reservation to the sand and gravel in lands covered by the SRHA, but not to the sand and gravel in lands covered by the Pittman Act. Besides, Stevens referred to a House Committee Report which said section 8 of the Pittman Act contained the same reservation of minerals as the SRHA. Stevens criticized the majority opinion for ignoring the fact that Watt v. Western Nuclear, Inc. already stated that a substance must be valuable to be a mineral. Moreover, he said "valuable minerals" and "minerals" were meant to be synonymous, as the Pittman Act contains the phrase "valuable minerals" twice and the words "minerals" and "mineral" without the word "valuable" eight times.
Stevens did not rule out the possibility that the majority opinion in Watt v. Western Nuclear, Inc. misinterpreted Congress' intention, but he said there was no reason to choose another assessment of the Congress' intention over the old one. Stevens criticized the majority opinion for not using legislative history in order to find the Congress' original intent, which could result into decisions based on personal preference.BedRoc Limited, 541 U.S. at 192 (Stevens, J., dissenting). The majority argued looking at the legislative history was unnecessary because of the clear language of the Pittman Act.
 References 
External links
 Interior Board of Land Appeals decision (6 October 1997)
 U.S. District Court of Nevada decision (24 May 1999)
 U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit decision (30 December 2002)
 Arguments of plaintiff and defendant in U.S. Supreme Court case
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States property case law
Category:United States public land law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Beech Aircraft Corp. v. Rainey" ==> """
Beech Aircraft Corporation v. Rainey, 488 U.S. 153 (1988), was a United States Supreme Court case that addressed a longstanding conflict among the Federal Courts of Appeals over whether Federal Rule of Evidence 803(8)(C), which provides an exception to the hearsay rule for public investigatory reports containing "factual findings," extends to conclusions and opinions contained in such reports. The court also considered whether the trial court abused its discretion in refusing to admit, on cross-examination, testimony intended to provide a more complete picture of a document about which the witness had testified on direct..
 Background 
On July 13, 1982, U.S. Navy Lieutenant Commander Barbara Allen Rainey and her trainee Ensign Donald Bruce Knowlton were practicing touch-and-go landings at Middleton Field near Evergreen, Alabama, when the aircraft banked sharply, lost altitude, and crashed. Rainey and Knowlton were both killed in the crash. Because of the damage to the plane and the lack of any survivors, the cause of the accident could not be determined with certainty.
 Trial 
The two pilots' surviving spouses, John Rainey and Rondi Knowlton, brought a product liability suit against petitioners Beech Aircraft Corporation, the plane's manufacturer, and Beech Aerospace Services, which serviced the plane under contract with the Navy.  The plaintiffs alleged that the crash had been caused by a loss of engine power, known as "rollback," due to some defect in the aircraft's fuel control system. The defendants, on the other hand, advanced the theory of pilot error, suggesting that the plane had stalled during the abrupt avoidance maneuver. Following a 2-week trial, the jury returned a verdict for petitioners.
 JAG Report 
One piece of evidence presented by the defense was an investigative report prepared by Lieutenant Commander William Morgan on order of the training squadron's commanding officer and pursuant to authority granted in the Manual of the Judge Advocate General. This "JAG Report," completed during the six weeks following the accident, was organized into sections labeled "finding of fact," "opinions," and "recommendations," and was supported by some 60 attachments. The "finding of fact" included statements like the following:
Among his "opinions" Lieutenant Commander Morgan stated that due to the deaths of the two pilots and the destruction of the aircraft "it is almost impossible to determine exactly what happened to Navy 3E955 from the time it left the runway on its last touch and go until it impacted the ground." He nonetheless continued with a detailed reconstruction of a possible set of events, based on pilot error, that could have caused the accident. The next two paragraphs stated a caveat and a conclusion:
The trial judge initially determined, at a pretrial conference, that the JAG Report was sufficiently trustworthy to be admissible, but due to Federal Rule of Evidence 803(8)(C) that it "would be admissible only on its factual findings and would not be admissible insofar as any opinions or conclusions are concerned." The day before trial, however, the court reversed itself and ruled, over the plaintiffs' objection, that some of the conclusions would be admitted.
 Testimony of John Rainey 
Five or six months after the accident, plaintiff John Rainey, husband of the deceased pilot and himself a Navy flight instructor, sent a detailed letter to Lieutenant Commander Morgan. Based on Rainey's own investigation, the letter took issue with some of the JAG Report's findings and outlined Rainey's theory that "[t]he most probable primary cause factor of this aircraft mishap is a loss of useful power (or rollback) caused by some form of pneumatic sensing/fuel flow malfunction, probably in the fuel control unit."
At trial Rainey did not testify during his side's case in chief, but he was called by the defense as an adverse witness. On direct examination he was asked about two statements contained in his letter. The first was to the effect that his wife had unsuccessfully attempted to cancel the ill-fated training flight because of a variety of adverse factors including her student's fatigue. The second question concerned a portion of Rainey's hypothesized scenario of the accident:
Rainey admitted having made both statements. On cross-examination, Rainey's counsel asked the following question: "In the same letter to which Mr. Toothman made reference to in his questions, sir, did you also say that the most probably [sic] primary cause of this mishap was rollback?" Before Rainey answered, the court sustained a defense objection on the ground that the question asked for Rainey's opinion. Further questioning along this line was cut off.
 Reversal 
Rainey appealed the decision based on the violation of Federal Rules of Evidence 803(8)(C), for the inclusion of the JAG Report's factual findings, and 106, for denying Rainey the opportunity to clarify his letter. A panel of the Eleventh Circuit reversed and remanded for a new trial. Considering itself bound by the Fifth Circuit precedent of Smith v. Ithaca Corp., the panel agreed with Rainey's argument that Federal Rule of Evidence 803(8)(C), which excepts investigatory reports from the hearsay rule, did not encompass evaluative conclusions or opinions. Therefore, it held, the "conclusions" contained in the JAG Report should have been excluded. The panel also held, citing Federal Rule of Evidence 106, that it was reversible error for the trial court to have prohibited cross-examination about additional portions of Rainey's letter which would have put in context the admissions elicited from him on direct.
On rehearing en banc, the Court of Appeals divided evenly on the question of Rule 803(8)(C). It therefore held that Smith was controlling and consequently reinstated the panel judgment. On the Rule 106 question, the court unanimously reaffirmed the panel's decision that Rule 106 (or alternatively Rule 801(d)(1)(B)) required reversal. The petitioners then appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court reversed the judgment of the Court of Appeals on the Rule 803(8)(C) issue. In the Court's holding, the Court stated: "We hold, therefore, that portions of investigatory reports otherwise admissible under Rule 803(8)(C) are not inadmissible merely because they state a conclusion or opinion. As long as the conclusion is based on a factual investigation and satisfies the Rule's trustworthiness requirement, it should be admissible along with other portions of the report." The Court also agreed with the Court of Appeals that the District Court erred, stating "We agree with the unanimous holding of the Court of Appeals en banc that the District Court erred in refusing to permit Rainey to present a more complete picture of what he had written to Morgan. We have no doubt that the jury was given a distorted and prejudicial impression of Rainey's letter."
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 488
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:United States evidence case law
Category:Beechcraft
"""

From "Begay v. United States" ==> """
Begay v. United States, 553 U.S. 137 (2008), is a United States Supreme Court case which held that felony driving while intoxicated is not a "violent felony" for purposes of the Armed Career Criminal Act.
 Background 
Larry Begay had multiple felony convictions for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) in New Mexico. He was found to be in possession of a firearm when he was arrested by the local police in a domestic incident.Begay had pointed a rifle at his sister and aunt and had pulled the trigger, but the weapon failed to discharge. The police were called and found Begay in possession of a .22 caliber rifle.
Under federal law it is illegal for a convicted felon to possess a firearm.The federal Gun Control Act, at 18 U.S.C. §922(g)(1), makes it a crime for a convicted felon to possess a firearm. Begay pleaded guilty in federal court to unlawful possession of a firearm. The pre-sentencing report showed that Begay had been convicted twelve times of DUI. Under New Mexico law, each DUI conviction after the first three was considered a felony.Accordingly, Begay had at least nine felony convictions for DUI, and may have had more if any of his first three DUI convictions was felonious.
The U.S. District Court for the District of New Mexico concluded that DUI was a "violent felony" under the Armed Career Criminal Act,18 U. S. C. §924(e)(1) thereby triggering that Act's 15-year mandatory minimum sentence. A divided United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit panel affirmed the decision to treat the DUIs as "violent felonies."Northwestern University, Medill School of Journalism Supreme Court Docket – Begay v. United States ()
 Opinion of the Court 
In a 6–3 vote, the Court held that DUI was not a "violent felony" because the crime was too different from the violent felony examples provided by Congress in the Armed Career Criminal Act (such as burglary, arson and extortion). Therefore, Begay should not have been subject to the mandatory sentencing hike.
Justice Breyer wrote the majority opinion with Justice Scalia concurring. Justice Alito dissented, with Justices Thomas and Souter, joining.U.S. Supreme Court: Written Opinion (https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/07pdf/06-11543.pdf)
 References 
External links
 Oral Argument Transcript
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal case law
Category:Armed Career Criminal Act case law
"""

From "Behrens v. Pelletier" ==> """
Behrens v. Pelletier, 516 U.S. 299 (1996), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held a defendant's immediate appeal of an unfavorable qualified immunity ruling on a motion to dismiss does not deprive the court of appeals of jurisdiction over a second appeal, also based on qualified immunity, immediately following denial of summary judgment.
Background
The Federal Home Loan Bank Board fired Robert Pelletier (Plaintiff) as the provisional managing officer of Pioneer Savings and Loans Associations after the agent responsible for monitoring Pioneer's operations, John Behrens (Defendant), recommended such action.  The basis of Behrens recommendation was an investigation involving the collapse of another financial institution, and possible misconduct by Pelletier.  Pelletier filled suite arguing wrongfully termination, and John Behrens claimed he was acting on behalf of the government and therefore was he was entitled to qualified immunity.
Issue
At issue is if a defendant's initial appeal for qualified immunity is unfavorable, does this ruling deprive the court of appeals jurisdiction of over a subsequent appeal based on the same claim, i.e., qualified immunity.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 516
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
http://www.quimbee.com
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1996 in United States case law
"""

From "Belford v. Scribner" ==> """
Belford v. Scribner, 144 U.S. 488 (1892), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held 1) A copyright is held by default with the person whose name it was taken out in, regardless of potential conflicts with state law. 2) If a work contains a mixture of original and copyright infringing material, but it is so intermingled as to be inseparable, then the copyright holder may take all profits from the work.
The work in question was Common Sense in the Household by Marion Harland. Her husband claimed that the copyright and profits derived therefrom belonged to him because the common law of New Jersey asserted that a wife held no share in property gained during a marriage.
 References 
External links
Category:1892 in United States case law
Category:Marriage law in the United States
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly" ==> """
Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544 (2007), was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States involving antitrust law and civil procedure. Authored by Justice David Souter, it established that parallel conduct, absent evidence of agreement, is insufficient to sustain an antitrust action under Section 1 of the Sherman Act. It also heightened the pleading requirement for federal civil cases by requiring for plaintiffs to include enough facts in their complaint to make it plausible, not merely possible or conceivable, that they will be able to prove facts to support their claims. The latter change in the law has been met with a great deal of controversy in legal circles, as evidenced by the dissenting opinion from Justice John Paul Stevens. (Stevens, J., dissenting).
 Background 
William Twombly and Lawrence Marcus brought a class-action lawsuit alleging that Bell Atlantic and the Baby Bells (successor companies to the trust-busted AT&T) had engaged in anti-competitive behavior in violation of Section 1 of the Sherman Antitrust Act. Specifically, the plaintiffs alleged that the companies had acted to disadvantage smaller telephone companies and charge consumers more by, for example, refraining from entering markets where another large company was dominant (thereby preventing a price war), even though the Telecommunications Act of 1996 had made it relatively inexpensive to do so."Bell Atlantic Corporation v. Twombly", The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law. The lawsuit alleged a conspiracy between the Baby Bells to not compete. As examples, the lawsuit noted that Qwest did not compete in California despite having business in all the surrounding states, and that Verizon did no business in Connecticut despite having a monopoly in all the surrounding states.
Their complaint was dismissed by Judge Gerard E. Lynch of the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York, as failing to allege sufficient facts to state a claim for a violation of the Sherman Act. The decision was reversed by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, and the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case in 2006.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Second Circuit, which had reversed the decision of the district court (Lynch D.J.) dismissing the complaint for failure to state a claim under Rule 12(b)(6) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
As an initial matter, the Supreme Court clarified the requirements of proving a claim of anti-competitive behavior under Section 1 of the Sherman Act. The Sherman Act prohibits entering into a "contract, combination, or conspiracy" to restrain trade. The court held that while parallel conduct (actions by competing companies that might be seen as implying some agreement to work together) is "admissible circumstantial evidence" from which an agreement to engage in anti-competitive behavior may be inferred, parallel conduct alone is insufficient to prove a Sherman Act claim.
The court then upheld the district court's dismissal of the plaintiff's complaint, holding that the mere allegations contained in the complaint that the competitors had agreed not to compete were insufficient to state a claim of conspiracy under the Sherman Act. The court found that Twombly's complaint had not provided enough facts for the court to find it plausible that the companies had engaged in a conspiracy; instead, the complaint provided factual bases for parallel conduct, not enough under the court's new interpretation of the Sherman Act, and stated only that an agreement had taken place, with no details to support that allegation. The court held that the dismissal of the complaint was therefore proper.
The decision changed the existing interpretation of the notice pleading requirements of Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8(a)(2) and the standards for dismissal under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) by creating a new, stricter standard of a pleading's required specificity.
Previously, under the standard the court set forth in Conley v. Gibson, a complaint needed to state only a "conceivable" set of facts to support its legal claims. In other words, a court could not dismiss claims unless it appeared, beyond a reasonable doubt, that plaintiffs would be able to prove no set of facts in support of their claims that would entitle them to relief.  In Twombly, the court adopted a stricter "plausibility" standard that required "enough fact[s] to raise a reasonable expectation that discovery will reveal evidence of illegal agreement."
The Twombly test however remained vague, and the legal establishment was stumped as how to interpret the "plausibility" standard, even though it was not supposed to be a heightened pleading standard, as the Court said in footnote 14. The general applicability of this heightened standard of pleading outside of antitrust cases was established in Ashcroft v. Iqbal, when the court also provided guidance as to how lower courts should apply the Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly test:
The two cases are often jointly referred to as Twiqbal.
The case was argued successfully by Michael K. Kellogg of law firm Kellogg, Huber, Hansen, Todd, Evans & Figel and Thomas O. Barnett, Assistant Attorney General of the United States Department of Justice Antitrust Division, on behalf of the United States as amicus curiae for the petitioners.
Twombly remains controversial as of 2020. Not only did it overturn Conley v. Gibson, but it also overturned Leatherman v. Tarrant County Narcotics Intelligence and Coordination Unit, 507 U.S. 163 (1992). Leatherman had unanimously established that the heightened pleading standard was fundamentally at odds with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, and the court opined that the only way to change the standard would be to amend the Rules. The Court had further cemented this idea with another unanimous ruling in Swierkiewicz v. Sorema, N.A., 534 U.S. 500 (2002), making Twombly all the more surprising.
 Legislative reaction 
On July 22, 2009, after the Supreme Court broadened Twombly with its decision in Iqbal, Senator Arlen Specter introduced the Notice Pleading Restoration Act of 2009, which provided:
Except as otherwise expressly provided by an Act of Congress or by an amendment to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure which takes effect after the date of enactment of this Act, a Federal court shall not dismiss a complaint under rule 12(b)(6) or (e) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, except under the standards set forth by the Supreme Court of the United States in Conley v. Gibson, 355 U.S. 41 (1957).4
Shortly thereafter, a similar bill was introduced in the US House of Representatives. It was called the "Open Access to Courts Act of 2009:"
A court shall not dismiss a complaint under subdivision (b)(6), (c) or (e) of Rule 12 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of the claim which would entitle the plaintiff to relief. A court shall not dismiss a complaint under one of those subdivisions on the basis of a determination by the judge that the factual contents of the complaint do not show the plaintiff's claim to be plausible or are insufficient to warrant a reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged.
Neither bill ever made it to the floor for a vote.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 550
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Ashcroft v. Iqbal
 References 
External links
 Bell Atlantic v. Twombly case brief
 Case brief of Bell Atlantic v. Twombly
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States motion to dismiss case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:Verizon Communications litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Bell v. Cone" ==> """
Bell v. Cone, 535 U.S. 685 (2002), was a Supreme Court of the United States case that upheld a death sentence despite the defendant's argument that he should not be sentenced to death because he was suffering from drug-induced psychosis when he committed the crimes.Bell v. Cone, , 689-90, 702 (2002); id. at 705 (Stevens, J., dissenting). Cone also argued that he was denied effective assistance of counsel because his attorney failed to present sufficient mitigating evidence during the sentencing phase of his trial and that his attorney inappropriately waived his final argument during the sentencing phase.Bell, 535 U.S. at 690–92; id. at 705–07 (Stevens, J., dissenting). In an 8–1 opinion written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, the United States Supreme Court denied Cone's petition for a writ of habeas corpus.Bell, 535 U.S. at 702 (reversing a prior ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit and remanding for further proceedings). The Court held that the actions taken by Cone's attorney during the sentencing phase were "tactical decisions" and that the state courts that denied Cone's appeals did not unreasonably apply clearly established law.Bell, 535 U.S. at 699–702. Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that Cone was denied effective assistance of counsel because his attorney failed to "subject the prosecution's case to meaningful adversarial testing."Bell, 535 U.S. at 702, 718–19 (Stevens, J., dissenting) (citing ) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Commentators have noted that Bell v. Cone is significant because it clarified the standards that should be used when determining ineffective assistance of counsel claims.See, e.g., Justin Rand, Pro Se Paternalism: The Contractual, Practical, and Behavioral Cases for Automatic Reversal, 163  283, 292–93 (2014); Jennifer Williams, Criminal Law—The Sixth Amendment Right to Counsel—The Supreme Court Minimizes the Right to Effective Assistance of Counsel by Maximizing the Deference Awarded to Barely Competent Defense Attorneys. Florida v. Nixon, 125 S. Ct. 551 (2004)., 28  149, 170 (2005). Other commentators have suggested that the Court's ruling has made it more difficult for state prisoners to receive habeas relief in federal court.See, e.g., Stuart E. Walker, "What We Meant Was . . ." The Supreme Court Clarifies Two Ineffective Assistance Cases in Bell v. Cone, 54  1271, 1288 (2003); Wayne M. Helge, Know Your Client: The Mundane Case of Wiggins v. Smith, 10  581, 594 (2005). After several additional appeals, the United States Supreme Court ruled in Cone v. Bell (2009) that Cone should receive a new hearing in federal trial court to determine whether the prosecution's failure to disclose evidence violated Cone's rights to due process under Brady v. Maryland.. In 2016, Gary Cone died from natural causes while still sitting on Tennessee's death row.Stuart Ervin, Death row inmate Gary Cone dies WSMV (April 20, 2016).
Background
In 1982, Gary Cone was convicted and sentenced to death for a crime spree that included the robbery of a jewelry store, a police pursuit, and the murder of an elderly couple.Bell, 535 U.S. at 689. At trial, Cone's attorney argued that he was not guilty by reason of insanity, and several experts testified that Cone suffered from a long history of drug abuse and post traumatic stress disorder resulting from his military service during the Vietnam War.Bell, 535 U.S. at 690. According to one expert, Cone's long-term drug abuse caused hallucinations and paranoia that "affected respondent's mental capacity and ability to obey the law."Bell, 535 U.S. at 690 (noting that Cone's drug use caused "chronic amphetamine psychosis, hallucinations, and ongoing paranoia"). The jury rejected Cone's insanity defense and found him guilty on all counts. At a sentencing hearing, Cone's attorney did not present evidence of Cone's drug use as mitigating evidence.Bell, 535 U.S. at 706 (Stevens, J., dissenting). Cone's attorney also waived his final argument so that the prosecutors would not have an opportunity for a rebuttal argument.Bell, 535 U.S. at 691–92. The trial court ultimately sentenced Cone to death, and on appeal, the Tennessee Supreme Court affirmed Cone's convictions and sentence.Bell, 535 U.S. at 692 (citing State v. Cone, 665 S.W. 2d. 87 (1984)).
Petitions for postconviction relief
Cone later filed a petition for postconviction relief, in which he argued that his attorney provided ineffective assistance of counsel by waiving his closing argument and by failing to present mitigating evidence during the sentencing phase of his trial.Bell, 535 U.S. at 692. After conducting a hearing on Cone's petition, a Tennessee state court rejected Cone's contentions, and the Tennessee Court of Criminal Appeals affirmed the lower court's ruling.Bell, 535 U.S. at 692 (citing Cone v. State, 747 S.W. 2d. 353 (1987)). The Tennessee Court of Criminal Appeals concluded that Cone's attorney acted within an acceptable range of competency and that Cone "received the death penalty based on the law and facts, not on the shortcomings of counsel."Bell, 535 U.S. at 692 (citing Cone v. State, 747 S.W. 2d. at 356–58). Both the Tennessee Supreme Court and the United States Supreme Court declined to consider further appeals.Bell, 535 U.S. at 692 (citing Cone v. Tennessee, 488 U. S. 871 (1988)).
In 1997, Cone filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in federal court.Bell, 535 U.S. at 692–93. In his petition, he alleged that his attorney provided ineffective assistance of counsel during the sentencing phase of his trial, but the federal district court denied his petition.Bell, 535 U.S. at 693. On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed the district court's ruling with respect to Cone's conviction, but it revered the district court's ruling with respect to Cone's sentence.Bell, 535 U.S. at 693 (citing Cone v. Bell, 243 F.3d 961, 979 (6th Cir. 2001)). The Sixth Circuit held that Cone "suffered a Sixth Amendment violation for which prejudice should be presumed" because his attorney's failure to ask for mercy "did not subject the State's call for the death penalty to meaningful adversarial testing."Bell, 535 U.S. at 693 (citing Cone v. Bell, 243 F.3d at 979) (quotation taken from Supreme Court opinion). Additionally, the Sixth Circuit held that the Tennessee Court of Criminal Appeals decision constituted "an unreasonable application of the clearly established law".Bell, 535 U.S. at 693 (citing Cone v. Bell, 243 F.3d at 979; Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668 (1984)) (quotation taken from Supreme Court opinion). In 2001, the United States Supreme Court granted certiorari.Bell v.Cone, 534 U.S. 1064 (2001).
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, the Supreme Court reversed the Sixth Circuit's ruling and remanded the case to the Sixth Circuit for further proceedings.Bell, 535 U.S. at 693, 702. Chief Justice Rehnquist stated that the Tennessee state court correctly identified Strickland v. Washington'''s two-part test as the proper legal standard for effective assistance of counsel when it rejected Cone's petition for postconviction relief.Bell, 535 U.S. at 698 (citing Strickland, 466 U.S. at 688, 694) ("We hold, therefore, that the state court correctly identified the principles announced in Strickland as those governing the analysis of respondent's claim."). Under this standard, Cone would need to demonstrate that his attorney's "representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness" and that "there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different".Bell, 535 U.S. at 698 (citing Strickland, 466 U.S. at 688, 694) (internal quotation marks omitted). Additionally, Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote that in order to presume prejudice under the standards set forth in United States v. Cronic,466 U.S. 648 (1984). an attorney's failure to subject a case to adversarial scrutiny "must be complete."Bell, 535 U.S. at 697. Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote that Cone would also need to demonstrate that the Tennessee court "applied Strickland to the facts of his case in an objectively unreasonable manner", but he was unable to do so in this case.Bell, 535 U.S. at 699. Citing various "tactical reasons" why Cone's attorney did not present mitigating evidence, Chief Justice Rehnquist concluded that the jury still had an opportunity to consider whether "evidence of a mental disease or defect" should mitigate Cone's ultimate sentence.Bell, 535 U.S. at 699–701. Finally, Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote that the attorney's choice to waive his closing argument was a "tactical decision about which competent lawyers might disagree."Bell, 535 U.S. at 702.
Justice Stevens' dissenting opinion
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that Cone's attorney "entirely fail[ed] to subject the prosecution's case to meaningful adversarial testing." Justice Stevens argued that the attorney's decision to not present mitigating evidence relied upon the incorrect assumption that the jury already had sufficient information regarding mitigating factors.Bell, 535 U.S. at 706–12 (Stevens, J., dissenting). Additionally, Justice Stevens argued that the jury would have viewed the absence of a closing argument as a "concession that no case for life could be made."Bell, 535 U.S. at 713–14 (Stevens, J., dissenting). Justice Stevens also noted that expert witnesses who testified at Cone's postconviction hearings described Cone's attorney's actions as "highly abnormal, and perhaps unprecedented in a capital case."Bell, 535 U.S. at 714–15 (Stevens, J., dissenting). In light of these facts, Justice Stevens argued that the Court should presume that Cone suffered a violation of his Sixth Amendment rights.Bell, 535 U.S. at 717–19 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
Subsequent developments
On remand, the Sixth Circuit ordered a new sentencing hearing "based on the purported invalidity of an aggravating circumstance found by the jury."Cone v. Bell, 556 U.S. 449, 463 (2009) (citing Cone v. Bell, 359 F.3d 785 (6th Cir. 2004). In a per curiam opinion, Bell v. Cone (2005), the United States Supreme Court again reversed the Sixth Circuit's decision.Bell v. Cone, 543 U.S. 447, 452–458 (2005) (per curiam). The case then returned to the Sixth Circuit for a third time.Cone v. Bell, 556 U.S. at 463. In a 2007 opinion, the Sixth Circuit reconsidered whether the prosecution violated Cone's rights to due process under the Fourteenth AmendmentSee Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963). by withholding police reports and witness statements that potentially could have corroborated his claims about the effects of his drug use. The Sixth Circuit rejected Cone's claims, holding the due process claims were procedurally barred by the Tennessee state courts in prior proceedings.Cone v. Bell, 492 F.3d at 753. The Sixth Circuit noted that even if the police reports and witness statements were admitted, they would not outweigh "overwhelming evidence of Cone’s guilt in committing a brutal double murder and the persuasive testimony that Cone was not under the influence of drugs."Cone v. Bell, 492 F.3d at 756.
The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari and vacated the Sixth Circuit's 2007 ruling.Cone v. Bell, 556 U.S. at 464, 476  ("We granted certiorari to answer the question whether a federal habeas claim is 'procedurally defaulted' when it is twice presented to the state courts." (Internal quotations omitted)). In an opinion written by Justice John Paul Stevens in Cone v. Bell (2009), the Supreme Court held that Cone's due process claims should not have been procedurally barred, and the Supreme Court remanded the case to the United States District Court that first examined Cone's habeas petition, "with instructions to give full consideration to the merits of Cone’s [due process] claim."Cone v. Bell, 556 U.S. at 476. Justice Stevens noted that "the quantity and the quality of the suppressed evidence lends support to Cone’s position at trial that he habitually used excessive amounts of drugs, that his addiction affected his behavior during his crime spree, and that the State’s arguments to the contrary were false and misleading."Cone v. Bell, 556 U.S. at 471. On April 19, 2016, Gary Cone died of natural causes while still sitting on Tennessee's death row.
Analysis and commentary
Justin Rand noted that Bell v. Cone is significant because it clarified that prejudice will only be presumed in the three circumstances outlined in United States v. Cronic and that all other cases will be analyzed under Strickland v. Washington's standards for evaluating prejudice.Justin Rand, Pro Se Paternalism: The Contractual, Practical, and Behavioral Cases for Automatic Reversal, 163  283, 292–93 (2014). However, Jennifer Williams suggested that the Court's ruling intended to limit presumptions of prejudice to cases in which there is a "complete" failure to challenge the prosecution.Jennifer Williams, Criminal Law—The Sixth Amendment Right to Counsel—The Supreme Court Minimizes the Right to Effective Assistance of Counsel by Maximizing the Deference Awarded to Barely Competent Defense Attorneys. Florida v. Nixon, 125 S. Ct. 551 (2004)., 28  149, 170 (2005). David A. Moran wrote that the Court's ruling in Bell reaffirmed that "the Cronic rule should apply to absences of counsel from critical stages of a criminal trial."David A. Moran, Don't Worry, I'll Be Right Back: Temporary Absences of Counsel During Criminal Trials and the Rule of Automatic Reversal, 85 Neb. L. Rev. 186, 205–06 (2006). Robert J. Nolan suggested that an "appropriate" interpretation of the Court's ruling would allow judges to presume prejudice for "unauthorized concessions" made during opening arguments because Supreme Court precedent requires that defense counsel "engage in meaningful adversarial testing."Robert J. Nolan, Prejudice Presumed: The Decision to Concede Guilt to Lesser Offenses during Opening Statements, 55  965, 972–73 (2004).
In his review of the case for the Suffolk University Law Review, Marc L. Gouthro, wrote that the Supreme Court "correctly" and "accurately" applied existing law to the facts of the case; he also suggested that the Court's ruling "provided concrete guidance for the lower courts to follow when making future decisions."Marc L. Gouthro, Constitutional Law – When Controversial Trial Tactics Satisfy a Defendat's Right to the Effective Assistance of Counsel, 37  219, 224 (2004). However, in his analysis of the case for the Mercer Law Review, Stuart E. Walker suggested that the Court's narrow interpretation of standards for federal habeas relief presents a "formidable barrier" to habeas petitioners and, "[g]iven the Supreme Court’s decision in Bell v. Cone'', many state prisoners seeking federal habeas relief for ineffective assistance claims may face a dim future."Stuart E. Walker, "What We Meant Was . . ." The Supreme Court Clarifies Two Ineffective Assistance Cases in Bell v. Cone, 54  1271, 1288 (2003). Wayne M. Helge also wrote that "viewed in light of Strickland's presumption of reasonable professional conduct by counsel," the Supreme Court's ruling will ultimately make "state court holdings practically unchallengeable on the merits."Wayne M. Helge, Know Your Client: The Mundane Case of Wiggins v. Smith, 10  581, 594 (2005).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:2002 in United States case law
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Bell v. Maryland" ==> """
Bell v. Maryland, 378 U.S. 226 (1964), provided an opportunity for the Supreme Court of the United States to determine whether racial discrimination in the provision of public accommodations by a privately owned restaurant violated the Equal Protection and Due Process Clauses of the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution. However, due to a supervening change in the state law, the Court vacated the judgment of the Maryland Court of Appeals and remanded the case to allow that court to determine whether the convictions for criminal trespass of twelve African American students should be dismissed..
Background
In 1960, twelve African American students were part of a group, which conducted a sit-in at Hooper's restaurant in downtown Baltimore, Maryland, where they had been refused service. When they refused to leave, they were arrested, convicted of criminal trespass in the Circuit Court of Baltimore City, and fined $10. They appealed their convictions to the highest court in Maryland, the Court of Appeals, which upheld their conviction. They then appealed to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
Decision
Although the Court had been briefed regarding whether the Equal Protection and Due Process Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment were applicable to the restaurant, the majority opinion noted that both the City of Baltimore and Maryland had passed laws against racial discrimination by an owner or operator of a place of public accommodation. The state antidiscrimination statute went further and forbade discrimination in public accommodations for sleeping or eating on the basis of race, creed, color, or national origin. The opinion, consistent with the Court's practice when a significant supervening change in law has occurred, vacated the criminal convictions of the students and remanded the case back to the Maryland Court of Appeals to allow it to consider whether the convictions should be dismissed under the current state law. The Court noted that the common law of Maryland held that when the legislature has repealed a criminal statute or otherwise makes conduct that once was a crime legal, a state court would dismiss any pending criminal proceeding charging such conduct. Lastly, the majority opinion noted that Maryland had a savings statute, which preserves criminal convictions and penalties when criminal statutes are amended, reenacted, revised, or repealed unless the legislation implementing the amendment, reenactment, revision, or repeal expressly provided that such convictions or penalties should be reduced or vacated. However, the Court did not believe that the Maryland savings statute would be applicable to the new antidiscrimination statute.
The concurring opinion by Justice Goldberg states that while the majority opinion is correct, if the case were properly before the Court, under the Fourteenth Amendment, the cases should be vacated. The concurring opinion by Justice Douglas would reach the merits of the case and vacate the convictions with direction that the cases be dismissed. The dissenting opinion by Justice Black would affirm the decision of the Maryland Court of Appeals that the Fourteenth Amendment did not apply to the convictions for criminal trespass on private property.
Critical response
Bell v. Maryland was one of five cases involving segregation protests decided on June 22, 1964. The other four cases were Griffin v. Maryland, 378 U.S. 130 (1964), Barr v. City of Columbia, 378 U.S. 146 (1964), Robinson v. Florida, 378 U.S. 153 (1964), and Bouie v. City of Columbia, 378 U.S. 347 (1964). The Supreme Court did not reach the merits of any argument addressing in any of those cases on whether private actions of segregation that were enforced by state courts were a state action violating the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The decisions were announced two days after the United States Senate ended a filibuster and passed the bill that would become the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which outlawed segregation in public accommodations. It has been suggested that the Supreme Court refrained from reaching the merits in those cases in consideration of the Act to avoid eliminating the basis for passing the legislation.
thumb|Robert Bell later became Chief Judge on the Court of Appeals of Maryland
Subsequent developments
The convictions were vacated by the Court of Appeals of Maryland on April 9, 1965, and the City of Baltimore was directed to pay the cost of the appeal to the Supreme Court of $462.93 to Robert M. Bell,Court of Appeals of Maryland order on rehearing (April 9, 2008) the named defendant in the case. Robert Bell's listing as the named defendant was accidental as his name was alphabetically first among the thirteen arrested students.
The Bell case was remanded by the Supreme Court essentially to determine whether a pending conviction for activity in protest of segregation should be vacated when the segregated activity became proscribed by later state legislation. The Supreme Court later answered this question affirmatively in Hamm v. City of Rock Hill, 379 U.S. 306 (1964), for prosecutions for activities protected by the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Robert M. Bell later became an attorney and in 1984 was appointed as a judge of the Maryland Court of Appeals, a court that had ruled against him in Bell v. Maryland, and where he became its Chief Judge in 1996. That court's prior Chief Judge was Robert C. Murphy, who when he had been a deputy attorney general attempted to uphold Bell's trespassing conviction for the sit-in and is listed by name on the state's brief to the Supreme Court in the case.12 L. Ed.2d 1335-36 (Briefs of Counsel in Bell v. Maryland)
The Maryland State Archives, as a teaching tool, has posted all of the legal papers associated with the case from each of its phases online.
See also
 Civil Rights Movement
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 378
 References 
External links
Category:1964 in Maryland
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:Anti-black racism in Maryland
Category:History of racism in Maryland
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Legal history of Maryland
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Bell v. Wolfish" ==> """
Bell v. Wolfish, 441 U.S. 520 (1979), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court addressed the constitutionality of various conditions of confinement of inmates held in federal short-term detention facilities.. The Court narrowly found(by a 5–4 decision in part and a 6–3 decision in the other part) that while treatment of pre-trial detainees is subject to constraint by the First, Fifth, and Fourteenth Amendments,[2]  all of the policies challenged in the case passed constitutional scrutiny.
Factual background 
Inmates at the Metropolitan Correctional Center (MCC) filed a class action suit challenging the constitutionality of several conditions of their confinement.Bell, 441 U.S. at 523–25. Opened in 1975 in New York City, the MCC served as a federally-operated short-term detention facility mainly for defendants awaiting trial at one of three federal district courts located in the New York City area. Though the MCC was initially constructed to house some 449 inmates, administrators were quickly forced to double-bunk inmates to accommodate the "unprecedented" increase in new detainees. In their complaint, petitioners argued that this practice of double-bunking inmates awaiting trial was unconstitutional. They also made claims against various MCC policies, including the "undue length of confinement, improper searches, inadequate recreational, educational, and employment opportunities, insufficient staff, and objectionable restrictions on the purchase and receipt of personal items and books."
 Procedural history 
After certifying the case as a class action, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York enjoined the MCC practices challenged by petitioners, holding that inmates could only be deprived of liberty as a matter of "compelling necessity." On appeal, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed nearly all of the District Court's rulings, including the due process standard the District Court utilized in enjoining the MCC's practices. The Court of Appeals did not affirm the District Court's Eighth Amendment analysis related to convicted inmates at the MCC awaiting sentencing or transfer, and instead remanded that issue to the District Court.Bell, 441 U.S. at 530.
The Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari on October 2, 1978..
 Majority opinion 
 Double-bunking 
In its majority opinion, the Supreme Court reversed the Court of Appeals. First, it noted that the “compelling necessity” standard on which the Court of Appeals relied was not grounded in the Constitution. Rather, the Court held, in order to evaluate whether conditions of pre-trial confinement violate an inmate's guarantee of due process, a court must determine whether those conditions “amount to punishment of the detainee”.Bell v. Wolfish, 441 U.S. 520, 535 (1979). Because the MCC's practice of double-bunking did not amount to punishment, the policy did not violate the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment.[2][3]
 Other challenged practices 
The Court also determined that the policy of prohibiting detainee from receiving hard-cover books not mailed directly from the publisher did not violate the First Amendment. In addition, the Court held that the practice of prohibiting detainees from receiving packages from outside the facility was not a due process violation under the Fifth Amendment. Nor, in the Court's opinion, was the practice of performing body cavity searches on detainees after contact visits a violation of the Fourth Amendment.
Finally, the Court held that none of these practices constituted punishment within the meaning of the Fifth Amendment.
References
Further reading
 Journal articles 
Keith A. Hassler, Bell v. Wolfish: The Rights of Pretrial Detainees, 6 New Eng. J. on Prison Law 129 (1979)
Dennis D. Cohen, Substantive Due Process Rights of Pretrial Detainees after Bell v. Wolfish, 65 Iowa L. Rev. 818 (1980)
Joseph P. Gill, Confused Concepts of Due Process for Pretrial Detainees - the Disturbing Legacy of Bell v. Wolfish, 18 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 469 (1981)
James Brian Boyle, Constitutional Law--Pretrial Detention--Due Process--Bell v. Wolfish, 26 N. Y. L. Sch. L. Rev. 341 (1981)
 Judicial opinions 
 Kingsley v. Hendrickson, 135 S. Ct. 2466 (2015) 
 Florence v. Bd. of Chosen Freeholders of Cty. of Burlington, 566 U.S. 318 (2012) 
Turner v. Safley, 482 U.S. 78 (1987)   
 Johnson v. Phelan, 69 F.3d 144 (7th Cir. 1995)
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Bellotti v. Baird (1976)" ==> """
Bellotti v. Baird, 428 U.S. 132 (1976), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld a Massachusetts law requiring parental consent to a minor's abortion, under the provision that "if one or both of the [minor]'s parents refuse... consent, consent may be obtained by order of a judge... for good cause shown."Full text opinion from Justia.com The decision was unanimous, and the opinion of the Court was written by Harry Blackmun. The law in question "permits a minor capable of giving informed consent to obtain a court order allowing abortion without parental consultation, and further permits even a minor incapable of giving informed consent to obtain an abortion order without parental consultation where it is shown that abortion would be in her best interests."
The case was initially titled  as Baird v. Quinn (Baird et al. v. Quinn et al.) since that proceedings commenced, Robert H. Quinn was the attorney general of Massachusetts. He was replaced in 1975 by Francis X. Bellotti.
 See also 
 Bellotti v. Baird
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:History of women's rights in the United States
Category:History of women in Massachusetts
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:1976 in United States case law
"""

From "Bellotti v. Baird (1979)" ==> """
Bellotti v. Baird, 443 U.S. 622 (1979), is a United States Supreme Court case that ruled 8-1 that teenagers do not have to secure parental consent to obtain an abortion.
The Court elaborated on its parental consent decision of 1976.. It implies that states may be able to require a pregnant, unmarried minor to obtain parental consent to an abortion if the state law provides an alternative procedure to parental approval, such as letting the minor seek a state judge's approval instead. The plurality opinion declined to extend the full right to minors to seek and obtain an abortion, which was granted to adult women in Roe v. Wade. The Court rejected the extension to minors by placing emphasis on the especially vulnerable nature of children, their "inability to make critical decisions in an informed and mature manner; and the importance of the parental role in child rearing."Bellotti v. Baird, . The case paradoxically allows a decide to decide that a woman is too immature to decide to have an abortion yet mature enough to be forced to become a parent.
Consent must be obtained from the parent(s) for a minor to have a nonemergency abortion and the parent(s) must know about the judicial proceedings, unless no parent(s) are available.  If the judge decides the minor is mature and making an informed and capable decision, he can still deny the abortion based on his own decision.
Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr., joined by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, Justice Potter Stewart, and Justice William Rehnquist argued there are three reasons why children aren't like adults: the vulnerability of children, the lack of critical decision making, and reliance on parents guidance for their children upbringing.
Justice John P. Stevens, joined by Justice William J. Brennan Jr., Justice Thurgood Marshall, and Justice Harry Blackmun, concluded that the Massachusetts statute was unconstitutional because first it allows for the court to deny the abortion despite the courts decision on the minor's maturity. Second, consent was required in every case without giving the minor an option to an independent case to prove she was mature, leading to an 'absolute third-party veto'.
If a state requires a pregnant minor to obtain consent of one or both parents, another alternative option must be available for the minor to receive the abortion. The alternative process has four requirements: (1) the minor is permitted to demonstrate her maturity and informed decision making on having the abortion without parental consent, (2) if the minor does not prove maturity, she has the ability to convince the judge that the abortion would be the best decision for her (3) the minor must remain anonymous, and (4) the process must be expedited to ensure the abortion will be  possible to obtain.
Justice Rehnquist concurred on stare decisis grounds while continuing to oppose the constitutional right to an abortion.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 443
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:History of women's rights in the United States
Category:History of women in Massachusetts
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:1979 in United States case law
"""

From "Benisek v. Lamone" ==> """
Benisek v. Lamone, 585 U.S. ____ (2018), and Lamone v. Benisek, 588 U.S. ____ (2019), were a pair of decisions by the Supreme Court of the United States in a case dealing with the topic of partisan gerrymandering arising from the 2011 Democratic party-favored redistricting of Maryland. At the center of the cases was Maryland's 6th district which historically favored Republicans and which was redrawn in 2011 to shift the political majority to become Democratic via vote dilution.For a discussion of vote dilution, see the working paper from the University of Chicago Law School, Addressing Minority Vote Dilution Through State Voting Rights Acts Affected voters filed suit, stating that the redistricting violated their right of representation under Article One, Section Two of the U.S. Constitution and freedom of association of the First Amendment.
Overview
Benisek v. Lamone, a case challenging the denial of the United States District Court for the District of Maryland to place an injunction on the controversial redistricting maps for the upcoming 2018 elections, was heard during the 2017–2018 term following the court's decision in Gill v. Whitford. The court, in a per curiam decision, affirmed the District Court's ruling, and remanded the case for further hearings to take Gill into consideration. The District Court later ruled that the maps represented unconstitutional partisan gerrymandering and ordered new maps to be drawn. The state challenged this in Lamone v. Benisek, which the Supreme Court heard in the 2018–2019 term alongside Rucho v. Common Cause, a partisan redistricting case from North Carolina. The Supreme Court ruled in both Lamone and Rucho by a 5–4 majority that questions of partisan gerrymandering represent nonjusticiable political questions and remanded each case back to its district court with instructions to dismiss the case.
Background
In the United States, the number of representatives for each state in the House of Representatives is based on that state's population.  Population counts are derived from the results of the United States Census, which is conducted every ten years.  Because population figures are updated following each new census, redistricting, or changing the boundaries of the state's districts, may be required to conform with changes in population. Redistricting is typically done by representatives of the political party in power within the state and can result in the practice of gerrymandering, creating oddly-shaped districts that favor one party's or group's chances of election. The Supreme Court has ruled that gerrymandering based on racial and ethnic grounds is unconstitutional and has stated that partisan gerrymandering is also likely unconstitutional, but has yet to develop a valid means to determine when partisan gerrymandering has occurred.
Maryland redistricting
thumb|left|The district map of Maryland from 2003 to 2013
thumb|left|The district map of Maryland as of 2013
For the 2010 Census, the Census Bureau recommended that states count incarcerated prisoners as living in the location of their group quarters, rather than at their home location. Within Maryland, most prisoners are African-American, and the largest prisoner populations were located in the state's 4th and 6th districts, which are otherwise predominantly populated by Caucasians. Because prisoners do not have the right to vote but would nevertheless be counted as residents of the prisons' districts, concerns were raised of "prison-based gerrymandering", such that the districts housing the prisoners would have inflated population counts, while the home districts of the prisoners – often metropolitan areas like Baltimore – would have diminished populations.  In 2010, Maryland passed a first-of-its-kind civil act, the No Representation Without Population Act, which would have prisoners counted for the decennial census within their home district.
Maryland has traditionally been a Democratic-heavy state, and according to FiveThirtyEight, non-gerrymandered or proportionally partisan districts in Maryland could range from four to six likely Democrat seats, suggesting that a proper redistricting of the state's eight districts would result in four to six districts favoring Democrats, and two to four either favoring Republicans or remaining competitive. Democratic analysts envisioned the possibility of an "8–0 map" which aspired to shut Republicans out of elections altogether; however, this may have endangered some incumbents, who rejected the proposal because they wanted to stay in office more easily. However, Democratic leaders saw the potential to create a district map that would give Democrats seven districts to the Republicans' one, or the "7–1 map". The state Democrats drew on services from the National Committee for an Effective Congress (NCEC) to determine how to create this "7–1 map". The issue was how to remap the two Republican-leaning districts, the 1st and the 6th. After reviewing options, advisers and mapmakers settled on remapping only the 6th district, because redrawing the 1st district to achieve their goal would have split the district across the Chesapeake Bay, an undesirable outcome. Ultimately, a 7–1 map favoring Democrats was implemented.
Benisek v. Lamone
First legal challenge
The new redistricting was initially challenged in Fletcher v. Lamone, a case brought by a number of African-American voters who believed that the new map diluted the strength of the African-American vote, violating the requirement of equal representation under Article One of the United States Constitution, equal protection granted by the 14th Amendment and equal voting rights from the 15th Amendment. They further challenged the No Representation Without Population Act, believing this further constituted a dilution of their vote. The case was heard by a three-judge panel at the District Court of Maryland in December 2011, and in a unanimous decision, the District Court found in favor of the state, issuing a summary judgement that asserted that the plaintiffs had not shown harm from the new district map nor from the Act.RWT-11cv3220 On appeal to the Supreme Court, the court issued a summary disposition that upheld the District Court's ruling.11-1178. 133 S.Ct. 29 (2012)
Second legal challenge
A separate challenge arose from other residents of the state in 2013. Aware that the District Court of Maryland had ruled that the redistricting map was not considered partisan based on Fletcher v. Lamone, these citizens challenged the redistricting's use of "narrow ribbons and orifices" that were used to connect non-contiguous regions having a targeted population distribution in the state's 4th, 6th, 7th, and 8th districts.https://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/legal-work/D.Md_Shapiro_1st_Complaint.pdf  Of particular concern was the 6th district. Previously it had covered most of the rural northwestern part of the state along the Pennsylvania border and was a predominantly Republican district with a largely Caucasian population that had supported Representative Roscoe Bartlett for two decades. After redistricting, the 6th district still covered the western arm of the state, but now also included many of the suburban and metropolitan areas across the border from Washington D.C., thereby increasing the number of African-American voters within it. The number of registered Republicans dropped by 70,000 voters, roughly 20% of the registered voters in the district. As a result, Bartlett lost his seat to Democrat John Delaney in the 2012 elections by more than 20% of the vote. The complaint stated that because these majority Republican districts had been remapped to predominantly represent Democrats, the new district boundaries violated their rights of equal representation, the right to vote under the 14th Amendment, and the rights of association under the 1st Amendment.
The case, filed as Benisek v. Mack, was reviewed by Judge James K. Bredar who deemed that none of the complaints brought by the plaintiffs were actionable and denied the request for a standard three-judge hearing in April 2014. Judge Bredar did find that the case represented a substantially different subset of residents than Fletcher and rejected the defense's argument for res judicata. In response to the plaintiffs' arguments, Judge Bredar found that the plaintiffs did not provide an effective measure to demonstrate partisan gerrymandering as suggested by Vieth v. Jubelirer, thereby nullifying their Article One and 14th Amendment claims, and that the affected citizens still had their rights to participate in the political process intact, thus denying any relief based on the 1st Amendment claim. The plaintiffs appealed to the Fourth Circuit Appeals Court, but the appeal was summarily denied in October 2014 on the basis that their claims were insubstantial, as determined by Bredar. The plaintiffs issued a petition for writ of certiorari from the Supreme Court of the United States, arguing that because the District Courts are required to hear any substantial constitutional challenges to state redistricting under Section 2284 of Title 28, the Appeals Court's dismissal based on the "insubstantial" claim was inappropriate. The case, Shapiro v. McManus, was accepted by the Supreme Court in June 2015, with oral arguments heard in November 2015 and the decision issued in December 2015. The court unanimously agreed with the petitioners that the claims presented were not insubstantial, thus clearing the bar set by Goosby v. Osser, and ordered a full three-judge hearing of the case at the District Court; the court did not otherwise comment on the merits of the petitioners' complaints related to the redistricting..
Second hearing
The new hearing before Circuit Judge Paul V. Niemeyer, Chief District Judge Bredar, and District Judge George Levi Russell III began in 2016. The plaintiffs had revised their case to focus specifically on the redrawn boundaries of the 6th district, which had had the greatest shift in voter demographics. While the state attempted to dismiss the case, the court denied dismissal in a 2–1 decision (with Bredar dissenting) in August 2016, allowing the case to move into the discovery phase.https://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/legal-work/Shapiro%20v.%20McManus%20Op.%20on%20MTD.pdf  Both sides sought to expedite the case through summary judgments in mid-2017. In June 2017, however, the Supreme Court announced that they would be hearing the Gill v. Whitford case later that year. The plaintiffs in Benisek, in anticipation of the upcoming 2018 elections, requested that the District Court issue an injunction preventing the state of Maryland from using the 2011 redistricting maps, as the state was seeking a stay of proceedings for the case until Gill v. Whitford was concluded. The District Court denied the plaintiffs' request and issued a stay on the case in August 2017, pending the conclusion of Gill v. Whitford.https://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/legal-work/Benisek_v_Lamone_Order_EnteringStay_08.24.17.pdf 
Supreme Court
Seeking an expedited ruling, the plaintiffs filed a request for a jurisdictional statement to the Supreme Court on September 1, 2017, to reverse the District Court's denial of summary judgement and injunctions and placing the case on hold.https://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/legal-work/17-333_JurisdictionalStatement.pdf  While the Supreme Court declined to reverse the District Court's orders, the court did agree to hear the case on its merits on December 8, 2017.
Oral arguments were heard on March 28, 2018. In contrast to Gill v. Whitford, the justices seemed to indicate that the redistricting of Maryland's 6th district was a much more aggressive partisan gerrymandering than that in Wisconsin, but still debated whether they had a proper measure to evaluate partisan division, whether the court should be involved in that decision, and whether such matters are to be regulated through federal or state legislation.
The Court issued its per curiam decision affirming the Appeals' Court ruling on June 18, 2018, the same day that the Gill decision was announced. In the decision, the court did not address the merits of the gerrymandering case, but instead found that the District Court, in denying the issuing of an injunction on the use of the redistricting maps, had not engaged in an "abuse of discretion", given both the pending legal challenge of Gill and the need for "due regard for the public interest in orderly elections". The decision further argued that the plaintiffs had waited too long from the time that the redistricting maps were certified to file their case.
Lamone v. Benisek
Following the per curiam decision and the conclusion of Gill v. Whitford, the District Court rescheduled hearings on the case on October 4, 2018. The District Court subsequently ruled on November 7, 2018, finding for summary judgement in the plaintiffs' favor that the revised boundaries of the 6th district were unconstitutional, and required the state to redraw its district maps in a more neutral manner by March 7, 2019, with the new maps to be approved by the court; otherwise, the court would assign an independent three-member commission to oversee the redistricting, ensuring that new maps would be available prior to the 2020 election. State governor Larry Hogan, a Republican, had stated his intent to let the ruling stand and engage with the state's general assembly to pursue redistricting, but the attorney general Brian Frosh, a Democrat, stated his intention to appeal the District Court ruling, potentially directly to the United States Supreme Court. Frosh also sought a stay of the District Court's redistricting order while the matter of appeal was under discussion.
Supreme Court
Frosh petitioned the Supreme Court to hear the new challenge of whether the District Court could make its summary judgement, and the court agreed in early January 2019 to hear the case. This new case was heard as Lamone v. Benisek (Docket 18-726) alongside Rucho v. Common Cause, another partisan gerrymandering case from North Carolina. The case was decided on June 27, 2019; a 5–4 majority determined that claims of partisan gerrymandering present a nonjusticiable political question that could not be handled by the federal court system. Along with Rucho, the Supreme Court vacated the District Court's judgement and remanded the case to that court, effectively leaving the existing redistricting maps in place.
References
External links
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Gerrymandering in the United States
Category:Congressional districts of Maryland
"""

From "Bennis v. Michigan" ==> """
Bennis v. Michigan, 516 U.S. 442 (1996), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that the innocent owner defense is not constitutionally mandated by Fourteenth Amendment Due Process in cases of civil forfeiture.
 Background 
Tina B. Bennis was a joint owner, with her husband, of an automobile.  Detroit police arrested her husband, John Bennis, after observing him engaged in a sexual act with a prostitute in the automobile while it was parked on a Detroit city street. In declaring the automobile forfeit as a public nuisance under Michigan's statutory abatement scheme, the trial court permitted no offset for petitioner's interest despite her lack of knowledge of her husband's activity. The Michigan Court of Appeals reversed but was, in turn, reversed by the Michigan Supreme Court, which concluded, among other things, that Michigan's failure to provide an innocent owner defense was without federal constitutional consequence under this Court's decisions.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 516
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Nebraska v. One 1970 2-Door Sedan Rambler (Gremlin)
Sources
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States civil forfeiture case law
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:Prostitution law in the United States
Category:History of Detroit
"""

From "Benton v. Maryland" ==> """
Benton v. Maryland, 395 U.S. 784 (1969), is a Supreme Court of the United States decision concerning double jeopardy. Benton ruled that the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment applies to the states.. In doing so, Benton expressly overruled Palko v. Connecticut..
Background
John Dalmer Benton was tried on charges of larceny and burglary. He was acquitted of larceny but convicted of burglary and was sentenced to 10 years in prison.
Shortly after Benton's conviction, the Maryland Court of Appeals had ruled in Schowgurow v. State that the portion of the Maryland Constitution that required all jurors to swear to their belief in the existence of God was itself unconstitutional. Since the jurors in Benton's case had been selected under the unconstitutional provision, he was given the option of demanding a new trial. Benton chose to undergo a new trial, but at the second trial, the state again charged Benton with larceny even though he had been acquitted of larceny in the first trial. The second trial concluded with Benton being found guilty of both burglary and larceny.
Case history
The case was argued December 12, 1968, reargued March 24, 1969, and decided June 23, 1969. It was reargued because the original argument for which the case was granted certiorari was limited to consideration of two issues: "(1) Is the double jeopardy clause of the Fifth Amendment applicable to the States through the Fourteenth Amendment? and (2) If so, was the petitioner 'twice put in jeopardy' in this case?" At the second trial Benton's sentence of 15 years on the burglary count and five years for the larceny was to run concurrently, and after oral argument, as Justice Marshall wrote in his opinion of the court, "it became clear that the existence of a concurrent sentence on the burglary count might prevent the Court from reaching the double jeopardy issue, at least if we found that any error affected only petitioner's larceny conviction. The case was scheduled for reargument, 393 U. S. 994 (1968), limited to the following additional question not included in the original writ: "Does the 'concurrent sentence doctrine,' enunciated in Hirabayashi v. United States, 320 U. S. 81, 105, and subsequent cases, have continuing validity in light of such decisions as Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U.S. 629, 633, n. 2, Peyton v. Rowe, 391 U.S. 54, Carafas v. LaVallee, 391 U.S. 234, 237-238, and Sibron v. New York, 392 U.S. 40, 50-58?"
Decision
The Supreme Court ruled that the second trial constituted double jeopardy. There was no protection against double jeopardy in Maryland from its state constitution, but the Court ruled that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment incorporated the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment and so made it enforceable against the states. As a result, the Court overturned the larceny conviction. Justice Thurgood Marshall, writing for the majority, wrote:
It is clear that petitioner's larceny conviction cannot stand once federal double jeopardy standards are applied. Petitioner was acquitted of larceny in his first trial. Because he decided to appeal his burglary conviction, he is forced to suffer retrial on the larceny count as well. As this Court held in Green v. United States ... 'conditioning an appeal of one offense on a coerced surrender of a valid plea of former jeopardy on another offense exacts a forfeiture in plain conflict with the constitutional bar against double jeopardy.'
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 395
Incorporation of the Bill of Rights
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Berea College v. Kentucky" ==> """
Berea College v. Kentucky, 211 U.S. 45 (1908), was a significant case argued before the United States Supreme Court that upheld the rights of states to prohibit private educational institutions chartered as corporations from admitting both black and white students.. Like the related Plessy v. Ferguson  case,. it was also marked by a strongly worded dissent by John Marshall Harlan. The ruling also is a minor landmark on the nature of corporate personhood.
Background
Berea College is a private liberal arts work college in Berea, Kentucky. It was founded in 1855 as a coeducational and desegregated school, admitting both black and white students and treating them without discrimination. In 1904, the "Day Law" (named for Carl Day, a Democrat from Breathitt County, Kentucky who had introduced the bill in the Kentucky House of Representatives) was passed by the Kentucky legislature, prohibiting any person, group of people, or corporation from the teaching of black and white students in the same school, or from running separate branches of a school for the teaching of black and white students within twenty-five miles of each other. Since at the time Berea was the only such integrated school in Kentucky (and the only such college in the South), it was clearly the target of this law. After Berea College's challenge to the law failed before the Kentucky Court of Appeals (although the distance provision was struck down), the case was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the state. Justice Brewer delivered the main opinion that as the corporation in question was chartered under the laws of the state of Kentucky, it was within the rights of the state to make such prohibition to the college. While the state might not have the right to thus restrict the actions of private individuals, that portion of the law was a separate issue, and not under direct consideration; and that the rights and restrictions on individuals were not necessarily the same as for corporations.
Justice Harlan vigorously dissented, arguing that the formal title of the law, "An Act to Prohibit White and Colored Persons from Attending the Same School," and the nature of its provisions made clear that no such distinction between individual and corporate restriction existed in the intentions of the legislators, and that the separate consideration of those aspects of the law was not appropriate. Harlan furthermore declared, "The capacity to impart instruction to others is given by the Almighty for beneficent purposes and its use may not be forbidden or interfered with by Government—certainly not, unless such instruction is, in its nature, harmful to the public morals or imperils the public safety. The right to impart instruction, harmless in itself or beneficial to those who receive it, is a substantial right of property—especially, where the services are rendered for compensation. But even if such right be not strictly a property right, it is, beyond question, part of one's liberty as guaranteed against hostile state action by the Constitution of the United States."Berea College, 211 U.S. at 67 (Harlan, J., dissenting).
Justice Day also dissented, separately from Harlan, but didn't write a dissenting opinion.
Subsequent developments
The result of the ruling was to allow states to prohibit integrated schooling in private institutions, as well as in public schools. Kentucky eventually amended the Day Law in 1950 to allow voluntary integration, shortly prior to the Brown v. Board of Education case which struck down racial segregation.
See also
 Civil Rights Cases, 
 Gott v. Berea College
Notes
External links
Bernstein, David E. Lochner vs. Plessy: The Berea College Case, 25 J. Sup. Ct. Hist. 93 (2000)
Berea College v. Kentucky - info
Category:1908 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Legal history of Kentucky
Category:Berea College
Category:1908 in Kentucky
Category:Education in Kentucky
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States education case law
Category:School segregation in the United States
Category:African-American history of Kentucky
Category:Higher education case law
"""

From "Berger v. New York" ==> """
Berger v. New York, 388 U.S. 41 (1967), was a United States Supreme Court decision invalidating a New York law under the Fourth Amendment, because the statute authorized electronic eavesdropping without required procedural safeguards.
Background
Under New York Code of Criminal Procedure § 813-a, police obtained an ex parte order to bug the office of attorney Ralph Berger. Based on evidence obtained by the surveillance, Berger was convicted of conspiracy to bribe a public official. The statute allowed electronic eavesdropping for up to two months upon a standard of "a reasonable ground to believe that evidence of a crime may be thus obtained." Further two-month extensions of the original order could be granted if investigators made a showing that such surveillance would be in the public interest. The statute required neither notice to the person surveilled nor any justification of such secrecy. The communications sought did not have to be described with any particularity; surveillance requests had to identify only the person targeted and the phone number to be tapped. Finally, the statute did not require a return on the warrant, so law enforcement officers did not have to account to a judge for their use of evidence gathered.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion written by Justice Tom C. Clark, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that section 813-a violated the Fourth Amendment, made enforceable against the states by the Fourteenth Amendment, because it lacked "adequate judicial supervision [and] protective procedures." Notably, the Court invalidated the law on its face rather than as applied to the petitioner. The Court likened such an indiscriminate grant of authority to search for any evidence of any crime to a general warrant, a tool used by British authorities in colonial America that the Fourth Amendment was enacted to outlaw. The Court held that conversations are protected by the Fourth Amendment, and that the use of electronic devices to capture conversations thus constituted a "search." This holding predates by several months the more famous case of Katz v. United States, which extended Fourth Amendment protection to a conversation in a public phone booth based on the speaker's reasonable expectation of privacy.
 Legacy 
Academic Colin Agur argues that Berger, along with Katz v. United States, were responses by the Court to police and government abuse of telephone surveillance. Berger, specifically, limited police wiretapping when it struck down the New York statute for being overly broad.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 388
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Privacy of telecommunications
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
Category:1967 in New York (state)
"""

From "Berger v. North Carolina State Conference of the NAACP" ==> """
Berger v. North Carolina State Conference of the NAACP, 597 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to the ability of state officials to intervene to defend the constitutionality of state laws.
 Background 
In 2013, the North Carolina General Assembly passed, and Governor Pat McCrory signed, HB 589, a voter identification law. A divided panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit invalidated that law in 2016, and the Supreme Court later denied a petition for a writ of certiorari in 2017 after disputes about whether North Carolina's new governor, Roy Cooper, could withdraw the petition. In November 2018, the people of North Carolina adopted a voter identification amendment to the Constitution of North Carolina, and the General Assembly then passed SB 824 to implement the amendment in December 2018, over Cooper's veto.
After the HB 589 litigation, the General Assembly modified state law, again over Cooper's veto, to direct that the Speaker of the North Carolina House of Representatives and the President pro tempore of the North Carolina Senate be able to intervene in any litigation over the constitutionality of state law.
The North Carolina State Conference of the NAACP filed suit against SB 824 in the United States District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina in late December 2018. The General Assembly sought to intervene in defense of the law twice, believing North Carolina Attorney General Josh Stein was not adequately defending the law. The district court denied both motions, asserting that Stein would defend the law fairly. The General Assembly appealed, and a divided panel of the Fourth Circuit reversed in an opinion written by Judge A. Marvin Quattlebaum Jr. Judge Pamela Harris dissented. The court of appeals granted rehearing en banc, and affirmed the district court by a 9–6 vote. The General Assembly subsequently filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on November 24, 2021. Oral arguments were held on March 21, 2022. On June 23, 2022, the Supreme Court reversed the Fourth Circuit in an 8–1 vote. Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion, while Justice Sonia Sotomayor dissented. The Supreme Court ruling means that Republican legislators in the state of North Carolina can act and advocate for a voter-identification law that they believe the state's attorney general, a Democrat, isn't defending adequately in court. The Court rejected the idea that courts should just presume that representation is adequate where the state law has explicitly authorized some other party to intervene in the process.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States civil procedure case law
"""

From "Berger v. United States" ==> """
Berger v. United States, 255 U.S. 22 (1921), is a United States Supreme Court decision overruling a trial court decision by U.S. District Court Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis against Rep. Victor L. Berger, a Congressman for Wisconsin's 5th district and the founder of the Social Democratic Party of America, and several other German-American defendants who were convicted of violating the Espionage Act by publicizing anti-interventionist views during World War I.
 Opinion 
The case was argued on December 9, 1920, and decided on January 31, 1921, with an opinion by Justice Joseph McKenna and dissents by Justices William R. Day, James Clark McReynolds, and Mahlon Pitney. The Supreme Court held that Judge Landis was properly disqualified as trial judge based on an affidavit filed by the German defendants asserting that Judge Landis' public anti-German statements should disqualify him from presiding over the trial of the defendants.Peter David Blanck, "The Appearance of Justice Revisited," The Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, Volume 86, Issue 3 Spring, Article 8 (1996), p. 905-906 The Berger test states that to disqualify a judge;
 Subsequent developments 
The House of Representatives twice denied Berger his seat in the House due to his original conviction for espionage using Section 3 of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution regarding denying office to those who supported "insurrection or rebellion." The Supreme Court overturned the verdict in 1921 in Berger v. U.S., and Berger won three successive terms in the House in the 1920s.
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Legal history of Wisconsin
Category:1921 in United States case law
Category:1921 in Wisconsin
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Berghuis v. Thompkins" ==> """
Berghuis v. Thompkins, 560 U.S. 370 (2010), is a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court considered the position of a suspect who understands their right to remain silent under Miranda v. Arizona and is aware that they have the right to remain silent, but does not explicitly invoke or waive the right.
The Court held that unless and until the suspect actually states that they are relying on their right(s), their subsequent voluntary statements may be used in court and police may continue to interact with (or question) them. The mere act of remaining silent is, on its own, insufficient to imply the suspect has invoked their rights. Furthermore, a voluntary reply even after lengthy silence can be construed as to implying a waiver..
The Court was split, 5–4. The dissent, authored by Justice Sonia Sotomayor, argued that Miranda and other previous cases had required a claimed waiver of a constitutional right to be shown more strongly, especially in light of a lengthy interrogation with a possible "compelling influence" during which the accused had remained almost entirely silent for almost 3 hours prior to the self-incriminating statement.
Responses from legal observers and the media were divided. Many considered Berghuis a further erosion of Miranda and were concerned it was "turning the clocks back" on safeguards developed in previous cases. At least one scholar has argued that Thompkins effectively gutted Miranda.Charles Weisselberg and Stephanos Bibas, "The Right to Remain Silent", 159 U. Pa. L. Rev. PENNumbra 69 (2010), Available at: http://scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/facpubs/2181 (Retrieved May 2, 2016) Others saw the ruling as a sign of strength and a signal that the Court, under its own impetus, was willing to address known issues resulting from the view of terrorism as crime. The more common view was concerned that vulnerable citizens could now be placed under pressure and, despite having an understanding of their rights, could be more easily coerced in a manner prejudicial to their interests.
Background of the case
Legal background
Under U.S. law and with rare exceptions,Three examples of potential exceptions are:
 Grand jury witnesses may be given a grant of immunity and compelled to give testimony under oath. A grant of immunity removes the possibility of the jeopardy of self incrimination, and therefore removes the right to remain silent to avoid self incrimination.
 The right against self-incrimination does not prevent a self-regulatory organization (SRO), such as the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD), from imposing otherwise valid sanctions when the privilege is validly asserted, since these organizations are generally not considered as state actors.
 In Raffel v. United States, 271 U.S. 494 (1926), the U.S. Supreme Court indicated that a criminal defendant who voluntarily testifies in his own behalf waives completely his privilege under the Fifth Amendment. ("The safeguards against self-incrimination are for the benefit of those who do not wish to become witnesses in their own behalf and not for those who do. There is a sound policy in requiring the accused who offers himself as a witness to do so without reservation") people (whether criminal suspects or defendants or not) have the right to remain silent as part of their right not to incriminate themselves under the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Remaining silent is optional—they may speak or be silent as they wish. The Miranda warning concerns the duty of the police or other formal questioners to make sure that the suspect is aware they have that right prior to questioning, in case they want to be silent at some point or the suspect later pleads ignorance that they had the right (and would have relied upon it had they been aware). Miranda v. Arizona  and related cases contemplate that a suspect might invoke their rights (make clear they wish to rely on them), waive their rights (make clear they do not wish to rely on them), or do neither of these. A number of cases such as the present one, refine Miranda by addressing when and at what point a suspect, who is aware that they have the right to remain silent, is said to have begun to rely on that right, as opposed to when they were aware of the right but were not choosing to rely on it.
Interrogation and conviction
Van Chester Thompkins was considered a suspect in a fatal shooting on January 10, 2000, in Southfield, Michigan. After advising Thompkins of his Miranda rights, police officers interrogated him. Thompkins did not state at any time that he wanted to rely on his right to remain silent, nor that he did not want to talk to the police, nor that he wanted an attorney. The court record suggested that he had been almost completely silent during the three-hour interrogation and the few sporadic comments he made had no bearing on the caseBerghuis, dissent, p.17 ("nearly silent for 2 hours and 45 minutes"). (police described it as "nearly a monologue"), but near the end, detectives changed their approach and "tried a spiritual tac[k]"  and an "appeal to his conscience and religious beliefs". Thompkins was asked in sequence—did he believe in God, did he pray to God, and did he pray to God to forgive him for shooting the victim. He answered "yes" to each of these. Thompkins made a motion to suppress his statements, claiming that he had invoked his Fifth Amendment right to remain silent, that he had not waived that right, and that his inculpatory statements were involuntary. The trial court denied his motion and Thompkins was found guilty by a jury and sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole. Of note, there had been significant other evidence of guilt corroborating the conviction.Berghuis, p.19.
State court appeal and federal court habeas corpus proceedings
Thompkins appealed his conviction on grounds that included suppression of his admission—that he had invoked and not waived his right to remain silent—and deficient representation related to improper jury instructions, but the Michigan Court of Appeals rejected Thompkins' Miranda claim. Thompkins then filed a writ of habeas corpus in federal District Court but it denied his request. However, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit reversed the District Court's decision, holding that the state court was unreasonable in finding an implied waiver of Thompkins' right to remain silent.
Petition to the U.S. Supreme Court
The state's petition to the Supreme Court advanced a number of reasons to hold that extended silence should not be construed as an invocation, and asserted that the interview in the present case had not been coercive.
The Court's decision
right|thumb|170px|Justice Kennedy wrote the decision of the court.
On June 1, 2010, by a vote of 5–4, the Supreme Court reversed the Sixth Circuit's decision. In the Opinion of the Court, written by Associate Justice Anthony Kennedy, the Court ruled that Thompkins' silence during the interrogation did not invoke his right to remain silent and that he had waived his right to remain silent when he knowingly and voluntarily made a statement to police.
(On the other issue considered, the court ruled that prejudice due to deficient representation in respect of jury instruction was "doubtful", but even if it had been deficient, other evidence of guilt corroborating the conviction made it unlikely that a change of jury instruction would have made any difference.)
Majority opinion
The Court reasoned as follows on Thompkins' various arguments:
There was no good reason why the standard for invoking the Miranda right to remain silent and the Miranda right to counsel should differ.Citing Solem v. Stumes, , 648 "Both protect... against compulsory self-incrimination... by requiring an interrogation to cease when either right is invoked".Citing Michigan v. Mosley, , 103 (citing Miranda at 474) and Fare v. Michael C., , 719. Making either of these statements would have ended the questions but the accused made neither of them.Berghuis, p.10.
The court further considered whether invocation of Miranda rights could be implied from the behavior or ambiguous words of the accused. It concluded (in line with previous cases such as Davis v. United StatesCiting Davis v. United States, , 458-459) that there was good reason why invoking these rights should require an unambiguous act of the accused, including certainty for police, prosecutors, and accused, and social benefit in law enforcement.
The court then considered whether the accused had taken action that waived those rights. Waiver must be a free choice with full awareness (Moran v. Burbine).Citing Moran v. Burbine, , 421 Miranda v. Arizona (the Miranda ruling) states that "[A] heavy burden rests on the government to demonstrate that the defendant knowingly and intelligently waived his privilege against self-incrimination and his right to retained or appointed counsel."The "heavy burden" had been clarified by past cases as "the burden to establish waiver by a preponderance of the evidence"—citing Colorado v. Connelly, , 168. It was noted that the accused had read and expressed understanding of the rights, and had them read aloud, he had not pleaded lack of understanding, was given time, and therefore knew his rights. Specifically, having read the 5th warning ("you have the right to decide at any time before or during questioning to use your right to remain silent and your right to talk with a lawyer while you are being questioned") he was aware this right was enduring and could be applied at any time in the questioning if he chose, and the police would have to honor the invocation if he did so.Citing Mosley, , 103, quoting Miranda at 474, 479 The court observed that "[p]olice are not required to rewarn suspects from time to time". That a question is linked to religious beliefs does not cause the reply to be "involuntary". The accused, understanding his rights and that they were capable of invocation at any point, had not chosen to invoke them.
This is ignoring the fact that the question asked was a loaded question and the defendant would have been indicted in either case according to the traditional logic and rhetoric of legal interrogation.  The custodial interview ended about 15 minutes after the following. "Q: Do you believe in God. A: Yes Q: Do you pray to God? A: Yes Q: Do you pray to God to forgive you for shooting that boy down? A: Yes." {Berghuis v. Thompkins, 560 U.S. 370, 376, 130 S. Ct. 2250, 2257 L. Ed. 2d. 1098 (2010).}   
The case of North Carolina v. Butler  Citing North Carolina v. Butler, , 373 showed that a waiver of Miranda rights may be implied through "the defendant's silence, coupled with an understanding of his rights and a course of conduct indicating waiver". The court held that where a Miranda warning had been given and was understood by the accused, an accused's uncoerced statement established an implied waiver of the right to remain silent. Thompkins' answer to the police question, having understood but not chosen to invoke his rights, was sufficient to show a course of conduct indicating waiver. Further corroboration was that he had sporadically made other comments as well.
The court concluded that:
Sotomayor's dissent
right|thumb|170px|Justice Sotomayor wrote the dissenting opinion.
Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote the dissenting opinion for four Justices, her first major dissenting opinion on the Court. She wrote that the case represented "a substantial retreat from the protection against compelled self-incrimination that Miranda v. Arizona has long provided during custodial interrogation", and that "[S]uspects must now unambiguously invoke their right to remain silent—which, counterintuitively, requires them to speak. At the same time, suspects will be legally presumed to have waived their rights even if they have given no clear expression of their intent to do so."
The dissent noted that the government must satisfy the "high standar[d] of proof for the waiver of constitutional rights [set forth in] Johnson v. Zerbst".Citing Johnson v. Zerbst, . It cited from Miranda that:
and that Miranda and North Carolina v. Butler both agreed that:
The Court had previously observed that "while the privilege [against self-incrimination] is sometimes a shelter to the guilty, [it] is often a protection to the innocent" and that "[f]or these reasons, we have observed, a criminal law system which comes to depend on the 'confession' will, in the long run, be less reliable and more subject to abuses than a system relying on independent investigation."Citing Withrow v. Williams, , 692 (some internal and nested quotation marks omitted).
Although giving "sporadic" comments during the interview, no answers had been given that touched upon the case. The Court had not previously considered "whether a suspect can invoke the right to remain silent by remaining uncooperative and nearly silent for 2 hours and 45 minutes" and the dissent considered that silence throughout a lengthy interrogation "long past the point when he could be deciding whether to respond[,] cannot reasonably be understood other than as an invocation of the right to remain silent". Butler also distinguished between a "sufficient course of conduct" and mere "inculpatory statements".
The dissent concluded that the ruling was unnecessary in the changes it established, "flatly contradicts" Miranda and Butler, and that "[e]ven if Thompkins did not invoke that right, he is entitled to relief because Michigan did not satisfy its burden of establishing waiver".
Other views
 Prior cases 
This particular view as the majority gave is not new. In the case of United States v. Johnson, 76 F. Supp. 538, 540 (D. Pa. 1947), the court ruled that, 
 Legal views and responses 
Responses to the ruling were divided with a significant number of commentators focusing upon the erosion of Miranda, and others commenting upon the impact of the case on terrorism suspect interviews—a topic where Congress had recently attempted to legislate.
Cornell Law School professor Sherry F. Colb's discussion of the decision at Findlaw.com was one of the former. She called the decision "an alarming break with the philosophy of Miranda v. Arizona [that] leaves that decision to stand as an arbitrary disclosure requirement, rather than the protection against coercive interrogation that it was originally crafted to be". The author noted the purpose of Miranda was to address psychologically pressured interviews and that it had noted that adequate protection was essential in order "to dispel the compulsion inherent in custodial surroundings". The Miranda decision was intended to prevent coercion, not merely to require a "disclosure of legal facts". The present decision "allow[ed] a waiver of the right to occur after interrogation had commenced, through a response to that interrogation". As a result, two subtly different meanings of "right to remain silent" could be construed, and a suspect who was (in the words of Miranda v. Arizona) "vulnerable, unassertive, and in need of protection"—precisely the kind of suspect Miranda aimed at protecting—would be left unaware:
A joint Amicus Curiae brief on behalf of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers and American Civil Liberties Union cautioned similarly:
Steven Shapiro, legal director of the ACLU, stated on similar lines in The Wall Street Journal online edition, that Berghuis "seriously undermines" Miranda, in which the court had "recognized that a suspect in police custody can be worn down by prolonged questioning and other interrogation tactics".
UC Berkeley law professor John Yoo responded in a matching article in the same publication, that the court's view provides interpretive guidance when a suspect says nothing for an extended period. More significantly (he wrote), it symbolizes and parallels the Obama administration's favoring of the "terrorism-as-crime" pre-2001 paradigm over the "terrorism-as-war" paradigm of the Bush era. (See anti-terrorism legislation and Bush Doctrine) This perspective could influence terrorism cases, when the opponents were declared to be at war, since "interrogation would seek actionable intelligence to stop attacks, not confessions for use in civilian trials". Yoo concluded that the court's "new flexibility" would perhaps allow it to "ease the burden" on military, intelligence and police" and permit "more [flexible responses to] terrorism within the criminal-justice paradigm, though at the expense of weakening the civil rights of all Americans". The present ruling might clarify that Miranda was not relevant where information was not being collected for use at a trial. As such it might act in mitigation of "weak anti-terrorism policies".
Kent Scheidegger, legal director of the Criminal Justice Legal Foundation, stated that the court had recognized the "practical realities that the police face in dealing with suspects" and placed reasonable limits on "an artificial rule that is not really in the Constitution". The statement concluded that "[t]he rule that really is in the Constitution, that no person may be compelled to be a witness against himself, is not changed by today's decision".
Emily Berman, counsel at the Brennan Center for Justice at the NYU School of Law commented that "[Berghuis]' potential consequences are as predictable as night following day: Police will interrogate criminal suspects who do not explicitly invoke their rights—often, those will be suspects who are unsophisticated, poorly educated or mentally ill—for hours on end. This will lead, just as inevitably, to more coerced—and therefore unreliable—confessions... the very phenomenon that Miranda aimed to eliminate." She noted the attorney general's comment that Miranda warnings had not deterred terrorism suspects such as Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab and Faisal Shahzad from talking and providing "valuable intelligence". The positive observation was a reflection upon attempts by Congress to amend Miranda legislatively, that the decision "sends a strong signal" that "the Supreme Court is not shy about curtailing Miranda protections, even without prodding from Congress". She concluded that "[w]hile it might look with hostility on congressional attempts to rein in the scope of the Miranda rule, the Supreme Court itself is willing to interpret narrowly the protections that Miranda affords criminal defendants. And it is willing to reach relatively far to do so."
Other legal responses included Stanford University law professor Robert Weisberg, who stated that "this decision authorizes lower courts to construe ambiguous situations in favor of police and prosecutors", and University of Michigan law professor Richard Friedman who concluded, "[t]his decision means that police can keep shooting questions at a suspect who refuses to talk as long as they want in hopes that the person will crack and give them some information... It's a little bit less restraint that the officers have to show."
At least one scholar has argued that Thompkins effectively gutted Miranda. In The Right to Remain Silent, Charles Weisselberg argues that "the majority in Thompkins rejected the fundamental underpinnings of Miranda v. Arizonas prophylactic rule and established a new one that fails to protect the rights of suspects." and that "But in Thompkins, neither Michigan nor the Solicitor General were able to cite any decision in which a court found that a suspect had given an implied waiver after lengthy questioning. Thompkins persevered for almost three hours before succumbing to his interrogators. In finding a waiver on these facts, Thompkins gives us an implied waiver doctrine on steroids."
Media response
National and regional media outlets reported a range of views similar to the above:
 Kansas City Star – "this is but one of a series of high court rulings in recent months that have effectively nipped away at the Miranda ruling. ... Perhaps because it is occurring incrementally, few outside the legal community have taken note of the trend... And besides, as long as the good guys win out over the bad, who cares how we get there, right?... We ought to care.... [z]eal for fighting crime shouldn't be allowed to undercut American standards like 'innocent until proven guilty'." It concluded that Sotomayor—the newest justice at the court—seemed to understand that "[g]ood policing is based on building cases, not on coercing confessions. ... What's the matter with the conservatives on the court?" 
 Bakersfield Californian – stated that "local attorneys [are] mixed on the decision", citing a variety of local attorneys. These included a defense attorney as saying "[t]ime will tell whether this activist conservative-majority Supreme Court is doing the right thing in moving back the clock on Miranda rights" and a district attorney as saying "Miranda had been broadened over the years far beyond what was necessary for its original goal of protecting suspects from [coercion]. ... police culture has dramatically changed for the better in the 40-plus years since it came into being". A second defense attorney was quoted as saying that "[i]t's placing too much on a person who is already in an incredibly stressful situation. If I sit you down in a chair in a little room and shine a harsh light in your face and question you for three hours, under those conditions I could get a ham sandwich to confess." A county public defender opined that the ruling was not unfavorable, as a clear answer would be preferable to uncertainty. Local police stated the ruling did not affect how interrogations would be conducted.
 Philadelphia Inquirer – asked "[s]ince when do Americans have to declare their constitutional rights out loud in order to claim them?" and that the decision had "set off ... shock waves among rights activists". It commented that "[t]he fact that DNA exonerations often upend criminal confessions that turn out to have been coerced after lengthy interrogations demonstrates the risks of such police procedures. That's a key reason Miranda rights were established in the first place". The ruling made automatic videotaping of major-crime interviews "critical". It concluded that "[i]t may seem to some that the high court ruling will enable police to nab more bad guys and make the charges stick. But by setting up a 'gotcha' set of rules about a key constitutional protection, the high court has eroded individual liberty for all Americans."
A number of newspapers, including well known and national titles such as USA Today, The New York Times and The Washington Post, and titles such as Associated Press and The Washington Times, reported the facts on both sides without stating a strong editorial position in their coverage.
Subsequent ruling in Salinas v. Texas
The U.S. Constitution's Fifth Amendment gives an individual suspected of crime a right not to be forced, by police or other government officials, into giving up evidence that would show he or she was guilty of a crime. Based on this constitutional prohibition against self-incrimination and to prevent coerced testimony by police or other government officials, the Supreme Court ruled in Miranda v. Arizona that an individual who was being held by police and was not free to leave had to be told of his/her right to remain silent. After Berghuis, a subsequent case, Salinas v. Texas, considered a suspect who was not being held against his will by police officers, but who had instead agreed to accompany officers and discuss a case upon their request. It extended Berghuis by ruling that in such a situation and prior to any arrest, the individual was not required to be explicitly told about his/her right to remain silent under the Fifth Amendment.
In Salinas, Genevevo Salinas of Houston had voluntarily gone to a police station when officers asked him to accompany them to talk about the murder of two men. Salinas answered most of the officers' questions, but simply remained silent when they asked him whether shotgun casings found at the scene of the murders would match his gun. He shifted his feet, and otherwise acted nervously, but did not say anything. Later, at his trial, prosecutors told jurors that his silence in the face of that question showed that he was guilty, that he knew that the shotgun used to kill the victims was his. Salinas' lawyer wanted the Supreme Court to rule that the simple fact of silence during police questioning, when an individual was not under arrest, could not be used against that person at a criminal trial.
The Supreme Court extended the standard from Berghuis v. Thompkins in Salinas v. Texas, 570 U.S. 178 (2013), on June 17, 2013, holding that a suspect's silence in response to a specific question posed during an interview with police when the suspect was not in custody and the suspect had been voluntarily answering other questions during that interview could be used against him in court where he did not explicitly invoke his Fifth Amendment right to silence in response to the specific question. Of the five justices who concluded that the suspect's silence could be used against him in these circumstances, Justices Alito and Kennedy and Chief Justice Roberts concluded that the defendant's Fifth Amendment claim failed because he did not expressly invoke the privilege. The other two Justices, Thomas and Scalia, concluded that the defendant's claim would fail even if he had invoked the privilege, on the theory that the prosecutor's comment at the trial—regarding the defendant's silence in response to a question during the police interview—did not compel the defendant to give self-incriminating testimony.See Salinas v. Texas, no. 12-246, U.S. Supreme Court (June 17, 2013).
In essence the Supreme Court ruled the Fifth Amendment's Self-Incrimination Clause does not protect a defendant's refusal to answer questions asked by law enforcement before he has been arrested or read his Miranda rights. In the concrete case the court issued the following holding: When petitioner had not yet been placed in custody or received Miranda warnings, and voluntarily responded to some questions by police about a murder, the prosecution's use of his silence in response to another question as evidence of his guilt at trial did not violate the Fifth Amendment because petitioner failed to expressly invoke his privilege not to incriminate himself in response to the officer's question. Long-standing judicial precedent has held that any witness who desires protection against self-incrimination must explicitly claim that protection.See, e.g., Garner v. United States, 424 U.S. 648 (1976) (individual's privilege against being compelled to be a witness against himself with respect to incriminating statements he made on his U.S. individual income tax return was not violated where the individual made the statements on the tax return instead of claiming the privilege with respect to specific disclosures on the return; "... in the ordinary case, if a witness under compulsion to testify makes disclosures instead of claiming the privilege, the government has not 'compelled' him to incriminate himself ..."). See also United States v. Kordel, 397 U.S. 1 (1970) (an individual's "failure at any time to assert the constitutional privilege leaves him in no position to complain now that he was compelled to give testimony against himself ..."). This requirement ensures that the government is put on notice when a defendant intends to claim this privilege and allows the government to either argue that the testimony is not self-incriminating or offer immunity. The plurality opinion of Justices Alito, Roberts and Kennedy reiterated two exceptions to this principle: 1) that a criminal defendant does not need to take the stand at trial in order to explicitly claim this privilege; and 2) that failure to claim this privilege must be excused when that failure was due to government coercion. The plurality opinion declined to extend these exceptions to the situation in Salinas v. Texas. Notwithstanding popular misconceptions, the Court held that the Fifth Amendment does not establish a complete right to remain silent but only guarantees that a criminal defendant may not be forced to testify against himself or herself. Therefore, as long as police do not deprive defendants of the opportunity to claim a Fifth Amendment privilege, there is no Constitutional violation. The Court stated that there was no "ritualistic formula" necessary to assert the privilege against self-incrimination, but that a person could not do so "by simply standing mute." If an individual fails to invoke his right, and is later charged with a crime, at trial the prosecution may use his silence as evidence of his guilt.
Notes
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 560
References
External links
 Petition presented to Supreme Court
 docket files
 Case and links on SCOTUSblog
 Supreme Court Cases of Interest [notes] Criminal Justice, Vol. 24, Issue 4 (Winter 2010), pp. 48–51, Freeman, Carol Garfiel, 24 Criminal Justice 48 (2009–2010) [not available online at this time]
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:Law enforcement in the United States
Category:Miranda warning case law
"""

From "Berkemer v. McCarty" ==> """
Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U.S. 420 (1984), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court which ruled that, in the case of a person stopped for a misdemeanor traffic offense, once they are in custody, the protections of the Fifth Amendment apply to them pursuant to the decision in Miranda v. Arizona 384 U.S. 436 (1966). Previously, some courts had been applying Miranda only to serious offenses.
Background
An officer observed the defendant's car weaving  in and out of its traffic lane.. The officer stopped defendant and asked him to get out of his car. The officer noticed that the defendant was having difficulty standing. The defendant's speech was slurred and difficult to understand. Defendant could not perform a "balancing test" without falling.
The officer then asked the defendant if he had consumed any intoxicants. Defendant said that he drank two beers and smoked several joints of marijuana shortly before being stopped. The officer then arrested the defendant and took him to the county jail where the defendant took an intoxilyzer test. The test results were negative for the presence of alcohol.
The officer then resumed questioning the defendant.Berkemer, 468 U.S. at 424. The defendant responded affirmatively when asked if he had been drinking. When asked if he was under the influence of alcohol said "I guess, barely." At no time was the defendant advised of his Miranda rights.
The trial court denied the defendant's motion to suppress his pre and post arrest statements. After exhausting his state appeals, the defendant filed a motion for writ of habeas corpus.Berkemer, 468 U.S. at 425. The federal district court denied the motion. The court of appeals reversed holding that "Miranda warnings must be given to all individuals prior to custodial interrogation, whether the offense investigated is a felony or a misdemeanor traffic offense, and that respondent's post-arrest statements, at least, were inadmissible." The Supreme Court granted certiorari to consider two issues - whether the Miranda  rule applies to defendants charged with a misdemeanor and whether an investigative detention is equivalent to Miranda custodial interrogation.
Opinion of Court
 Miranda applies to custodial interrogations involving minor traffic offenses.
 Routine questioning of motorists detained pursuant to traffic stops is not custodial interrogation under Miranda.
The Miranda rule prohibits the use of testimonial evidence in criminal proceedings that is the product of custodial police interrogation unless the police properly advised the defendant of his Fifth Amendment rights and the defendant knowingly, intelligently and voluntarily waived those rights and agreed to talk to the police. The circumstances triggering the Miranda safeguards are "custody" and "interrogation." Custody means formal arrest or the deprivation of freedom to an extent associated with formal arrest. Interrogation means explicit questioning or actions that are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response. Unquestionably the defendant in Berkemer was interrogated. In fact, he was interrogated twice - prearrest roadside questioning and post arrest questioning at the jail. In neither case had the officer advised the defendant of his Miranda rights. As for post arrest interrogation, the defendant was in custody since he had been arrested. The issue for the court was whether to create an exception to Miranda for custodial interrogations that related to minor offenses.Berkemer, 468 U.S. at 429.
The Supreme Court declined to carve out such an exception because to do so would sacrifice the certainty and clarity of the Miranda rule.Berkemer, 468 U.S. at 430–432. The pre arrest interrogation raised the issue of whether detention was equivalent to custody for purposes of the Miranda rule.Detention is a fourth amendment concept. A detention is a temporary seizure of a person for purposes of investigation. A person who is detained is not free to leave. However, a temporary constraint on one's freedom of movement falls short of fifth amendment custody. The fourth amendment analog to custody is arrest. Note that a person who has been detained has the right to remain silent and decline to answer questions. Berkemer holds that the police are not required to follow the Miranda procedures before questioning the suspect. (The Supreme Court has upheld a law that required a person to give his name when requested by a law enforcement officer) In its opinion, the Court stated:
The Court found that there were two significant differences between interrogation of person taken into custody and detainees. First was the length of the detention. Investigative detentions were brief and usually culminated in the issuance of a citation and release of the defendant. Second, the circumstances attendant to roadside detention were substantially less coercive and compulsive than those typically surrounding custodial interrogation."In short, the atmosphere surrounding an ordinary traffic stop is substantially less "police dominated" than that surrounding the kinds of interrogation at issue in Miranda itself ..." Berkemer, 468 U.S. at 438-39. Specifically the Court noted that during most traffic stops the actions of the officer were "exposed" to public view and that stops typically involved only one or two officers.Given the brevity and openness of roadside detention the opportunity and effectiveness of psychological ploys and stratagems is reduced.
A police officer can stop a vehicle if he has a reasonable articulable reason to suspect that "criminal activity is occurring."The officer may also stop if he has probable cause to believe that a crime was, is or will be committed.
The officer may detain for sufficient time to conduct a reasonable investigation that either confirms or dispels his suspicions.
The officer is not required to arrest the suspect once the officer has PC. The officer may delay the arrest for purposes of conducting a non-custodial interrogation.
The officer may interrogate the suspect without advising him of his Miranda rights.
 References 
External links
Category:History of law enforcement in the United States
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Berman v. Parker" ==> """
Berman v. Parker, 348 U.S. 26 (1954), is a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court that interpreted the Takings Clause ("nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation") of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Court voted 8–0Justice Robert H. Jackson did not participate, as he had died 10 days before oral arguments were heard. Jackson's successor, John Marshall Harlan II, would not take his seat on the Court until March 1955. to hold that private property could be taken for a public purpose with just compensation. The case laid the foundation for the Court's later important public use cases, Hawaii Housing Authority v. Midkiff, 467 U.S. 229 (1984) and Kelo v. City of New London, 545 U.S. 469 (2005).
Critics of recent occurrences of eminent domain uses trace what they view as property rights violations to this case.
 Background 
The United States Congress passed the District of Columbia Redevelopment Act of 1945 to address the vast blighted area found in the District of Columbia. The Act created a commission of five members called the District of Columbia Redevelopment Land Agency and granted it the power to redevelop blighted areas and eliminate any "blighting factors or causes of blight." The act granted the Agency the power of eminent domain, if necessary, to transfer private property from the original owner to a private entity to serve the public purpose of redevelopment. The Act was not only concerned with clearing slums but also with modernizing the urban environment.
The first project under the Act was Project Area B in Southwest Washington, D.C. In 1950, a comprehensive plan for the area was published after surveys indicated that in that area, "64.3% of the dwellings were beyond repair, 18.4% needed major repairs, only 17.3% were satisfactory; 57.8% of the dwellings had outside toilets, 60.3% had no baths, 29.6% lacked electricity, 82.2% had no wash basins or laundry tubs, 83.8% lacked central heating." The plan made provisions for the types of dwelling units and provided that "at least one-third of them [were] to be low-rent housing with a maximum rental of $17 per room per month." The plan was approved by the Commissioners and the Agency began redevelopment of the area. It was during the beginning stages of this redevelopment that the plaintiffs brought suit to challenge the constitutionality of the taking of their department store, located at 712 Fourth Street, S.W. in Area B.
The plaintiff in the case, Max Morris, owned a department store that was not itself blighted but that was scheduled to be taken by eminent domain in order to clear the larger blighted area where it was located. Plaintiffs argued that this property was not slum housing and that it could not be taken for a project under the management of a private agency to be redeveloped for private use simply to make the community more attractive overall. The owners further argued that taking the land under eminent domain and giving it to redevelopers amounted to "a taking from one businessman for the benefit of another businessman" and did not constitute a public use, thus violating the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution. Morris died while the case was under review. His executors, including Samuel Berman, continued the case for the Morris estate.
Berman's challenge to the constitutionality of the District of Columbia Redevelopment Act was heard by a special three-judge panel district court. The key issue addressed was the government's ability and scope to take and transfer private property to private developers as part of a project to clear blight from an entire area.
E. Barrett Prettyman, the D.C. Circuit judge who wrote the opinion, found no problem with the government's use of eminent domain to clear blighted structures because it could be seen as the abatement of a public nuisance.
However, Judge Prettyman saw the land on which the blighted structures were located as a different matter and as having nothing inherently to do with blight. Such land, he felt, could be taken by eminent domain only if it actually helped to combat the blight that existed on the property.
Judge Prettyman ultimately read the Redevelopment Act very narrowly and found that non-blighted property could be taken if the taking could be tied to prevention of blight. He firmly stated, however, that eminent domain could not be used by the government to take private property for the purpose of improving economic or aesthetic conditions of neighborhoods.
Therefore, he granted the government's motion to dismiss but also raised the seriousness of using eminent domain to serve broad redevelopment projects.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court unanimously decided in favor of the Planning Commission by arguing that the problem of large-scale blight needed to be addressed by a large-scale integrated redevelopment plan. Justice Douglas wrote, "If owner after owner were permitted to resist these redevelopment programs on the ground that his particular property was not being used against the public interest, integrated plans for redevelopment would suffer greatly."
As the Planning Commission had made detailed plans and taken extensive surveys of the area in question, the Supreme Court argued for judicial restraint. Douglas wrote, "In the present case, the Congress and its authorized agencies have made determinations that take into account a wide variety of values. It is not for us to reappraise them."
The Court stated that the Fifth Amendment had nothing to prohibit those who govern the District of Columbia from deciding that the Capital should be "beautiful as well as sanitary."
As the object of cleaning up the area was said to be within Congress's authority, the Court found a clear right to use eminent domain to accomplish the object.
Douglas addressed the issue presented by the landowners of "a taking from one businessman for the benefit of another businessman" by saying that a legitimate public purpose had been established by the Congress in creating the entire redevelopment plan: the purpose of the taking was to eliminate slums on an area-wide basis. Specific parcels of land may have been unblighted, but the Court found that their taking was necessary for the functioning of the redevelopment plan as a whole.
Justice Douglas expanded the definition of "public use" to include "public purpose" based on physical, aesthetic, and monetary benefits; he stated that the purpose of the redevelopment plan was to address the broader blight issues in the area to prevent the neighborhood from reverting to the blighted conditions.
The Court ultimately declined to address the specifics of the plan: "Once the question of the public purpose has been decided, the amount and character of the land to be taken for a particular tract to complete the integrated plan rests in the discretion of the legislative branch."
The judgment of the District Court was affirmed, but the Supreme Court opinion made it clear that Judge Prettyman's narrow reading of the Act was improper.
 Legacy 
Berman was confirmed in Kelo v. City of New London (2005) in which the Court again allowed taking of unblighted private property. Between Berman and Kelo, the Court held in Hawaii Housing Authority v. Midkiff (1984) that redistribution of land from some private parties to other private parties satisfied the constitutional public use requirement because the state legislature had found that the redistribution might reduce an oligopoly in fee simple land titles.
The legislation upheld by the Supreme Court in Berman provided that inasmuch as the taking of land in the project area would displace a large impoverished, slum-dwelling population, in the new [re]development of that area, at least a third of new dwellings would be required to rent for $17 per room per month. However, after the Berman decision came down, that provision was repealed. Similarly, in Hawaii, the taking of the land lessor's interest was supposed to reduce or stabilize housing prices on Oahu. However, after the Midkiff decision, housing prices on Oahu skyrocketed upward, doubling in about five years. Many of the homes in the taking area, notably in the Kahala area, were bought up by Japanese investors who tore them down and replaced them with luxury homes.
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 348
 Notes 
 Further reading 
 Barros, D. Benjamin. 2007. Nothing "Errant" About It: The Berman and Midkiff Conference Notes and How the Supreme Court Got to Kelo With Its Eyes Wide Open. In Private Property, Community Development, & Eminent Domain, ed. Robin Paul Malloy (forthcoming).  This paper can be downloaded from The Social Science Research Network at http://ssrn.com/abstract=902926.
 Cohen, Charles E. 2006.  Eminent Domain After Kelo v. City of New London: An Argument for Banning Economic Development Takings.  Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy 29:491–568.
 Pritchett, Wendell E. 2003.  The "Public Menace" of Blight: Urban Renewal and the Private Uses of Eminent Domain.  Yale Law & Policy Review 21, 1–52.
 Berman v. Parker, 348 U.S. 26 (1954), in the Encyclopedia of the Supreme Court of the United States.
 External links 
Category:United States land use case law
Category:1954 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Bernal v. Fainter" ==> """
Bernal v. Fainter, 467 U.S. 216 (1984), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the Equal Protection Clause prohibited the state of Texas from barring noncitizens from applying for commission as a notary public..
Background
A native of Mexico applied to be a notary public in Texas.Bernal, 467 U.S. at 218. Citing a Texas law that required notaries public to be citizens of the United States, Texas' Secretary of State denied the application.Bernal, 467 U.S. at 218 (noting that the application was denied under Tex.Rev.Civ.Stat.Ann., Art. 5949(2) (Vernon Supp.1984)). After losing an administrative appeal, the applicant filed a lawsuit in federal court.Bernal, 467 U.S. at 218 (citing Vargas v. Strake, C.A. No. B-79-147 (SD Tex., Oct. 9, 1981) (mem.)). The trial court ruled in favor of the applicant and found that under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, Texas' citizenship requirement did not pass either strict scrutiny or rational basis review.Bernal, 467 U.S. at 218-19. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reversed, holding that the rational basis test was the proper standard of review and that under this standard, the citizenship requirement "bears a rational relationship to the state's interest in the proper and orderly handling of a countless variety of legal documents of importance to the state."Bernal, 467 U.S. at 219 (citing Vargas v. Strake, 710 F.2d 190, 195 (1983)) (internal quotation marks omitted)).
Opinion of the Court
Citing Graham v. Richardson,. the Supreme Court recognized that legal aliens are a suspect class, and therefore any law applying to legal aliens as a class is subject to strict scrutiny.Bernal, 467 U.S. at 419-22. The Court also recognized a "political function" exception that subjects alienage classification laws to a lower standard of review for "positions intimately related to the process of democratic self-governance."Bernal, 467 U.S. at 422-27. However, the Court held that since the requirements of being a notary are essentially ministerial (that is, without judgment or discretion, either the person fits the statutory requirement to have a document authenticated or they do not), and the only real requirement of a notary was to follow the law, being a notary does not have any special character of citizenship that would require one to necessarily be a citizen.Bernal, 467 U.S. at 425-27. The Court noted that this is unlike the role played by other individuals in who work in judicial systems, such as judges or police officer, where a locality may require police officers to be citizens because they act on behalf of the state and have considerable discretion in how the law is enforced.Bernal, 467 U.S. at 426-27. Consequently, the Supreme Court struck down the Texas law that required a notary to be a citizen.Bernal, 467 U.S. at 428. The Court also noted in dictum that notary commissions are issued by the Texas Secretary of State, who is not required to be a citizen despite holding the "highest appointive position" in Texas.Bernal, 467 U.S. at 422.
Dissenting opinion
Justice William Rehnquist wrote a one-sentence dissenting opinion stating: "I dissent for the reasons stated in my dissenting opinion in Sugarman v. Dougall."Bernal, 467 U.S. at 428 (Rehnquist, J., dissenting). In Sugarman, Justice Rehnquist argued that alienage is not a suspect classification. (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).
See also
Torcaso v. Watkins (1961): religious test to be a notary found unconstitutional
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 467
References
External links
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Berwind-White Coal Mining Co. v. Chicago & Erie Railroad Co." ==> """
Berwind-White Coal Mining Company v. Chicago and Erie Railroad Company, 235 U.S. 371 (1914), was a United States Supreme Court case involving a suit over demurrage of an Erie Railroad car used by Berwind-White Coal Mining Company to transport coal. The Court asserted that the filing of rates with the Interstate Commerce Commission complied with the notice requirements of the Act to Regulate Commerce and the point of reconsignment was clear under the company's usual practice for many years..
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:1914 in United States case law
Category:Berwind Corporation
Category:Coal in the United States
"""

From "Besser Mfg. Co. v. United States" ==> """
Besser Mfg. Co. v. United States, 343 U.S. 444 (1951), is a 1951 patent–antitrust decision of the United States Supreme Court in which the Court upheld a ruling that the dominant U.S. manufacturer of concrete block–making machines violated the antitrust laws when it acquired its two principal competitors (attaining a 65% market share), bought important patents, made bad–faith threats of patent infringement suits, and entered into patent licensing agreements in which the parties were given veto powers over any prospective additional licensees. The Supreme Court approved the district court's grant of  compulsory, reasonable–royalty licensing of the patents and compulsory sales of patented machines, holding that such relief "is a well–recognized remedy where patent abuses are proved in antitrust actions, and it is required for effective relief.".
Background
Besser Manufacturing Company held a dominant position in manufacturing concrete block–making machines. It acquired several patents for automatically making concrete block. In 1948 it succeeded in acquiring control of its principal competitor, Stearns Manufacturing Company, and the two firms accounted for 65% of dollar sales volume in 1948; the other 35% was divided among 53 companies, two of which had 14% together and the rest had the remaining 21%. In 1946, Besser had acquired Stephen Flam, Inc., another major competitor, and Flam's patents.Besser, 96 F. Supp. at 310.
thumb|right|250px|Besser's patented concrete block making machine
In 1942, in settlement of patent infringement litigation with inventors Gelbman and Andrus, Besser and Stearns entered into an agreement under which Stearns and Besser were each given the right to use the Gelbman and Andrus patents, but exclusively to them, and it was agreed that they were to have the benefit of, and right to use, any and all future improvements and patents covering concrete block making machines that Gelbman and Andrus might conceive. Not only were Gelbman and Andrus prohibited from licensing anyone else, but Besser and Stearns were each prohibited from licensing anyone else without the consent of the others.
 Besser continued to buy patents from others, and threatened patent infringement suit without even having seen the accused machines.Besser, 96 F. Supp. at 312.
The government sued Besser, Stearns, Gelbman, and Andrus in the Eastern District of Michigan for conspiring to restrain and monopolize trade in the manufacture of concrete block making machines, and for monopolizing such trade.
Ruling by district court
The district court found that the contract of Gelbman and Andrus "goes further than is necessary to protect the patent monopoly of Gelbman and Andrus." An exclusive license to one company would be permissible, but:
Furthermore, documents were before the court that "denote Besser's objective to accomplish the elimination of almost every competitor" in the industry by such conduct as:
 (1) recklessly made bad–faith threats of suit,
(2) purchase of competitors' assets, and
(3) covenants not to compete.
The court therefore concluded "that the defendants, Besser, Stearns, Andrus and Gelbman have combined and conspired to restrain and to monopolize interstate trade and commerce in concrete block machines in violation of Sections 1 and 2 of the Sherman Act, and that Besser Manufacturing Co. and Jesse H. Besser have attempted to monopolize and have monopolized said trade and commerce in violation of Section 2 of the Act." The court accordingly ordered that:
(1) the Besser interests must dispose of their holdings in the Stearns company;
(2) the Gelbman-Andrus patents, plus all improvements and inventions made subsequently, must be made subject to reasonable royalty, nondiscriminatory licensing to the industry;
(3) leased machines must be sold to the lessees unless they prefer to continue leasing them; and
(4) the defendants are prohibited from entering into similar agreements in the future.Besser, 96 F. Supp. at 314–15.
Ruling by Supreme Court
thumb|right|175px|Justice Jackson delivered the unanimous opinion of the Supreme Court, affirming the district court's judgment
Justice Robert H. Jackson delivered the unanimous opinion of the Supreme Court, affirming the judgment below.Justice Tom C. Clark, who had been a Justice Department official associated with the case did not participate.
Only the Besser Company and its president, Jesse H. Besser, appealed. The Court began by stating "that the conclusions of the trial judge that appellants conspired to restrain and monopolize interstate commerce in concrete block-making machinery and that they monopolized and attempted to monopolize that industry are overwhelmingly supported." The Court therefore rejected Besser's argument that the evidence did not show the antitrust violation that the district court has found.343 U.S. at 446–47.
Besser opposed the reasonable royalty, compulsory licensing order as "punitive, confiscatory and inappropriate." The Court responded that "compulsory patent licensing is a well recognized remedy where patent abuses are proved in antitrust actions, and it is required for effective relief."
The Court therefore affirmed the judgment of the district court.343 U.S. at 350.
Subsequent developments
The doctrine of the Besser case against veto–power clauses in patent licenses was followed in United States v. Krasnov. The facts of the Krasnov case were not completely identical to those of the Besser case, but the court said, "I think the evil which the court there struck down exists here, namely, (1) the veto power over licensing rights granted to a licensee and (2) the contractual arrangement which created the power to restrict competition by requiring joint consent before others could be licensed."143 F. Supp. at 201–02.
References
External links
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:1951 in United States case law
"""

From "Bethel School District v. Fraser" ==> """
Bethel School District v. Fraser, 478 U.S. 675 (1986), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court upheld the suspension of a high school student who delivered a sexually suggestive speech at a school assembly. The case involved free speech in public schools.
On April 26, 1983, student Matthew Fraser was suspended from Bethel High School in Pierce County, Washington after he gave a speech including sexual innuendo at a school assembly while nominating a classmate for a student council position. Believing his speech to be inappropriate and vulgar, the school's administration suspended Fraser for three days and barred him from speaking at graduation. After unsuccessfully appealing his punishment through the school's grievance procedures, Fraser filed a lawsuit against the school board, claiming the suspension violated his right to free speech under the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
The United States District Court and Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals both sided with Fraser. On appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court, a 7–2 majority held that his suspension did not violate the First Amendment. Writing for the majority, Chief Justice Warren Burger found that schools have the right to suppress student speech that is considered lewd or indecent, even if not obscene, in the interest of preserving a safe educational environment.
Background
On April 26, 1983, Matthew Fraser, a high school senior at Bethel High School in Spanaway, Washington, gave a speech nominating classmate Jeff Kuhlman for student council vice president. The speech was delivered at an assembly held during school hours and students were required to either attend or report to study hall.Fraser, 478 U.S. 675, 677. To an audience of about 600 students, including many 14-year-olds, Fraser gave the following speech:
It took Fraser about one minute to deliver the speech. As he delivered it, some students in the audience "hooted and yelled", while others appeared "bewildered and embarrassed".Fraser, 478 U.S. 675. Fraser's candidate, Jeff Kuhlman, ultimately won the election with 90% of the vote.
While the speech was not outwardly obscene, Fraser made frequent use of sexual innuendos, metaphors, and double entendre, prompting disciplinary action from the administration. Prior to delivering the speech, two of Fraser's teachers warned him that the speech was "inappropriate", and that he "probably should not deliver it" because doing so could have "severe consequences".Fraser, 478 U.S. 678. After appealing through the grievance procedures of his school, he was still found to be in violation of several school policies against disruptive behavior and the use of vulgar and offensive speech. These grounds later evolved to include obscenity at trial, but obscenity, according to Fraser, was not listed as grounds for his punishment in his initial hearing with school vice-principal Christy Blair. As a result, Fraser was suspended from school for three days, though he returned after two, and was prohibited from speaking at his graduation ceremony.  Fraser nonetheless was selected by a write-in vote which placed him second overall among the top three finishers, although Bethel High School administrators refused to accept the write-in vote as a valid result, and continued to deny Fraser the opportunity to speak at graduation.
With approval from his parents and help from American Civil Liberties Union cooperating attorney Jeff Haley, Fraser filed a lawsuit against the school authorities claiming a violation of his First Amendment right to free speech, and United States District Court judge Jack Tanner ruled in his favor.
The school district then appealed to the US Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, which ruled in Fraser's favor with a broadly worded opinion. The school district asked the United States Supreme Court to consider the case. The Supreme Court granted certiorari on October 8, 1985.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court reversed the Court of Appeals in a 7–2 vote to reinstate the suspension, saying that the school district's policy did not violate the First Amendment.Bethel School District No. 403 v. Fraser | The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law Chief Justice Warren Burger delivered the Court's opinion, in what ended up along with the Gramm–Rudman decision (Bowsher v. Synar) to be the final case of the Burger Court era. Justices William J. Brennan and Harry Blackmun delivered concurring opinions, while Thurgood Marshall and John Paul Stevens dissented.
Though the Court distinguished its 1969 decision Tinker v. Des Moines, which upheld the right of students to express themselves where their words (or in that case, the wearing of a protest armband) are non-disruptive and could not be seen as connected with the school, Fraser limits the scope of that ruling, by prohibiting certain styles of expression that are sexually vulgar.
See also
 School speech
 Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District, 393 U.S. 503 (1969)
 Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. 260 (1988)
 Morse v. Frederick, 551 U.S. 393 (2007)
 Mahanoy Area School District v. B.L., 594 U.S. ___ (2021)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 478
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
 References
 Sources
 Bethel School District v. Fraser, 478 U.S. 675 (1986)
Further reading
 Finkelman, P., & Urofsky, M. I. (2003). Bethel School District No. 403 v. Fraser. In Landmark decisions of the United States Supreme Court. Washington: CQ Press. Retrieved January 22, 2009, from CQ Press Electronic Library, CQ Supreme Court Collection, http://library.cqpress.com/scc/lndmrk03-113-6442-349542. Document ID: lndmrk03-113-6442-349542.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Student rights case law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1986 in education
Category:Education in Pierce County, Washington
Category:History of Pierce County, Washington
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:Obscenity controversies
"""

From "Bethune-Hill v. Virginia State Bd. of Elections" ==> """
Bethune-Hill v. Virginia State Bd. of Elections, 580 U.S. ___ (2017), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court evaluated whether Virginia's legislature the Virginia General Assembly violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution by considering racial demographics when drawing the boundaries of twelve of the state's legislative districts., slip. op. at 1. 
The case involves the maps drawn up by the Republican-controlled state legislative bodies to try to maintain their majority within the state. The initial decision by the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia found the 2011 redistricting map to be racially gerrymandered. The state challenged to the Supreme Court, which found the District Court had misapplied a standard and remanded portions of the case while affirming other parts of the decision. On rehearing, the District Court again found the redistricting to be unconstitutional, and the state of Virginia declined to challenge the result. A second petition for the Supreme Court was initiated by the Virginia House of Delegates, appealing the new District Court ruling. The Supreme Court accepted the petition but summarily ruled that the House of Delegates did not have sufficient standing to challenge in lieu of the state itself.
Background
Virginia has historically been a Republican-favored state but in the last few decades, has seen a shift towards the left. The Republicans have managed to hold slim margins in their state legislation despite not having won an election since 2009.
This case arose when Virginia voters filed a lawsuit to challenge the twelve new legislative districts, drawn up by the controlling Republican legislative bodies in 2011, "as unconstitutional racial gerrymanders." At trial, a three-Judge panel from the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia ruled that race was not a predominant factor in the creation of eleven of the districts; the panel "held that race predominates only where there is an 'actual conflict between traditional redistricting criteria and race'".Bethune-Hill, slip op. at 1-2 (citing 141 F. Supp. 3d 505, 524 (E.D. Va. 2015) (internal quotation marks omitted). The three-judge panel also held that race was a predominant factor for the boundaries of the remaining district, "District 75," though the panel held that the legislature did not violate the Equal Protection Clause when drawing the district "because the legislature's use of race was narrowly tailored to a compelling state interest."Bethune-Hill, slip op. at 2. The Panel explained "that a 55% racial target  was necessary in District 75 to avoid diminishing the ability of black voters to elect their preferred candidates, which at the time would have violated §5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965."Bethune-Hill, slip op. at 2 (citing , slip op. at 22). New court-ordered redistricting maps were prepared, which gave the Democrats the edge in future elections.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion written by Justice Anthony Kennedy, the Supreme Court held that the district court applied an incorrect legal standard when it determined that race did not predominate in eleven of the twelve legislative districts.Bethune-Hill, slip op. at 7-11. However, the Court also held that the district court correctly determined that legislature did not violate the constitution when drawing the boundaries of District 75.Bethune-Hill, slip op. at 13-16. The Supreme Court remanded the case back to the district court for further proceedings.Bethune-Hill, slip op. at 17.
Aftermath
Following the remanded hearings, in which the District Court still held that the redistricting was an unconstitutional gerrymandering,Bethune-Hill v. Va. State Bd. of Elections,  the state of Virginia issued a statement that it would not seek additional judicial relief. However, the Virginia House of Representatives instead attempted to appeal on behalf of the state, creating a new case, Virginia House of Delegates v. Bethune-Hill (Docket 18-281). This appeal was directly petitioned to the Supreme Court, which accepted  the case for appeal. On June 17, 2019, the Supreme Court issued its ruling, dismissing the appeal on the basis that the House lacked standing to take over the case from the State., 139 S. Ct. 1945 (2019). In the 5–4 decision, Justice Ginsburg stated that the House, acting alone from Virginia's Senate, did not have standing either directly as a party to the case, or to represent the State's interests.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
 OneVirginia2021
References
External links
 Slip opinion for Virginia House of Delegates v. Bethune-Hill
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2017 in United States case law
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
"""

From "Betterman v. Montana" ==> """
Betterman v. Montana, 578 U.S. 437 (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case which held that the right to a speedy trial does not guarantee the right to speedy sentencing.  It was decided on May 19, 2016.Supreme Court Rules Right to Speedy Trial Ends at Guilty Verdict
 Background 
Brandon T. Betterman was charged with an assault on a family member in 2011, but failed to show up at a Montana court room.No Right to Speedy Sentencing, Justices Rule  In April 2012, Betterman pleaded guilty to jumping bail.  He spent 14 months in a county jail in Montana while waiting for his sentence.  In the summer of 2013, the judge sentenced him to seven years in prison, with four years suspended.No Right to a Speedy Sentence Betterman ultimately appealed his case to the Supreme Court of the United States, where argued that holding him in the county jail for 14 months violated his constitutional rights, because the right to a speedy trial guaranteed under the Speedy Trial Clause of the Sixth Amendment extended to speedy sentencing.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a unanimous 8–0 ruling, the Montana Supreme Court's decision was upheld. Associate Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the decision in an 11-page opinion.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Montana state case law
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Speedy Trial Clause case law
"""

From "Betts v. Brady" ==> """
Betts v. Brady, 316 U.S. 455 (1942), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case that denied counsel to indigent defendants prosecuted by a state. The reinforcement that such a case is not to be reckoned as denial of fundamental due process was famously overruled by Gideon v. Wainwright.
 Background 
In its decision in Johnson v. Zerbst, the Supreme Court had held that defendants in federal courts had a right to counsel guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment. In Powell v. Alabama, the Court had held that state defendants in capital cases were entitled to counsel, even when they could not afford it; however, the right to an attorney in trials in the states was not yet obligatory in all cases as it was in federal courts under Johnson v. Zerbst. In Betts v. Brady, Betts was indicted for robbery and upon his request for counsel, the trial judge refused, forcing Betts to represent himself. He was convicted of robbery, a conviction he eventually appealed to the Supreme Court on the basis that he was being held unlawfully because he had been denied counsel.
Betts filed writ of habeas corpus at the Circuit Court for Washington County, Maryland, and claimed that he had been denied counsel. He then filed a petition for writ of certiorari to the Court of Appeals of Maryland, the state's ultimate appellate court. All of his petitions were denied. Finally, he filed for certiorari to the Supreme Court.
 Issue 
In a 6–3 decision, the Court found that Betts did not have the right to be appointed counsel with Justice Hugo Black emphatically dissenting. In the majority opinion, Justice Owen Roberts stated,
Throughout the opinion, Roberts continually makes the point that not all defendants in all cases will need the assistance of counsel in order to receive a fair trial with due process. Roberts appears to be of the opinion that while counsel may be necessary to receive a fair trial in some cases, it is not in all cases. However, in his dissent, Black wrote:
Black stated in his dissent that the denial of counsel based on financial stability makes it that those in poverty have an increased chance of conviction, which is not equal protection of the laws under the Fourteenth Amendment. During his dissent, Black cited also Johnson v. Zerbst and made the point that had the proceedings of Betts's case been held in federal court, his petition for counsel to be appointed to him would have been accepted, and counsel would have been appointed. Black argued that because this right was guaranteed in federal courts, the Fourteenth Amendment should make the right obligatory upon the states, but the majority disagreed. Black argued also that a man of even average intelligence could not possibly be expected to represent himself without any training in such matters as the law.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 316
References
External links
Category:1942 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment appointment of counsel case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
"""

From "Bi-Metallic Investment Co. v. State Board of Equalization" ==> """
Bi-Metallic Investment Co. v. State Board of Equalization, 239 U.S. 441 (1915), was a United States Supreme Court case which held that due process protections attach only to administrative activities in which a small number of people are concerned, who are exceptionally affected by the act, in each case upon individual grounds. By contrast, rule-making or quasi-legislative activities that affect a large number of people without regard to the facts of individual cases do not implicate due process protections. It is an important case in United States administrative law.
Facts and procedural posture
The State Board of Equalization of the state of Colorado and the Colorado Tax Commission ordered that the valuation of all taxable property in Denver be increased by forty percent.. Plaintiff company brought suit alleging that it had been deprived of its due process protections because a tax had been levied against its property without it being afforded an opportunity to be heard, in violation of the 14th Amendment.239 U.S. at 444.  The Colorado Supreme Court ordered that the suit be dismissed.
The Supreme Court of the United States affirmed the dismissal, holding that no due process rights are implicated when a tax is levied against a large number of people who are all affected equally.239 U.S. at 446.
Issue
Are all property owners entitled to an opportunity to be heard prior to adoption of an administrative order that increases property taxes?
Holding and decision
The Due Process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment provides that the government may not deprive an individual of life, liberty, or property without notice and an opportunity to be heard. Where an agency rule will apply to a vast number of people, the Constitution does not require that each be given an opportunity to be heard directly for the purpose of arguing in favor of or against its adoption. In cases such as this, it would be impractical to allow all individuals affected to offer a direct voice in support of or in opposition to an order."Where a rule of conduct applies to more than a few people, it is impracticable that everyone should have a direct voice in its adoption. . . . Their rights are protected in the only way that they can be in a complex society, by their power, immediate or remote, over those who make the rule."  239 U.S. at 445. Thus, the Constitution is satisfied by the fact that, as voters, the taxpayers exercise power, remote or direct, over those responsible for the order. Accordingly, the judgment of the state supreme court dismissing this suit must be affirmed.
Analysis
The Court distinguishes this case from Londoner v. City and County of Denver, a 1908 case in which the Court held that individual taxpayers had a right to a hearing before an individualized benefits tax was assessed. The apparent conflict between the two cases is explained by Justice Holmes's observation that in Londoner, "a relatively small number of persons was concerned, who were exceptionally affected, in each case upon individual grounds..." In contrast, here the taxpayers in Denver are affected equally, and in large numbers, and it would be an impractical impediment to government to afford all of them individual hearings. Instead, "their rights are protected in the only way that they can be in a complex society, by their power, immediate or remote, over those who make the rule." In other words, there was no violation of the Fourteenth Amendment because the taxpayers of Denver retained the right to organize and vote.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 239
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1915 in United States case law
Category:Property taxes
Category:History of Denver
Category:Legal history of Colorado
"""

From "Bibb v. Navajo Freight Lines, Inc." ==> """
Bibb v. Navajo Freight Lines, Inc., 359 U.S. 520 (1959), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Illinois law requiring trucks to have unique mudguards was unconstitutional under the Commerce clause.
 Background 
The state of Illinois enacted a statute requiring curved mud guards, instead of straight mudflaps on trucks driven in Illinois. Although there was no federal regulation requiring mudflaps or mudguards, Arkansas required straight mudflaps, which were legal in at least 45 states.  The Illinois legislature asserted that the unique curved mudguards would be more useful in preventing stones and other debris to be kicked up from the back of trucks, thus preventing more accidents than other types of mudflaps. The plaintiffs were trucking companies who drove through Illinois and would have to use one form of mudflap equipment while in Illinois, but other mudflap equipment while in other states. The named plaintiff was Navajo Freight Lines, Inc., of New Mexico.
The only issue was whether in the absence of federal regulation, in this context did the Commerce Clause allow one State to prescribe standards that would affect interstate carriers in a way that would conflict with the standards of another State.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court held that the Illinois law was unconstitutional under the Commerce clause, technically the Dormant Commerce Clause.
In Bibb v. Navajo Freight Lines, 359 U.S. 520, 524 (1959), the Supreme Court stated:
The court was unanimous, but Justice Harlan filed a concurrence, which was joined by Justice Stewart. To find the statute unconstitutional, the Court balanced the benefit of the regulation to the state (in the form of increased safety) against the burden on interstate commerce arising from out of state truck drivers having to stop at the Illinois border and change mudguards. Because the benefit to Illinois was small and the burden on interstate commerce large, the Court held that 
 Subsequent developments 
It is considered one of the leading precedents on the law of Interstate commerce.
 See also 
 Kassel v. Consolidated Freightways Corp.: 1981 U.S. Supreme Court case applying the Dormant Commerce Clause to interstate trucking safety regulations
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 359
 References 
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:1959 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Illinois
Category:Vehicle law
Category:Trucking industry in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Automotive accessories
"""

From "Bicknell v. Comstock" ==> """
Bicknell v. Comstock, 113 U.S. 149 (1885), was an action to recover the cost paid for a tract of land in Iowa and the value of the improvements made by the defendant. The complaint alleged a conveyance by Bicknell to one Bennett, the subsequent transfer to the defendant by sundry mesne conveyances, valuable improvements on the premises made by Bennett and his grantees, and a failure of title in Bicknell when the deed was made by reason of a superior title in the State of Iowa under a land grant. Judgment below for plaintiff, to reverse which this writ of error was brought..
The mutilation (without the consent and against the protest of the grantee) of a patent for public land by the Commissioner of the Land Office, after its execution and transmission to the grantee, and the like mutilation of the record thereof, do not affect the validity of the patent. A state statute of limitations as to real actions begins to run in favor of a claimant under a patent from the United States on the issue of the patent and its transmission to the grantee.
The lapse of time provided by a statute of limitations as to real actions vests a perfect title in the holder.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States property case law
Category:Legal history of Iowa
"""

From "Biddle v. Perovich" ==> """
Biddle v. Perovich, 274 U.S. 480 (1927), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that under his power "to grant reprieves and pardons for offenses against the United States" (Article II, Section 2), the President may commute a sentence of death to life imprisonment without the convict's consent. Burdick v. United States, 236 U.S. 79, limited page 274 U.S. 486. Response to a certificate of questions from the circuit court of appeals, arising upon review of a judgment of the district court in habeas corpus discharging Perovich from the Leavenworth Penitentiary.
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1927 in United States case law
Category:United States clemency case law
Category:Recipients of American presidential clemency
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
"""

From "Biden v. Nebraska" ==> """
Biden v. Nebraska (Docket 22–506) is a pending United States Supreme Court case related to the forgiveness of federal student loans by the Biden administration in 2022.
 Background 
While campaigning for president in 2020, Joe Biden promised to cancel up to $10,000 of federal student loan debt per borrower. After being elected president, Biden called for the 117th U.S. Congress to pass a bill to facilitate $10,000 in student loan forgiveness. In August 2022, Biden announced that he would use executive action to forgive $10,000 in student loans for borrowers earning less than $125,000 individually and $250,000 as married couples, including an additional $10,000 for Pell Grant recipients. The Biden administration invoked the HEROES Act as the basis for his executive authority to forgive loans. In particular, the administration utilized language that states that the U.S. Secretary of Education has the authority to "waive or modify any statutory or regulatory provision applicable to the student financial assistance programs under Title IV" of the Higher Education Act of 1965 to ensure that "affected individuals" are not placed in a worse position financially in relation to that financial assistance. Affected individuals include, among others, those who "reside or are employed in an area declared a disaster area in connection with a national emergency" and those who "suffered direct economic hardship as a result of a war, military operation, or national emergency."
On September 29, 2022, Nebraska, Missouri, Arkansas, Iowa, Kansas and South Carolina filed a lawsuit in the Eastern Missouri U.S. District Court challenging the forgiveness program, asserting that it violated the separation of powers and the Administrative Procedure Act. The states asserted they had standing because the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 bars them from taxing loans that are discharged for 3 years. Missouri in particular also asserted that it had standing because the Higher Education Loan Authority of the State of Missouri (MOHELA) is a public entity that would lose revenue from student loan forgiveness and become less able to fund Missouri's student financial aid program. On October 20, 2022, district judge Henry Autrey dismissed the suit, holding that the states lacked standing to sue. The states appealed, and on November 14, 2022, the U.S. 8th Circuit Court of Appeals granted an injunction pending appeal.
Separately, on October 10, 2022, two student loan borrowers who did not qualify for the proposed debt forgiveness filed a lawsuit in the Northern Texas U.S. District Court, seeking to vacate the student loan forgiveness program. The borrowers asserted they had standing due to their inability to voice their disagreement with the program through a formal notice-and-comment rule making process required by the Administrative Procedure Act. On November 10, 2022, district judge Mark Pittman issued an order to strike down the student loan forgiveness program. On November 30, 2022, the U.S. 5th Circuit Court of Appeals declined to issue a hold on the order in response to an appeal from the U.S. Department of Education.
 Supreme Court 
After the 8th Circuit granted an injunction pending appeal, the federal government sought to vacate the stay at the Supreme Court on November 18, 2022. On December 1, 2022, the court deferred resolution of the application, granted certiorari before judgment and set the case for argument in the February 2023 sitting. On December 2, 2022, the Biden administration requested that the court either hear the government's appeal from Pittman's order alongside the Nebraska case or issue a hold on his order. On December 12, the Supreme Court agreed to hear arguments in the second case, Department of Education v. Brown, jointly with Biden v. Nebraska. On January 4, 2023, the Justice and Education Departments filed a brief with the Court that argued that the plaintiffs failed to demonstrate legal injury from the proposal and thereby lacked standing under Article III, and that denied the claims made by the plaintiffs that the administration was overstepping its statutory authority in promulgating the proposal under the HEROES Act.
Oral arguments for both Department of Education v. Brown, jointly with Biden v. Nebraska were held on February 28, 2023. Many journalists and legal commentators stated that based on oral arguments, the Court seemed likely to overturn the Biden debt relief program.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States education case law
Category:Higher education case law
Category:United States standing case law
"""

From "Biden v. Sierra Club" ==> """
Biden v. Sierra Club (previously captioned Trump v. Sierra Club) was a United States Supreme Court case involving the appropriation of funds used to expand the Mexico–United States barrier under the presidency of Donald Trump, colloquially known as the Trump wall. Congress did not grant direct appropriations to fund expansion of the wall, leading Trump to sign the National Emergency Concerning the Southern Border of the United States in February 2019 which, citing his powers under the National Emergency Act, took approximately  of funds appropriated to military spending towards construction of the wall. Numerous states and non-governmental organizations filed suit shortly after the order, resulting in a Ninth Circuit ruling that deemed the transfer of funds inappropriate under the Appropriations Clause and leading to the Supreme Court challenge.
Trump's successor, Joe Biden, terminated the national emergency and ceased wall construction, making the case moot. The Supreme Court vacated the ruling and remanded the case to lower courts for any potentially necessary further proceedings.
Background
Portions of the U.S.–Mexico border have had barriers in place to restrict illegal crossings of immigrants from Mexico since 2006, though only about half of the  border is barriered as of 2018. One of Donald Trump's presidential campaign pledges was to greatly expand and fortify the border wall to further restrict illegal immigration into the U.S. Shortly after his inauguration to office in January 2017, Trump issued Executive Order 13767 instructing the government to begin construction of the expanded wall, but as the Order lacked any funding directive, no such construction could begin.
By 2018, Trump sought direct funding for the border wall construction from Congress to be given to the Department of Homeland Security through appropriations bills, with an estimated  required to complete full construction of the wall; this included  of new wall and improvements to  of existing structures. For the 2018 United States federal budget that passed in March 2018, while Trump had requested a first trunch of  for construction for the wall, but only  was allocated for primary and secondary fencing, barrier planning and design, and border security technology, but no wall construction. Trump had put pressure on Congress to pass the Build the Wall, Enforce the Law Act of 2018 which would have funded the full costs for construction and ongoing operations, but the bill failed to pass out of the House of Representatives following its change in leadership from Republican to Democratic after the 2018 elections.
As the 2019 United States federal budget was formulated, Trump again asked for  for construction of the wall which the Senate had confirmed but the House refused to allocate, and Trump stated he would veto any budget without fund for the border wall. While parts of the budget were passed through the year, including the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) in August 2019, most other parts of the federal budget remained in limbo as the President and Congress engaged in partisan fighting over the border wall funding. This conflict was a major contributing factor to the 2018–19 government shutdown. By February 2019, both the House and Senate had come to a compromise position on the border wall, allocating about  for a  stretch of the border wall. While Trump signed the compromised budget and border wall bill to end the shutdown, he then announced his intentions to declare a national emergency as to evoke powers of the National Emergency Act and re-allocate funds to build the border wall.
National Emergency Order and subsequent lawsuits
Trump declared the National Emergency Concerning the Southern Border of the United States on February 15, 2019, two days after signing the 2019 budget into law. The order directed that about  of previously allocated funds from Congress to departments within the Executive branch be re-allocated to construction of the border wall. This included  from the Department of Defense's military construction,  for the Department of Defense's drug interdiction activities, and  from the Treasury Department's forfeiture fund. In the case of the , Trump argued that Section 8005 of the 2019 Defense Appropriations Bill, which states "[t]hat such authority to transfer may not be used unless for higher priority items, based on unforeseen military requirements, than those for which originally appropriated and in no case where the item for which funds are requested has been denied by the Congress." allowed him to transfer funds from the Defense Department to the Department of Homeland Security for the building the border wall as an unforeseen requirement. 
The order was immediately challenged in a number of cases. Two challenges were filed at the United States District Court of the Northern District of California; one led by a group of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) including the Sierra Club and the Southern Border Communities Coalition, represented by the American Civil Liberties Union, and a second by a coalition of 20 states led by California. Both suits challenged the re-appropriation of the  of the Defense drug interdiction funds for wall construction as unconstitutional under the Appropriations Clause. Judge Haywood Gilliam presided over both cases.
Judge Gilliam issued a preliminary injunction in the Sierra Club case on May 24, 2019, blocking the use of the targeted funds for border wall construction on the basis that the plaintiff's challenge had a good chance of succeeding on the merits. Gilliam asserted that the re-appropriation of funds by Trump violated the separation of powers. Gilliam also stated that Trump's claim of being able to reallocate funds under the National Emergency Act for "unforeseen" events was belied since he had been asking for funding since 2018. Judge Gilliam's injunction was upheld on appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit on July 3, 2019. The administration petitioned the Supreme Court to challenge the injunction, and in a 5–4 ruling issued July 26, 2019, put a stay on the injunction as litigation continued, on the basis that the plaintiffs in the case may not have standing to challenge Trump's order. In the intervening year, about  of new border wall was constructed.
Judge Gilliam issued joint rulings on both cases on June 28, 2019, ruling against Trump's re-allocation of  of Defense Department funds set by Congress.Sierra Club v. Trump, No. 4:19-cv-00892, 2019 WL 2715422 (N.D. Cal. June 28, 2019);  The administration appealed both cases to the Ninth Circuit.
The Ninth Circuit on review issued their ruling on both cases on June 26, 2020, finding in a 2–1 ruling in both that the re-appropriation of funds was unconstitutional violating the separation of powers.Sierra Club v. Trump, 963 F.3d 874 (9th Cir. 2020);  The Ninth also affirmed that the NGOs had standing in their suit as the ongoing wall construction was impacting the environment of which they had a vested interest in, and thus were damaged by it. As a result, the Sierra Club case plaintiffs petitioned the Supreme Court to reconsider their prior stay based on the findings of the Ninth Circuit in July 2020, but the Court declined to lift the stay in a 5–4 decision issued on July 31, 2020.
Supreme Court
The Trump administration petitioned the Supreme Court challenging the Ninth Circuit decision of both the Sierra Club and the states' case, questing both the standing of the plaintiffs in the original suits, and the authority for the re-allocation of appropriated funds pursuant to Section 8005 of 2019 NDAA was lawful. The Supreme Court granted certiorari for the case on October 19, 2020, anticipating to be heard during the 2020–21 term. 
After the Supreme Court's grant of certiorari, Joe Biden became President of the United States. Biden's early actions in office undid several of Trump's policies, among them those related to illegal immigration. This including formally abandoning the National Emergency that Trump has ordered, with Biden promising not to use any funds to build the wall. Oral arguments for Biden v. Sierra Club had been scheduled to be held in February 2021, but as a result of Biden's revocations, acting Solicitor General Elizabeth Prelogar requested the Supreme Court postpone them, which the Court agreed to.
Subsequently, in orders on July 2, 2021, the Supreme Court granted the government's request to vacate the ruling from the Ninth and remand the case there to determine if any further litigation was required.
References
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Donald Trump litigation
Category:Immigration to the United States
Category:Sierra Club litigation
Category:Trump administration controversies
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Mexico–United States barrier
"""

From "Biden v. Texas" ==> """
Biden v. Texas, 597 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to administrative law and immigration.
 Background 
In December 2018 under the Trump administration, the United States Department of Homeland Security announced its promulgation of the Remain in Mexico policy, formally titled the Migrant Protection Protocols (MPP), which required asylum seekers to remain in Mexico while officials reviewed their case. In April 2019, the United States District Court for the Northern District of California enjoined its enforcement. In May 2019, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit stayed the preliminary injunction pending disposition of the appeal. In February 2020, the Ninth Circuit affirmed the preliminary injunction, over the dissent of Judge Ferdinand Fernandez, and in March, the same panel denied a request by the federal government to stay the injunction pending disposition of a petition for writ of certiorari in the Supreme Court of the United States. The Supreme Court granted that request, with Justice Sonia Sotomayor dissenting. In October 2020, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the appeal. After President Joe Biden took office in January 2021, the Court held the case in abeyance. It vacated the Ninth Circuit's judgment as moot in June after the government rescinded MPP.
In April 2021, Texas and Missouri challenged the rescission of MPP in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas. In August, Judge Matthew J. Kacsmaryk held the rescission of MPP was arbitrary and capricious, agreeing with the states that allowing asylum seekers to stay within the United States imposed undue costs on these states, and issued a permanent injunction. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit denied a stay pending appeal, as did the Supreme Court, the latter in a 6–3 vote. In December, the Fifth Circuit again ruled against the federal government, this time on the merits of the appeal.
The federal government filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on February 18, 2022. Oral arguments were held on April 26, 2022. On June 30, 2022, the Supreme Court reversed the Fifth Circuit by a 5–4 vote and held that the federal government has the authority to revoke the Migrant Protection Protocols. It was ruled that the 1996 law which amended the Immigration and Nationality Act, and which was used to justify the authority Congress had over the Remain in Mexico policy, did not deny the President the authority to end the protocols.
Aftermath
The case was then returned to the lower courts for additional proceedings determining whether the Biden Administration's action was "arbitrary and capricious" in violation of the Administrative Procedure Act, which governs how federal agencies develop and issue regulations. On December 15, 2022, U.S. district judge Matthew Kacsmaryk prevented the Biden Administration from officially ending the program by ruling that the policy should stay in place while legal challenges play out. However, Kacsmaryk did not order the policy reinstated. In February 2023, Mexico's Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced it rejects any efforts to reinstate the policy for asylum-seekers.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "Bigelow v. Virginia" ==> """
Bigelow v. Commonwealth of Virginia, 421 U.S. 809 (1975), was a United States Supreme Court case that established First Amendment protection for advertising.Greenhouse, Linda. Becoming Justice Blackmun. Times Books. 2005. Page 119.
 Background 
Court precedents had long considered advertising mere "commercial speech," giving it little, if any, protection under the First Amendment.Greenhouse, Linda. Becoming Justice Blackmun. Times Books. 2005. Page 116.
In 1972, the American Civil Liberties Union filed a Supreme Court appeal on behalf of a newspaper editor in Charlottesville, Virginia who had published an advertisement for an abortion referral service in New York (where abortion was legal).Greenhouse, Pages 116-117 Virginia charged the editor, Jeffrey C. Bigelow, with violating a state law that made it a crime to encourage abortions via lectures, advertisements, or any other manner.Greenhouse, Page 117 Bigelow was convicted and fined; the Virginia Supreme Court affirmed his conviction, rejecting his First Amendment challenge by pointing to the lowered protections on commercial advertisements.
Roe v. Wade was pending when Bigelow's appeal first reached the Supreme Court, leading the justices to defer action. After Roe was decided, the justices remanded Bigelow to Virginia, but the state court reaffirmed Bigelow's conviction; Bigelow filed a new appeal to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The decision was announced June 16, 1975.Greenhouse, Page 119 Justices William Rehnquist and Byron White cast the only votes to uphold the conviction.Greenhouse, Pages 117-118  Justice Blackmun wrote the majority opinion, and was joined by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger and Justices Thurgood Marshall, Potter Stewart, William Brennan, William O. Douglas, and Lewis Powell.Greenhouse, Page 118
Justice Harry Blackmun wrote that the First Amendment "should prevent states from prohibiting advertisements of products or conduct that is clearly legal at the place advertised." The Court also noted the political nature of abortion and its status as a constitutionally protected fundamental right.Bigelow, 421 U.S. at 822.
 Subsequent developments 
Bigelow was used as precedent in a case in the 1975 term of the Court. In Virginia State Board of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, Blackmun struck down a state law that prohibited pharmacists from advertising the prices of prescription drugs. Justice William Rehnquist was the only dissenter.Greenhouse, Page 120
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States commercial speech case law
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Legal history of Virginia
"""

From "Bigelow v. RKO Radio Pictures, Inc." ==> """
Bigelow v. RKO Radio Pictures, Inc., 327 U.S. 251 (1946), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court allowing an action to recover compensatory damages under the antitrust statutes.  The jury had returned a verdict for $120,000 in petitioner's favor, covering a five-year period where plaintiff suffered due to respondents' antitrust conspiracy.  The trial court, sitting in the Northern District of Illinois, gave judgment for treble damages, as prescribed by § 4 of the Clayton Act.  The 7th Circuit reversed on the sole ground that the evidence of damage was not sufficient for submission to the jury, and directed the entry of judgment for respondents non obstante veredicto (notwithstanding the verdict).150 F.2d 877 (7th Cir. 1945)  The Supreme Court granted certiorari to determine whether the evidence of damage was sufficient to support the verdict.  Respondents argued that any measure of damages would be too speculative and uncertain to afford an accurate measure of the amount of the damage.327 U.S. 251, 263  The Supreme Court disagreed, not wanting to let the respondent defeat a remedy because its antitrust violation was so effective and complete.  The Court held that the jury could return a verdict for the plaintiffs, even though damages could not be measured with the exactness which would otherwise have been possible, so long as the jury made a "just and reasonable estimate of the damage based on relevant data".Id. at 264  The judgment of the district court was affirmed and the judgment of the court of appeals was reversed.
Facts
Petitioners, owners of the Jackson Park motion picture theatre in Chicago, alleged that respondents, some of whom, like RKO Pictures, were distributors of films, and some of whom owned or controlled theatres in Chicago, entered into a conspiracy which continued from some time before November 1936 to the date the suit was brought, July 28, 1942.  During the conspiracy, films were distributed among cinemas in Chicago in such a manner that theatres owned by some of the conspirators were able to show movies before independent theater operators.  Independent exhibitors were not able to show new movies until the conspirators had finished with a "first run".
The first question was whether there was an unlawful conspiracy, and the second question was how to measure the damages for any loss, given the difficulty of knowing how many people might have attended different films.
Judgment
The Supreme Court found that it was "indisputable that the jury could have found that ... a first run theater possessed competitive advantages over later run theaters" and that this discriminatory release was "damaging to petitioners".Id. at 260 The problem, however, was the uncertainty in determining to what amount those damages should total. The petitioners submitted two methodologies for calculating damages.  The first was the yardstick method, which compared the earnings from petitioner's theater, Jackson Park, during the conspiracy to the earnings of its competitor, the Maryland Theater.  The two theaters were comparable in size, although the Jackson Park theater was "superior in location, equipment, and attractiveness to patrons."Id. at 258  The Maryland Theater, however, was owned by Paramount Pictures, and benefited from the conspiracy.  The evidence showed that during the five-year period, Maryland's profit exceeded petitioner's like profit by $115,982.34.
The second measure was the before & after method.  Here, the Court looked to the years 1933-1937, where the petitioner had successfully showed at least some first run movies, to the five-year period where the conspiracy was established to have happened, and petitioner was completely shut out of first run movies despite its best efforts.  This comparison showed a falling off of petitioners' profits during the five-year period aggregating $125,659.00.
The 7th Circuit concluded that the jury had adopted the before & after method, but that this proof did not furnish a proper measure of damage for the reason that it could not be proved what petitioner's earnings would have been in the absence of the illegal distribution of films.  The Supreme Court reversed, holding that a damage award does not need to be mathematically precise, but it must be a just and reasonable estimate based on the evidence presented, and not based on speculation.  Petitioners are able to submit yardstick or before & after estimates, but they must be careful to use comparable data.
See also
 United States antitrust law
 United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc., 334 U.S. 131 (1948), deciding the fate of movie studios owning their own theatres and holding exclusivity rights on which theatres would show their films.
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 327
References
External links
Category:Judicial remedies
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:RKO General
Category:1946 in American cinema
Category:History of film
Category:Media case law
"""

From "Bilski v. Kappos" ==> """
Bilski v. Kappos, 561 U.S. 593 (2010), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States holding that the machine-or-transformation test is not the sole test for determining the patent eligibility of a process, but rather "a useful and important clue, an investigative tool, for determining whether some claimed inventions are processes under § 101.".  In so doing, the Supreme Court affirmed the rejection of an application for a patent on a method of hedging losses in one segment of the energy industry by making investments in other segments of that industry, on the basis that the abstract investment strategy set forth in the application was not patentable subject matter.
Majority opinion
The Court affirmed the judgment of the Federal Circuit in In re Bilski, the case below.  However, it rejected the machine-or-transformation test as a sole test of patentability based on an interpretation of the language of § 101.Bilski, slip op. at 8.  The Court rejected the Federal Circuit's statutory interpretation regarding the word "process," finding the definition in § 100(b) to be sufficient without turning to the canon of noscitur a sociis.Bilski, slip op. at 7.  Section 100(b) defines process as a "process, art or method, and includes a new use of a known process, machine, manufacture, composition of matter, or material."
The Court looked to Gottschalk v. Benson and Parker v. Flook, and noted that both had explicitly refused to rely on the machine-or-transformation test as the sole test for patent eligibility...
The Court also rejected a categorical exclusion of business method patents from eligibility, reasoning that the definition of "process" in § 100(b) includes the word "method," which appears to comprehend some forms of business method patents.Bilski, slip op. at 10.  35 U.S.C. § 273(b)(1) also provides as a defense to patent infringement prior use of a "method of conducting or doing business."  By acknowledging the defense, the statute also acknowledged the possibility of business method patents.Bilski, slip op. at 11.
Regarding Bilski's claimed subject matter, the Court found that his method of optimizing a fixed bill system for energy markets was an unpatentable abstract idea.Bilski, slip op. at 15-16.  Despite taking a broader reading of patent eligibility for processes, according to the majority opinion "this Court by no means desires to preclude the Federal Circuit’s development of other limiting criteria that further the Patent Act’s purposes and are not inconsistent with its text."Bilski, slip op. at 16.
In the plurality sections of Kennedy's opinion, an overall Court minority opinion as not joined by Scalia, he notes that strict adherence to only "the machine-or-transformation test would create uncertainty as to the patentability of software, advanced diagnostic medicine techniques, and inventions based on linear programming, data compression, and the manipulation of digital signals" but "the Court today is not commenting on the patentability of any particular invention, let alone holding that any of the above-mentioned technologies from the Information Age should or should not receive patent protection."Bilski, slip op. at 9-10.  Kennedy also suggests that a categorical exclusion of some types of business methods from patent eligibility might be legitimate if that rule was based on the idea that purely abstract ideas are not patentable.Bilski, slip op. at 12.
Concurrences
The holding of the Court was unanimous, but there were two concurring opinions, and no single opinion commanded a majority of the Court as to all parts.
Stevens' concurrence
Justice Stevens' concurrence, joined by Justices Ginsburg, Breyer, and Sotomayor, argues that the majority interpret the term "process" too broadly.Bilski, slip op. at 2 (Stevens, J., concurring) Stevens rejected the majority's reliance on the mention of the word "method" in 35 U.S.C. § 273(b), saying that the statute, originally known as the First Inventors Defense Act of 1999, was only passed by Congress in response to the confusion created by State Street Bank v. Signature Financial Group. 149 F.3d 1368 (Fed. Cir. 1998).  He would categorically exclude business methods from patentability, as they have not traditionally been patentable in the U.S., despite significant innovations in business methods.Bilski, slip op. at 33 (Stevens, J., concurring)
It was the final opinion in Stevens' 35-year career on the Supreme Court. His retirement became effective the next day.
Breyer's concurrence
Justice Breyer's concurrence began by agreeing with Justice Stevens "that a 'general method of engaging in business transactions' is not a patentable 'process'..." In a second part, joined by Justice Scalia, Breyer highlighted four points which he felt were consistent with both the opinion of the Court and Justice Stevens' concurring opinion:Bilski, slip op. at 1 (Breyer, J., concurring).
that although the law's description of what is patentable in §101  "is broad, it is not without limit."
the Court has repeatedly stated that "transformation and reduction of an article to a different state or thing is the clue to the patentability of a process claim that does not include particular machines."
"while the machine-or-transformation test has always been a 'useful and important clue,' it has never been the 'sole test' for determining patentability."
"although the machine-or-transformation test is not the only test for patentability, this by no means indicates that anything which produces a 'useful, concrete, and tangible result,' [as held in State Street Bank v. Signature Financial Group] is patentable."
Part II sums up by stating "it is my view that, in reemphasizing that the 'machine-or-transformation' test is not necessarily the sole test of patentability, the Court intends neither to de-emphasize the test’s usefulness nor to suggest that many patentable processes lie beyond its reach."
Impact
The Court's opinion in this case is seen as moderating the machine-or-transformation test requirement instated by the Federal Circuit in In re Bilski, while also leaving little guidance as to what should be considered patentable under § 101.   "[T]he outcome from the decision might be best stated as 'business as usual.' "
In light of the decision in Bilski v. Kappos, the Supreme Court granted judicial review, vacated the decisions of the Federal Circuit, and remanded to the Federal Circuit for reconsideration the cases of Mayo Collaborative Services v. Prometheus Laboratories, Inc.. and Classen Immunotherapies, Inc. v. Biogen Idec.Supreme Court Orders.  Tuesday June 29, 2010.  The two claims related to medical diagnostics, and the claims in Prometheus were found patentable under the machine-or-transformation test while the claims in Classen were not.  In December 2010, the Federal Circuit applied the broad eligibility of Bilski in Research Corp. Technologies v. Microsoft Corp., which upheld the patent eligibility of a process for digital image halftoning.
Patent Examiners and Practitioners were given interim instructions on the interpretation of Bilski v. Kappos both during the appeal process (on August 29, 2009) and shortly after the decision (on July 27, 2010) in documents issued by the USPTO.Interim Guidance for Determining Subject Matter Eligibility for Process Claims in View of Bilski v. Kappos
See also
 In re Bilski
 Stanford v. Roche
 CyberSource Corp. v. Retail Decisions, Inc.
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 561
References
Further reading
External links
 Transcript of oral arguments of Bilski v. Kappos
 Links to Briefs, incl. amici, on Cert. petition and merits in Bilski v. Kappos (Retrieved November 10, 2009).
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Bingham v. Cabot (1795)" ==> """
Bingham v. Cabot, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 19 (1795), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the Cabot family, a wealthy Yankee shipping family from New England.  In the case the court held in a mixed seriatim opinion:
On the return of the record (to which were annexed several depositions and papers produced in the court below, as well as the papers referred to in the bill of exceptions) the following errors were assigned, the defendant in error pleaded in nullo est erratum, and issue was thereupon joined:
That judgment had been given for the plaintiff, instead of the defendant below, on the 3rd Count.
That the circuit court, proceeding as a court of common law, in an action on the case, for money had and received, etc., had no jurisdiction of the cause; the question, as it appears on the record, being a question of prize, or no prize, or wholly dependent thereon, and, as such, it was, exclusively of admiralty jurisdiction.
That the evidence referred to in the bill of exceptions ought not to have been rejected on the trial of the cause.
The judges, after some advisement, delivered their opinions seriatim.Bingham v. Cabot, .
 See also 
 Bingham v. Cabot (1798)
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rutledge Court
Category:1795 in United States case law
"""

From "Bingham v. Cabot (1798)" ==> """
Bingham v. Cabot, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 382 (1798), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the Cabot family, a wealthy Yankee shipping family from New England. It was the second such case following the 1795 Bingham v. Cabot case. In the case the Court held that in diversity suits in federal courts, a party must allege appropriate citizenship and not simply residence, otherwise it may be stricken from the docket..
 See also 
 Bingham v. Cabot (1795)
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
Category:1798 in United States case law
"""

From "Birchfield v. North Dakota" ==> """
Birchfield v. North Dakota, 579 U.S. ___ (2016) is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the search incident to arrest doctrine permits law enforcement to conduct warrantless breath tests but not blood tests on suspected drunk drivers., slip op. at 1, 32 (2016).
 Background 
Birchfield was a consolidation of three cases: Birchfield v. North Dakota, Bernard v. Minnesota, and Beylund v. Levi. Birchfield was charged with violation of a North Dakota statute for refusing to submit to blood alcohol content testing; Bernard was charged with a violation of a Minnesota statute for refusing to submit to breath alcohol testing; Beylund underwent a blood alcohol test consistent with North Dakota's implied consent law and challenged the constitutionality of that law after an administrative hearing based on the test results led to the revocation of his license.
 Issue 
In Missouri v. McNeely, 569 U.S. 141 (2013), the Court held that in the absence of an argument based on facts specific to the case "the natural dissipation of alcohol from the bloodstream does not always constitute an exigency justifying the warrantless taking of a blood sample". In contrast to the court's 1966 finding in Schmerber v. California, 384 U. S. 757  held that the same exigent circumstance did exist by inferring that an officer might reasonably believe it to exist. The court "did not address any potential justification for warrantless testing of drunk driving suspects, except for the exception 'at issue in the case,' namely, the exception for exigent circumstances".
The issue before the court was how the "search incident to arrest doctrine applies to breath and blood tests". Is warrantless alcohol testing incident to drunk driving arrests to determine blood alcohol content a violation of the Fourth Amendment?
 Decision 
The Court held that both breath tests and blood tests constitute a search under the Fourth Amendment. The Court then proceeded to analyze both types of tests under the search incident to arrest doctrine, weighing on the one hand "the degree to which it intrudes upon an individual’s privacy" and on the other hand "the degree to which it is needed for the promotion of legitimate governmental interests." Applied to breath tests, the Court concluded that breath tests do not implicate significant privacy concerns. Blood tests, on the other hand, are significantly more intrusive. Turning to the government's interest in the tests, the Court concluded that serves the very important function of providing an incentive to cooperate in alcohol testing. Weighing these interests, the Court concluded that requiring breath tests is constitutional; however, requiring blood tests is not, as the goal of traffic safety can be obtained by less invasive means (such as breath tests).
In the majority opinion, in addressing the limits of implied consent laws, the court stated that while their "prior opinions have referred approvingly to the general concept of implied-consent laws" that "there must be a limit to the consequences to which motorists may be deemed to have consented by virtue of a decision to drive on public roads" and "that motorists could be deemed to have consented to only those conditions that are 'reasonable' in that they have a 'nexus' to the privilege of driving".
The Court ruled in favor of Birchfield who was prosecuted for refusing a warrantless blood draw and ruled against Bernard who refused a warrantless breath test.  Beylund, on the other hand consented to a blood test after police advised him that he was required to do.  The court therefore remanded Beylund's case back to the state court "to reevaluate Beylund's consent given the partial inaccuracy of the officer's advisory." The Supreme Court of North Dakota court subsequently avoided the issue by holding that, even assuming the consent was involuntary, the Exclusionary Rule does not apply in the administrative hearing context and thus affirmed suspension of his license for testing over the prohibited level set forth in the implied consent / administrative license suspension statute.
 Justice Thomas' dissent of warrant-required blood tests 
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote that "the search-incident-to-arrest exception to the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement should apply categorically to all blood alcohol tests, including blood tests. By drawing an arbitrary line between blood tests and breath tests, the majority destabilized the law of exceptions to the warrant requirement and made the jobs of both police officers and lower courts more difficult.""Birchfield v. North Dakota." Oyez, www.oyez.org/cases/2015/14-1468. Accessed 9 Dec. 2019. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of Birchfield in a 7–1 majority stating that the refusal to submit to a warrantless blood test may not be criminalized as it is a violation of the petitioner's Fourth Amendment right against unlawful searches and is protected by neither the search incident to arrest nor exigent circumstances exceptions of the Fourth Amendment's warrant requirement. The Supreme Court also stated that the same rationale applied to the decision of warrantless breath tests was not relevant based on the implication of serious privacy concerns brought about by the administration of blood tests which could be used to obtain information other than the BAC of the suspected drunk driver as well as the intrusive process used to obtain a blood sample.
 Justice Sotomayor's and Justice Ginsburg's dissent of warrantless breath tests 
Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote that "the Fourth Amendment’s prohibition against warrantless searches should apply to breath tests unless exigent circumstances justify one in a particular case. In establishing exceptions to the warrant requirement, the Court has routinely examined whether a legitimate government interest justified the search in light of the individual’s privacy interest and whether that determination should be made based on a case-by-case analysis or a categorical rule." Justice Sotomayor argued that the administration of a warrantless breath test was not imperative to the prevention of drunk drivers as the suspected drunk driver has already been removed from the roadway and a search warrant could be obtained if necessary. The Supreme Court ruled 6–2 in favor of The State of North Dakota stating that warrantless breath tests are protected under the search incident to arrest warrant exception of the Fourth Amendment's warrant requirement and require minimal physical intrusion. The Supreme Court majority also argued that the administration of a warrantless breath tests serves the government's objectives of deterring drunk drivers as well as effectively allowing law enforcement officers to remove already present drunk drivers from the roadways.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
2017 University of Utah Hospital incident
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Alcohol law in the United States
Category:Blood tests
Category:Breathalyzer
Category:Driving under the influence
Category:Legal history of North Dakota
"""

From "Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents" ==> """
Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents, 403 U.S. 388 (1971), was a case in which the US Supreme Court ruled that an implied cause of action existed for an individual whose Fourth Amendment protection against unreasonable search and seizures had been violated by the Federal Bureau of Narcotics. The victim of such a deprivation could sue for the violation of the Fourth Amendment itself despite the lack of any federal statute authorizing such a suit. The existence of a remedy for the violation was implied by the importance of the right violated.
The case has been subsequently interpreted to create a cause of action against the federal government similar to the one in 42 U.S.C. § 1983 against the states.
Background
Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN) agents searched the Brooklyn home of the plaintiff, Webster Bivens, and arrested him without a warrant. Drug charges were filed but were later dismissed by a US commissioner (now called magistrate judge). Bivens filed a lawsuit alleging the violation of his Fourth Amendment protection from unreasonable search and seizure. The government claimed that the violation allowed for only a state law claim for invasion of privacy and that the Fourth Amendment provides no cause of action but only a rebuttable defense for the FBN agents.
The district court agreed and dismissed the suit for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction and for Bivens's failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed. The Supreme Court granted certiorari on that secondary issue of whether a plaintiff can bring a claim in federal court based solely on an alleged violation of his Fourth Amendment rights.
Bivens was represented pro bono by Stephen A. Grant.
Decision
The Supreme Court, in an opinion by Justice Brennan, laid down a rule that it will infer a private right of action for monetary damages where no other federal remedy is provided for the vindication of a constitutional right, based on the principle that "for every wrong, there is a remedy". The court reasoned based upon a presumption that where there is a violation of a right, the plaintiff can recover whatever he could recover under any civil action, unless Congress has expressly curtailed that right of recovery, or there exist some "special factors counseling hesitation".
Concurrence
Justice Harlan voted with the majority to reverse the lower court but also wrote a separate concurring opinion.
Harlan particularly emphasized the special importance of constitutional rights. He presented that it was well-settled, even undeniable, that a suit for injunction based on a constitutional right had been long recognized in the Federal courts. However, a suit for damages should be as or more acceptable.
Dissents
Dissenting opinions were written by Chief Justice Burger and by Justices Black and Blackmun.
Chief Justice Burger's dissent asserted that the decision was legislating an area that should be left to Congress. Justice Black basically agreed with Justice Burger and was worried about the growing docket. Justice Blackmun went a step further, saying the decision "opens the door for another avalanche of new federal cases".
Subsequent case law
In Davis v. Passman, , the Supreme Court upheld a Fifth Circuit opinion that held that even though there existed "an explicit congressional prohibition against judicial remedies for those in petitioner's position", the Court declined to infer that Congress also sought to foreclose an alternative remedy directly under the Fifth Amendment.
 Stafford v. Briggs, 
In Carlson v. Green, , the court held that a damages remedy would be available despite the absence of any statute conferring such a right, unless: (1) Congress had provided an alternative remedy which it "explicitly declared to be a substitute for recovery directly under the Constitution"; or (2) the defendant could demonstrate any "special factors counseling hesitation".
 Chappell v. Wallace, 
In Bush v. Lucas, , the Court refrained from implying a Bivens remedy due to the availability of alternative remedies for the first time.
 Mitchell v. Forsyth, 
 Anderson v. Creighton, 
 United States v. Stanley, 
 Schweiker v. Chilicky, 
 McCarthy v. Madigan, 
In FDIC v. Meyer, , and Correctional Services Corporation v. Malesko, , the court held that the fundamental logic supporting Bivens was to deter constitutional violations by individual officers, not federal agencies.
 Farmer v. Brennan, 
 Saucier v. Katz, 
 Christopher v. Harbury, 
 Hartman v. Moore, 
In Wilkie v. Robbins, , the court held that the difficulty inherent in "defining limits to legitimate zeal on the public's behalf in situations where hard bargaining is to be expected" was a "special factor" that counseled against the availability of a Bivens remedy.
 Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 
 Hui v. Castaneda, 
 Ashcroft v. al-Kidd, 
In Minneci v. Pollard, , the court denied a Bivens action for Eighth Amendment violations committed by employees of a private prison because "state tort law authorizes adequate alternative damages actions … that provide both significant deterrence and compensation", despite acknowledging that these officials were "act[ing] under color of federal law".
 Reichle v. Howards, 
 Wood v. Moss, 
 Ziglar v. Abbasi, 
 Hernandez v. Mesa, 
 Hernandez v. Mesa, 
 Brownback v. King, 
 Egbert v. Boule, 
Subsequent developments
Scholarship on Bivens success rate
According to Alexander A. Reinert, law professor at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law of Yeshiva University, many attorneys assumed Bivens claims were far less successful than other civil rights litigation. However, Reinert's research showed outcomes for plaintiffs more promising than had been assumed: "Depending on the procedural posture, presence of counsel, and type of case," success ranged from "16% to more than 40%," and that "when Bivens claims fail, it very rarely is because of the qualified immunity defense."
Egbert v. Boule
The Supreme Court granted Egbert v. Boule, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), in November 2021, which is expected to review extensions of Bivens related remedies. The case involves a lawsuit filed by Robert Boule, the owner of an inn at the U.S.-Canada border against U.S. Border Patrol agent Erik Egbert related to a 2014 incident. In the incident, after Boule asked Egbert to leave his property when Egbert had approached a Turkish man about his immigration status, Egbert pushed Boule to the ground. Boule complained to the Border Patrol, which in turn led Egbert to prompt the IRS to investigate Boule. Boule claimed his First and Fourth Amendment rights were violated under Bivens. The district court found against Boule asserting his claims were an inappropriate extension of Bivens, but the Ninth Circuit reversed. 
In a 6-3 decision, the Supreme Court of the United States decided that the authority of the court to find a course of action under Bivens does not extend to Robert Boule claim of excessive force under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution and his First Amendment retaliation claim.
See also
 Qualified immunity
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 403
References
Sources
External links
 Casebrief Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents of Federal Bureau of Narcotics a provided by Bloomberg Law's Law Cases & Case Briefs for Students
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Implied constitutional cause of action case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Drug Enforcement Administration litigation
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1970s in Brooklyn
"""

From "Black & White Taxicab & Transfer Co. v. Brown & Yellow Taxicab & Transfer Co." ==> """
Black and White Taxicab and Transfer Company v. Brown and Yellow Taxicab and Transfer Company, 276 U.S. 518 (1928), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court refused to hold that federal courts sitting in diversity jurisdiction must apply state  common law.  Ten years later, in Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins, the Court reversed course, and overturned Swift v. Tyson.
It is most famous for the dissent of Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.
Case details
Brown and Yellow Cab Company, a Kentucky corporation, sought to create a business association with the Louisville and Nashville Railroad, where Brown and Yellow would have a monopoly on soliciting passengers of the railroad station in Bowling Green, Kentucky, effectively eliminating the competition, the Black and White Cab Co. Such an agreement was illegal under Kentucky common law, as interpreted by Kentucky's highest court. Brown and Yellow dissolved itself, reincorporated in Tennessee, and executed the agreement there, where such an agreement was legal, bringing suit against Black and White in a Kentucky federal court to prevent them from soliciting passengers. The federal court upheld the agreement, citing Swift, and arguing that under general federal common law, the agreement was valid.
See also
 Erie doctrine
External links
Category:1928 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:Conflict of laws case law
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:Federal common law case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Erie Doctrine
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:Louisville and Nashville Railroad
Category:Bowling Green, Kentucky
Category:Taxis of the United States
"""

From "Black v. United States" ==> """
Black v. United States, 561 U.S. 465 (2010), is a white-collar criminal law case decided by the United States Supreme Court dealing with businessman Conrad Black's fraud trial. Along with two companion cases—Skilling v. United States and Weyhrauch v. United States—it dealt with the honest services provision, .
Probe against Hollinger Inc.
In May 2003, following shareholder complaints, a special committee appointed by Hollinger International directors began an investigation of internal financial management, including compensation and fees paid directly and indirectly to Black's associates at Ravelston, a holding company. In particular, New York investment firm Tweedy, Browne, which had an 18% stake in Hollinger International, demanded the company probe what it alleged to be excessive payments to Conrad Black and David Radler, and demanded "disgorgement" of the funds paid.Olive, David "A Conrad Black Timeline" TheStar.com March 11, 2007
For example, in 2000, in an arrangement that came to be known as the "Lerner Exchange," Black acquired Chicago's Lerner Newspapers and sold it to Hollinger. The special committee's report contained allegations of impropriety which led to a criminal investigation and, ultimately, the unraveling of the Hollinger media empire.
Black attempted to sell the controlling interest in Hollinger to British businessmen David and Frederick Barclay. The Hollinger board of directors successfully sued to halt Black's proposed transaction, though subsequent events demonstrated that the Barclays' publicly disclosed offer of $18 per share was several times higher than the share price ultimately obtained for the sale of the Hollinger assets."Auto Da Fé: Conrad Black, Corporate Governance, and the End of Economic Man", Books in Canada, December 2006
In November 2003, Black resigned as chief executive of Hollinger. By January 2004 the board of directors of Hollinger obtained Black's resignation as chairman. Hollinger International filed a $200 million (USD) lawsuit against Black, David Radler and their associated companies.
Background: earlier civil matters
Black was called before the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission in December 2003 but he refused to answer questions about business dealings, citing his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.CBC News "Conrad Black: Timeline"
In May 1998, American Trucker Magazine (ATM) was sold by Southam (see also Hollinger International Inc.) in a bundled transaction including a daily circulation Western Canada newspaper for $93,672,000. The purchase and sale agreement provided for the payment by the purchaser of a $2.0 million non-competition fee to the Company. The Company failed to disclose that on February 1, 1999, approximately eight months after the sale closed, the Company transferred funds equivalent to the non-competition fee to Hollinger Inc. This transaction played a part in the trial.
In February 2004, Delaware judge Leo E. Strine, Jr. barred the Barclays sale and wrote in his judgment, "Black breached his fiduciary and contractual duties persistently and seriously... I found Black evasive and unreliable. His explanations of key events and of his own motivations do not have the ring of truth".Herman, Eric "Judge stymies Black"  Chicago Sun-Times, February 27, 2004 Strine, however, also wrote that "another reasonable mind might draw different conclusions" regarding these findings of fact., Hollinger International v. Black, Delaware Chancery, February 26, 2004
In August 2004, a special committee of the Board of Directors of Hollinger International Inc. made a report of investigation to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and the U.S. District Court. The special committee was headed by Richard Breeden, a former SEC Chairman who was paid approximately $100,000 (USD) per week for his work.Black, C. (2011). A Matter of Principle. McCelland & Stewart. . The report, which became known as the "Breeden Report" and which cost Hollinger International over $50 million (USD), alleged that Black and associates had without proper authorization taken cash and other assets and benefits from Hollinger and had breached their fiduciary duties to Hollinger's public majority, non-controlling shareholders.
In November 2004, the SEC filed civil fraud lawsuits against Black and several others, alleging the defendants cheated and defrauded shareholders through a series of deceptive schemes and misstatements.
Criminal case
One year later, eight criminal fraud charges were brought by the Chicago U. S. Attorney against Black and three former Hollinger executives. The U.S. Attorney laid four new charges against Black on 15 December 2005, alleging racketeering, obstruction of justice, money laundering, mail fraud, tax evasion and wire fraud. Under the racketeering count, the government sought forfeiture of more than $92,000,000 (USD). The obstruction count related to Black and his chauffeur removing boxes of documents from Hollinger offices in Toronto on June 9, 2005, contrary to a court order that prohibited removal. Black contested the obstruction count on the grounds that he was obeying an eviction notice,"A Head-Scratching Verdict Against Conrad Black", The Wall Street Journal, June 28, 2011 that he knew he was being filmed because he had installed the security cameras which filmed him, that he had already provided copies of every document prosecutors had asked for, and that not a single commercially relevant document in those boxes was not already possessed by prosecutors.
The criminal fraud trial of Black and three other Hollinger International executives commenced on 14 March 2007.
Verdict and sentence
After twelve days of deliberation, on 13 July 2007, the jury found Black guilty of three counts of mail and wire fraud and one count of obstruction of justice and acquitted him of nine other charges, including wire fraud and racketeering. The fraud convictions related to money taken by the executives in exchange for their agreements to not compete with various Hollinger units. Prosecutors claimed these were fraudulent agreements.Harris, Andrew "Conrad Black's Guilty Verdict..." Bloomberg.com May 2, 2008 Co-accused, Peter Y. Atkinson, John A. Boultbee and Mark Kipnis, were each found guilty of mail and wire fraud (David Radler had already pleaded guilty to fraud).
On November 5, 2007, Judge Amy St. Eve denied Black's motion for a new trial. On December 10, 2007, Black was sentenced to 78 months in jail. Twelve weeks later, the Court of Appeals denied his motion to remain free on bail while appealing his convictions. Black requested to be housed in a minimum security prison camp near Miami but the Bureau of Prisons denied his request and instead ordered him to report to Coleman Federal Correctional Complex near Orlando, Florida on March 3, 2008, to begin serving his sentence. Prior to his being granted bail, Black's projected release date was in October 2013.
Reaction and consequences
Black told journalists he would continue his "long war" against the charges and said "any conviction is unsatisfactory". After the verdicts, Black's Canadian lawyer Edward Greenspan said, "The heart of their case was lost." However, former federal prosecutor and SEC enforcement lawyer Jacob Frenkel called it a "stunning victory" for the government and explained how a split verdict "highlights for the appellate court that the jury was very thoughtful and thorough in its deliberations."
Investigators hired by Hollinger companies to locate assets examined more than forty bank accounts which may be, or may have been, held in the name of Black, his wife, or affiliated entities. According to court filings, Ravelston Corp. also had a subsidiary in Barbados called Argent News Inc. and another in Bermuda called Sugra Bermuda Ltd. A report by a special committee of the board of Hollinger International Inc. said Black co-owned two Barbados companies, Moffat Management Inc. and Black-Amiel Management Inc., which both received millions of dollars in payments, the former allegedly owned by Black and his co-defendants, and the latter by Black, his wife and Boultbee.  In November 2007, Sun-Times Media Group (formerly Hollinger) said in a regulatory filing that it had spent $107.7 million on legal fees and indemnification costs for criminal and civil actions involving Black, Boultbee, Kipniss and Atkinson.
After the verdict, New Democratic Party of Canada Member of Parliament Charlie Angus publicly called for Black's expulsion from the Queen's Privy Council for Canada and for his removal from the Order of Canada. The Toronto Star similarly called for then-Governor General Michaëlle Jean to remove Black from the Order. Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper stated that Black would have to go through regular channels to attempt to regain his Canadian citizenship, that membership in the Order of Canada is the purview of the Governor General and that decisions about the Privy Council would only take place after the legal process, including appeal, had been completed.
Black's ability to re-enter Canada is uncertain unless he obtains dispensation from the Canadian government. Were he to regain residency, "Canadian citizenship can't be granted to those who are criminally inadmissible and neither the minister nor the Governor in Council (cabinet) can override that," according to an immigration department spokesperson. The loss of his Canadian citizenship also makes it impossible for Black to be transferred to a Canadian prison where he would be eligible for parole much sooner than if he were to serve time in the United States.
Appeal
Black's oral arguments were heard June 5, 2008, by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit. Andrew Frey argued that Black and his co-defendants did not steal from Hollinger when they authorized individual non-competition payments. Frey asserted that the monies were "management fees" and that Hollinger International shareholders were not hurt by the payments. Appeals judge Richard Posner said, "The bulk of the evidence [in the Hollinger case] has to do with pretty naked fraud."Chandler, Susan: "Judges appear cool to Black appeal" , Chicago Tribune, June 6, 2008 Posner was skeptical about defense arguments that Black did not obstruct justice by removing boxes from his Toronto office, commenting, "The timing was bizarre, the removal of the documents in the middle of an investigation." Three weeks later, on June 25, 2008, the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the convictions. and rejected all of the arguments raised by the defense. The circuit court found that "the evidence established a conventional fraud, that is, a theft of money or other property from Hollinger by misrepresentations and misleading omissions..." The panel affirmed the jury's findings stating that, "It is not as if Black had merely been using his power as controlling shareholder to elect a rubber-stamp board of directors or to approve a merger favorable to him at the expense of the minority shareholders ... He was acting in his capacity as the CEO of Hollinger when he ordered (Mark) Kipnis to draft the covenants not to compete and when he duped the audit committee and submitted a false 10-K." Black, for his part, maintained the form in question was simply improperly, and not falsely, submitted.
Prosecutor Eric Sussman replied to news of the initial appeal decision saying, "I think at some point in time Mr. Black needs to take a hard look in the mirror and ask who it is that really doesn't understand the conduct that took place in this case…You've got 16 people who have taken a look at the facts and the law in a very detailed and time-consuming way, and they have all reached the same conclusion, which is that he stole money from this company and he tried to obstruct the investigation."Bell, Douglas, "Denied: Posner's wry prose more or less sends Black to jail until 2013", Toronto Life, June 26, 2008
Black added Harvard professor Alan Dershowitz to his law team and asked the 7th Circuit Court to reconsider the appeal decision without success.Harris, Andrew "Conrad Black Loses Bid for Appeals Court Rehearing" Bloomberg.comTedesco, Theresa, "Black's defence readies for Supreme Court appeal" , Financial Post, July 16, 2008Wisniewski, Mary "Appeals Court upholds Conrad Black's conviction"  Chicago Sun-Times, June 25, 2008 In June 2008, he ruled out trying to obtain a presidential pardon from George W. Bush,Westhead, Rick, "Black has one card left to play", Toronto Star, June 26, 2008 though he later applied for one in November of the same year.Valdmanis, Richard, "Jailed press baron Black seeks Bush pardon: report", Reuters, November 20, 2008 The final acts of clemency of Bush's presidency were announced on his last full day of office, January 19, 2009. Black's name was not included in the list of commuted sentences.Bush fails to pardon Conrad Black, Toronto Star, January 20, 2009
The US Supreme Court heard an appeal of Black's fraud conviction on 8 December 2009. Black's application for bail pending his appeal was turned down by the Supreme Court and  subsequently by Judge St. Eve of the US District Court.
The Supreme Court only reviewed Black's fraud convictions and did not reconsider his conviction for obstruction of justice for which he received a sentence concurrent with his sentence for fraud; thus even a successful appeal would not necessarily have resulted in a reduction of his prison sentence. Eric Sussman, Black's prosecutor in the Chicago trial, told the Toronto Star that the Supreme Court's rejection of Black's bail request means that the "Supreme Court is confident that no matter what happens he's still going to be serving six-and-a-half years for obstruction of justice" regardless of the outcome of his appeal.
On June 24, 2010, the U.S. Supreme Court released its 9–0 decision ordering the 7th circuit court, which had upheld Black's conviction at trial, to review its own decision regarding the three fraud convictions against Black in light of the Supreme Court's construction of the honest services fraud statute in Skilling v. United States. Writing for the Court, Justice Ginsburg was critical of Judge Posner's decision, referring to its "anomalous" ruling and the "judicial invention" found therein. The appeal court was instructed to review Black's case and determine whether his fraud convictions should stand or if there should be a new trial."Conrad Black seeks bail", Globe and Mail, July 7, 2010 Black's obstruction of justice conviction remained in place. Black's lawyers filed an application for bail pending the appeal court's review, which prosecutors contested, arguing in court papers that Black's trial jury had proof that Black committed fraud."Conrad Black sued for $71 million in back taxes", Toronto Star, July 15, 2010 On July 19, 2010, Black was granted bail pending a decision by the court on whether to retry his 2008 criminal fraud conviction. He was released on July 21, 2010, on a $2 million bond signed by Roger Hertog."Conrad Black granted bail", Toronto Star, July 19, 2010
On October 28, 2010, the U.S. 7th Circuit Court of Appeals overturned two of the three remaining mail fraud counts. It left Black convicted of one count of mail fraud, of which his portion was $285,000 (USD),<ref name=bringhome>"Bring Conrad Black home", Ipolitics", July 1, 2011</ref> and one count of obstruction of justice. The court also ruled that he must be resentenced. On December 17, 2010, Black lost an appeal of his remaining convictions for fraud and obstruction of justice. The three-person panel did not provide reasons. On May 31, 2011, the Supreme Court of the United States refused to grant Black leave to appeal his two remaining convictions without any comment."U.S. Supreme Court rejects Conrad Black's appeal", Globe and Mail, May 31, 2011 Resentencing on the two remaining counts by the original trial judge occurred on June 24, 2011."Conrad Black sentencing set for June 24", Chicago Sun-Times, January 13, 2011 Black's lawyers recommended that he be sentenced to the 29 months he has already served, while the prosecution argued for Black to complete his original -year sentence. The probation officer's report recommends a sentence of between 33 and 41 months."Will Conrad Black go back to jail?", Globe and Mail, June 23, 2011 On that date, Judge St. Eve resentenced him to a reduced term of 42 months and a fine of $150,000 returning him to prison to serve the remaining 13 months of his sentence."Black sent back to jail for 13 months" , Globe and Mail, June 24, 2011
Black did not return to his former location of Coleman Federal Correctional Facility because two female guards at Coleman reported they feared for their safety if Black returned. Instead, he reported on September 6, 2011, to the Federal Correctional Institution, Miami. He was released from prison on May 4, 2012. Although he has given up his Canadian citizenship in 2001 in order to receive British peerage, he has expressed desire to live in Canada after his prison term completed. He was granted a one-year temporary resident permit to live in Canada in March 2012 when he was still serving his sentence. Critics denounced that Black received special treatment from the Canadian government but Stephen Harper, the Prime Minister, denied any political influence. Upon his release from the prison, Black was immediately picked up by the U.S. Immigration officials and was escorted to the Miami International Airport. He arrived at Toronto on the same afternoon and returned to his home for the first time in nearly five years.
On February 19, 2013, Black's motion to vacate his guilty verdict was dismissed.
Time in prison
Black, Federal Bureau of Prisons #18330-424, was incarcerated at Coleman Federal Correctional Complex near Orlando, Florida for 28 months from March 3, 2008, until he was released on July 21, 2010.
On August 23, 2008, Black authored a piece in the National Post'' about the experience of prison. He repeated his assertion that he had been wrongly convicted and asserted: "The bunk about a lavish lifestyle was disbelieved and rejected by the jury." He believes that time will show the Canadian and American justice systems were disgraced by his conviction, not him. He adds, "But someone has to resist the putrification of justice in these jurisdictions, and if someone of my means doesn't, who will?" Black, Conrad "On strip searches and fellow inmates"  National Post, August 23, 2008
In 2008 Black wrote to the Canadian Press, commenting that, "I am doing fine. This (prison) is a safe and civilized place, and I don't anticipate any difficulty."Chicago Sun-Times "Conrad Black says prison life 'safe and civilized'"  March 24, 2008
After being promoted from his initial prison job as a dishwasher, he taught high school level classes in American history helping a dozen prisoners earn their high school diplomas. Black was nicknamed "Lordy" by his fellow convicts, a reference to his membership in the UK aristocratic nobility."Fellow cons called their tutor 'Lordy'", Globe and Mail, July 22, 2010
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 561
References
Further reading
External links
Category:21st-century American trials
Category:Mail and wire fraud case law
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Blackmer v. United States" ==> """
Blackmer v. United States, 284 U.S. 421 (1932), is a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States.
Harry M. Blackmer was a United States citizen resident in Paris. Blackmer was found guilty of contempt by the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia for refusing to appear as a witness for the United States in a criminal trial, which was related to the Teapot Dome Scandal, after being subpoenaed.
Blackmer was subsequently fined $30,000 and the costs of the court. Blackmer challenged the fine under the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment.
The Court unanimously ruled against Blackmer, with Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes delivering the judgment and opinion of the Court and Justice Owen Josephus Roberts not participating.
Chief Justice Hughes, in delivering the opinion of the Court, stated "[n]or can it be doubted that the United States possesses the power inherent in sovereignty to require the return to this country of a citizen, resident elsewhere, whenever the public interest requires it, and to penalize him in case of refusal." Also, "[i]t is also beyond controversy that one of the duties which the citizen owes to his government is to support the administration of justice by attending its courts and giving his testimony whenever he is properly summoned."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 284
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1932 in United States case law
Category:Teapot Dome scandal
Category:France–United States relations
Category:Citizenship of the United States
"""

From "Blake v. City and County of San Francisco" ==> """
Blake v. City and County of San Francisco, 113 U.S. 679 (1885),  was an appeal from a decree that dismissed a bill filed by the appellant to restrain the infringement by the appellees of reissued letters patent granted to the appellant as the assignee of original letters patent issued to Thomas H. Bailey. The original patent was dated February 9, 1864, and the reissue September 18, 1877. They were for "a new and improved valve for water cylinders of steam fire engines and other pump cylinders." The specification, which was substantially the same in both patents, stated that previous to the invention therein described, the only valve used to relieve the pressure upon fire hose to prevent them from bursting was one operated by hand. To obviate the defects of such a valve, the inventor applied at some point between the engine or pump and the hose nozzle a valve which opened automatically by the pressure in the hose or the pump cylinder, so as to discharge an additional stream and thereby relieve the pressure..
Background
The reissued patent contains two claims, the second of which only is found in the original. They were as follows:
The combination, with a pump cylinder and hose of a fire engine, of an automatic relief valve arranged relatively thereto substantially as specified.
The combination of the value C, stem d', spring E, adjustable cap D, and pin-hole d whereby the valve may be either held upon its seat with a variable yielding pressure or may be elevated therefrom or held immovably thereon, as an ordinary screw plug.
The answer of the defendants denied infringement, denied that Bailey was the original inventor of the devices described in his patent, and averred that his alleged invention had been in notorious public use many years before the application of a patent therefor by Bailey.
The appellant did not contend that the appellees infringe the first claim of the reissued patent. He based his demand for relief on the alleged infringement of the second claim only.
The proper construction of this claim was that it covered an automatic valve in combination with a contrivance consisting of a pinhole and pin, by which the valve may be raised from its seat, so as to leave the valve hole permanently open, or by which the valve may be rigidly closed upon its seat, making a closed or plug valve.
The evidence showed that Bailey was not the first to conceive the idea of a device for opening or closing rigidly an automatic valve. The same thing had been done by means of wedges and screws and other devices. He cannot therefore cover by his patent all the devices for producing this result, no matter what their form or mode of operation. The claim must be confined to the specific device described in the specification and claim—namely a pinhole and pin. If this construction of the claim be adopted, it is clear that no infringement is shown, for the appellees do not use a pinhole and pin for holding their valve open or closed, but a screw, sleeve, or cap, and therefore one of the elements of the combination, covered by the second claim of appellant's patent, is wanting in the device used by the appellees.
But if it be contended that the device covered by the second claim of the appellant's patent is infringed simply by the use of an automatic relief valve which can be converted at will into an open or closed valve, the evidence in the record is abundant.
Decision
Upon this state of facts, it was plain that the mere employment by the defendants of the old and well known automatic safety valve afforded no ground upon which to base the relief prayed for in the appellant's bill. Appellant's counsel therefore disclaimed any right to the exclusive use of an automatic safety valve, and said: "We do not claim the valve any further than in this combination with a steam fire engine."
If it be conceded, therefore, that the second claim of appellant's patent covered the use of an automatic relief valve applied to a steam fire engine and hose, the question is presented whether the appellant's patent thus construed is valid.
Justice Horace Gray speaking for the court;
The decree of the circuit court was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States patent case law
Category:Legal history of San Francisco
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:1885 in California
"""

From "Blake v. United States" ==> """
Blake v. United States, 103 U.S. 227 (1880), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the removal power under the Appointments Clause. 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1880 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "Blakely v. Washington" ==> """
Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296 (2004), held that, in the context of mandatory sentencing guidelines under state law, the Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial prohibited judges from enhancing criminal sentences based on facts other than those decided by the jury or admitted by the defendant. The landmark nature of the case was alluded to by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who characterized the decision as a "Number 10 earthquake".
Background of the case
Ralph Howard Blakely was born in 1936; he started his criminal career in 1954.http://www.columbiabasinherald.com/articles/2005/03/23/news/news02.txt  Blakely married his wife in 1973. During the Blakely's 20-plus-year marriage, Mr. Blakely was involved in 80 or more lawsuits covering irrigation water rights, as well as crimes of assault, shoplifting, and many others. When his wife filed for divorce in 1996, Blakely kidnapped her from her home in rural Grant County, Washington, at knifepoint, forced her into a wooden box in the back of his pickup truck, and took her to Montana.  He ordered their 13-year-old son to follow in another car, threatening to shoot his estranged wife with a shotgun if he did not comply.  En route to Montana, their son escaped in Moses Lake, Washington, and alerted the police. FBI agents and sheriffs arrested Blakely in Montana near the town of Three Forks.
Blakely was charged with first-degree kidnapping, but ultimately pleaded guilty to second-degree kidnapping involving domestic violence and the use of a firearm. If one is convicted of first-degree kidnapping of a minor in Washington state, one must register as a sex offender upon release from prison. To avoid this, Mr. Blakely negotiated a plea of a longer sentence while pleading guilty only to second-degree kidnapping.Ralph Howard Blakely III At the plea hearing, Blakely admitted the facts necessary to support these charges but no others.  Under Washington law, second-degree kidnapping was a class B felony, punishable by a maximum sentence of 10 years in prison.  However, under Washington's mandatory sentencing guidelines, the judge was required to sentence Blakely to no less than 49 and no more than 53 months in prison, unless he had "substantial and compelling" reasons to impose a sentence outside that range. These reasons could not take into account factors used to compute the standard range for the sentence.  If the judge did not articulate specific findings of fact and conclusions of law justifying an exceptional sentence, an appellate court would have to reverse the sentence.
Despite these requirements, the trial judge sentenced Blakely to 90 months, finding that Blakely had acted with "deliberate cruelty."  Blakely appealed, arguing that this unexpected additional factfinding on the judge's part violated his Sixth Amendment right under Apprendi v. New Jersey, , to have the jury determine beyond a reasonable doubt all the facts legally necessary to his sentence.  The Washington Court of Appeals rejected his claim, and the Washington Supreme Court declined to review it.  Blakely then asked the U.S. Supreme Court to review the case, and it agreed to do so.
In an unusual turn of events, the local county prosecutor, John Knodell III, asked Washington's governor for permission to personally argue the case before the U.S. Supreme Court.Rebecca Cook, Supreme Court rules judges alone cannot impose extra-long prison terms, Associated Press (June 25, 2004) https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=861&dat=20040625&id=dScPAAAAIBAJ&sjid=eIUDAAAAIBAJ&pg=3901,5855965  During oral argument, Justice Scalia challengedJimmie Presley, Court to rule if judge can raise sentence, Spokesman-Review (March 24, 2004) Knodell for attempting to impose a prison sentence much longer than what state law authorized.
Majority opinion
In order to resolve this case, the Court had to apply the rule set forth in Apprendi v. New Jersey:  "Other than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt."  This rule promoted the historic concerns of the jury-trial requirement — to subject all accusations against a criminal defendant to the "unanimous suffrage of twelve of his equals and neighbors," and to confirm the existence of those facts essential to the punishment under the law.  In this case, the finding of "deliberate cruelty" had not been submitted to a jury, and Blakely had not admitted acting with "deliberate cruelty."  The State contended that this was not problematic under Apprendi because the statutory maximum was 10 years, not 53 months.  The Court read Apprendi as having held that the "statutory maximum" punishment was "the maximum sentence [the judge] may impose without any additional findings."  Accordingly, because "deliberate cruelty" was not an element of the crimes to which Blakely had pleaded guilty, the judge could not have used that fact to enhance Blakely's sentence above the 53-month statutory maximum.
The Court's "commitment to Apprendi in this context reflects not just respect for longstanding precedent, but the need to give intelligible content to the right of jury trial.  That right is no procedural formality, but a fundamental reservation of power in our constitutional structure."  Just as citizens participate in the legislative process by electing representatives to the legislature, they participate in the judicial process by serving on juries.  The Apprendi rule ensures that "the judge's authority to sentence derives wholly from the jury's verdict.  Without that restriction, the jury would not exercise the control that the Framers intended."  Justice Scalia, as the author of the majority opinion, reasoned that those who reject  Apprendi "are resigned to one of two alternatives."  First, a jury might be allowed only to pass on a small part of criminal activity, and then allow the judge to determine the punishment for the full range of conduct the government seeks to punish, as by letting the jury determine whether an accused murderer illegally possessed a firearm and then allowing the judge to impose a life sentence because the defendant had used the firearm to kill someone.  Second, the legislature could establish judicial limits that were not too excessive, a necessarily subjective standard that would be hard for the Court to monitor and adjust as necessary.  But this claim was not plausible, since the entire purpose of the jury-trial requirement was to check judicial authority.
Scalia insisted that the result of the case would not signal the end of determinate sentencing altogether.  Rather, it merely required states to implement determinate sentencing in a manner consistent with the Sixth Amendment.
Dissenting opinions
Justice O'Connor's dissent
Justice O'Connor feared dire consequences as a result of the Court's ruling. Before Washington enacted its guidelines scheme, there was remarkable disparity among sentences meted out for similar offenses. Guidelines schemes have the effect of reducing this disparity by channeling the discretion of sentencing judges, who are told how to weigh what factors when computing a sentence. By enacting its sentencing guidelines, Washington did not intend to "manipulate the statutory elements of criminal offenses or circumvent the procedural protections of the Bill of Rights. Rather, lawmakers were trying to bring some much-needed uniformity, transparency, and accountability to an otherwise 'labyrinthine sentencing and corrections system that 'lacked any principle except unbridled discretion.'"
Far from "disregarding principles of due process and the jury trial right," O'Connor argued, the guidelines system honored them. Under the former sentencing scheme, a defendant like Blakely could have received anything from probation to 10 years in prison. Under the guidelines, he knows what range of sentence he might receive based on the conduct in which he engaged. "Criminal defendants still face the same statutory maximum sentences, but they now at least know, much more than before, the real consequences of their actions." The guidelines also reduce disparities, particularly those based on race, which was a concern of some critics of the pre-guidelines system.
O'Connor foresaw a "substantial constitutional tax" in applying the Apprendi rule to sentencing guidelines systems. She protested that the traditional sentencing factors would now have to be charged in the indictment and proved to a jury. Bifurcated proceedings may become commonplace in criminal trials, so that a jury might not improperly consider prior bad acts during the guilt phase but properly consider them when it comes time for sentencing. And under some guidelines schemes, such as the federal sentencing guidelines, some facts relevant to sentencing, such as perjury and obstruction of justice, cannot be known until the trial is underway. In any event, all relevant sentencing facts may not be known prior to trial, since prosecutors typically wait until after a guilty verdict is obtained before gathering a full history of the defendant and examining the pertinent facts of the crime in order to recommend a sentence.
Finally, O'Connor disagreed with the majority's interpretation of the "statutory maximum" in a guidelines context. She believed that, despite the mandatory nature of the guidelines, the "statutory maximum" remained (for Blakely) 10 years. For O'Connor, mere formalism dictated the conclusion that the "statutory maximum" was the greatest sentence the judge could legally impose based on the facts found by the jury or admitted by the defendant, and formalism was not a virtue she felt was worth vindicating. Furthermore, the effects of the decision were not confined to Washington, for every system involving guidelines sentencing, including the federal system, were constitutionally suspect.
Justice Breyer's dissent
Justice Breyer envisioned three possible responses to the majority's decision. First, legislatures could prescribe exactly the same sentence for all possible variations of a crime — an automatic five-year sentence for all robberies, for instance. This system has the "intolerable" effect of imposing the same sentence on people who commit their crimes in vastly different ways.  Prosecutors would end up with the real control over defendants' sentences, since prosecutors ultimately make the decisions regarding how to charge the case. Second, states could return to indeterminate sentencing, in which the authorized range of punishment for crimes is very broad. But such systems were criticized (rightly, in Breyer's view) for their excessive disparity and unfairness. There would be less "reason" in an indeterminate sentencing system than in the guidelines system Washington had adopted.
Third, the guidelines systems currently in force would remain, and the jury-trial requirement would be grafted onto them.  Breyer predicted this could play out in one of two ways.  First, legislatures might redefine crimes with highly specific detail — a robbery statute could enhance punishment based on the value of the goods taken, whether a gun was used, the seriousness of the threat used to obtain the goods, and so on. But the result of this system would be the same as the first option — prosecutors would end up with the discretion to determine the defendant's sentence by manipulating the charge.  Second, two juries could be assembled for each criminal trial, one for the guilt phase and one for the penalty phase.  But this approach would be costly, as the experience with bifurcated trials in capital cases has shown.
Perhaps another solution would be to prescribe overly harsh sentences for crimes, and then define a list of mitigating factors, so that a judge could still retain the discretion to impose sentences (since the jury-trial requirement only applies to increases in the maximum sentence). But "political impediments" make vast revisions of any legislative scheme difficult to implement, and Breyer doubted that the mere fact that the Court ruled the Sixth Amendment demanded a legislative solution would impel many state legislatures to revamp their criminal codes in this way.
Finally, Breyer argued that legislatures needed to retain the constitutional authority to make the labelling decision between an "element" of a crime and a "sentencing factor." Without the ability to do so, legislatures cannot create "sentencing systems that are consistent with, and indeed may help to advance, the Constitution's greater fairness goals." For Breyer, those greater fairness goals are achieved when a defendant's real conduct drives the sentence he receives. Constitutional obstacles that stand in the way of this goal detract from the overall fairness of the criminal justice system.
Effect on subsequent jurisprudence
Although the Court expressly stated that it was not addressing the constitutionality of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, it was hard to resist the conclusion that the Guidelines as then constituted were in jeopardy in light of the tremendous similarity between the structure of the federal Guidelines and the Washington Guidelines at issue in Blakely.  Six weeks after the decision in this case, the Court agreed to review two cases involving the constitutionality of sentence enhancements under the federal Guidelines — United States v. Booker and a companion case, United States v. Fanfan — an extraordinary step for the Court to take during the summer months.  The Court ordered the briefs in Booker to be submitted during the month of September 2004, and scheduled oral argument in Booker for the first day of the 2004 Term, Monday, October 4.  The Court's opinion in Booker came out on January 12, 2005, and drastically changed the legal framework within which federal sentencing takes place.
Also, many states had to decide how Blakely applied to their sentencing systems.  California, notably, concluded it did not affect its sentencing scheme in a case decided by the California Supreme Court called People v. Black.  The U.S. Supreme Court later concluded that Blakely did apply in California, thereby overruling Black with its decision in Cunningham v. California.
Subsequent developments
One week before release of the opinion which invalidated Blakely's sentence, John Knodell III, the Grant County prosecutor who lost the prior case before the U.S. Supreme Court, obtained authorization for a new warrant alleging Blakely solicited a planted prison informant for the murder of Blakely's wife and daughter.  Blakely is now serving 35 years in prison due to this separate case.  Knodell personally prosecuted this second case against Blakely.  Blakely made a claim of prosecutorial vindictiveness, asserting Knodell vindictively filed the criminal solicitation charge in retaliation for Blakely's successful appeal of his sentence in Blakely, 542 U.S. 296, 124 S. Ct. 2531, 159 L. Ed. 2d 403, but the court of appeals rejected Blakely's claim.State v. Blakely, 134 Wash.App. 1043, 2006 Wash. App. LEXIS 1817 (2006)
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 542
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
Further reading
WASHINGTON VS BLAKELY appeal denying legal papers for defense https://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/memoranda/2018/12/03/18-35647.pdf
External links
 State sentencing commission responses to Blakely, compiled by the United States Sentencing Commission
Transcript of the oral argument
 Amicus brief of the ACLU
 Response of the Department of Justice to Blakely
 Amicus brief of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers
 Sentencing Law and Policy Blog by Prof. Douglas Berman, Ohio State University Moritz College of Law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment sentencing case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Blanton v. City of North Las Vegas" ==> """
Blanton v. North Las Vegas, 489 U.S. 538 (1989), is a United States Supreme Court case clarifying the limitations of the right to trial by jury.
Background
Melvin R. Blanton was charged with driving under the influence of alcohol. His petition for a jury trial was denied and he was instead given a bench trial. Blanton appealed, arguing that his Sixth Amendment right to trial by jury had been violated.
Opinion of the Court
The Court ruled that Blanton did not have the right to a jury trial because the crime he was charged with was "petty" because it carries a maximum prison term of six months or less. The Court went on to elaborate: "we do find it appropriate to presume for purposes of the Sixth Amendment that society views such an offense as 'petty.' A defendant is entitled to a jury trial in such circumstances only if he can demonstrate that any additional statutory penalties, viewed in conjunction with the maximum authorized period of incarceration, are so severe that they clearly reflect a legislative determination that the offense in question is a 'serious' one.".
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 489
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:North Las Vegas, Nevada
Category:Driving under the influence
"""

From "Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co." ==> """
Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Company, 188 U.S. 239 (1903), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court found that advertisements were protected by copyright. The case is now cited for the proposition that commercial speech can be protected by copyright.
Facts
The named plaintiff was George Bleistein, an employee of the Courier Lithographing Company. The company had been hired by Benjamin Wallace, owner of a traveling circus called the "Great Wallace Show" (which would later become the Hagenbeck-Wallace Circus) to design and produce a number of chromolithographs used to produce posters to promote the circus. The posters featured images from the circus, such as ballet dancers and acrobats. When Wallace ran out of posters, rather than ordering more from the plaintiff, Wallace hired the Donaldson Lithographing Company - a competitor of the plaintiff - to manufacture copies of three of those posters.
Courier (and Bleistein, in name) sued Donaldson for copyright infringement. Donaldson objected on the basis that the posters were merely advertisements, and thus should not be considered eligible for copyright protection either under the Constitution of the United States or under the controlling Copyright Act of 1870. The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit held that the posters were not amenable to copyright protection, and Courier appealed.
 The Posters 
Holmes described the posters as being "of an ordinary ballet", of "the Stirk family, performing on bicycles", and of "men and women whitened to represent statues".
Opinion of the Court
Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., writing for the Court, found that it was irrelevant that the posters were made for advertising. Holmes laid out this ruling in language which has become well-worn in copyright case law:.
Dissents
A dissenting opinion was submitted by Justice Harlan, joined by Justice McKenna, agreeing with the Sixth Circuit that advertising posters "would not be promotive of the useful arts within the meaning of the constitutional provision", and were therefore not "fine art" for the Constitution permitted protection.
References
 Further reading 
Diane Leenheer Zimmerman, "The Story of Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Company: Originality as a Vehicle for Copyright Inclusivity", in Jane C. Ginsburg and Rochelle Cooper Dreyfuss, Intellectual Property Stories (2005), pp. 77–108.
External links
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:1903 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Posters
"""

From "Block v. Hirsh" ==> """
Block v. Hirsh, 256 U.S. 135 (1921), is a United States Supreme Court case which upheld a temporary rent control law in the District of Columbia. It set a precedent in American law that government can regulate housing conditions during times of emergency to maintain or improve living conditions.
Three years later, the rental property statute upheld in the case reached the Court for a second review. In Chastleton Corp v. Sinclair, despite the language being the same, the statute was unanimously struck down in a decision where the Court held that the emergency necessitating the measure had passed, and that that which "justified interference with ordinarily existing property rights as of 1919 had come to an end by 1922."
Facts
Prior to World War I, housing in the United States was usually regarded as an issue for state and local governments. 
In the aftermath of the war, the country experienced a national housing shortage. This shortage impelled federal intervention in the housing market, and in October 1919, Congress passed a statute establishing a commission with the power to regulate rental property in the District of Columbia. The statute allowed for the fixing of fair and reasonable rents, and secured a tenant's right of occupancy so long as he paid his rent and performed by the conditions of his lease. However, it reserved to the owner his right to possession for actual bona fide occupancy, as in to provide a home for himself and his relatives. This right was conditioned on the tenant being given a 30 days' notice to vacate the premises. The statute declared that its provisions were made necessary due to emergencies growing out of the war, and limited its duration to a period of two years.
Block was a tenant in an apartment building located at F Street in Washington. His lease was set to expire on December 31, 1919, but he would be allowed to remain in occupancy under the rental property statute. Hirsh, who had recently purchased the building, notified Block on December 15 and requested that he vacate the premises upon expiration of his lease. Hirsh wanted the premises for his own use, but did not see fit to give the 30 days' notice because he denied the validity of the statute. Block declined, and on review, the Court of Appeals held the statute unconstitutional. Block appealed to the Supreme Court.
Judgment
In a 5–4 decision, the Court upheld the law as constitutional. The majority opinion was written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. Congress's claim, Holmes contended, was that "circumstances have clothed the letting of buildings in the District of Columbia with a public interest so great as to justify regulation by law." These circumstances constituted a "publi[c], notorious, and almost worldwide fact". There was no reason to doubt that the war had bred unseemly conditions in the district, nor Congress's intention of providing an effective remedy to that end. In times of trouble, Holmes concluded, the private may be affected with a public concern, allowing governmental action otherwise considered impermissible. Moreover, condemnation for public use had been repeatedly upheld by the Court in the fields of mining, irrigation and insurance. Holmes noted that state control of privately owned buildings evoked a peculiar apprehension, but nonetheless was within regulatory reach:
The more pressing question, Holmes said, was whether the statute had gone too far in restricting the entitlement of the property owner. Beyond the general police power, and further beyond the power of eminent domain, an eventual clash with the due process right of the Fifth Amendment was inevitable. If unduly exerted, the legislation would be in violation of the takings clause. However, rate fixing in the public interest was a valid form of regulation, as had been decided in Munn v. Illinois. Additionally, the self-imposed time limitation sufficiently dispelled any trepidation that would have been manifest in the case of a permanent change. Holmes concluded with an admonishment in the vein of judicial restraint:
Dissent
Justice Joseph McKenna wrote a sharply worded dissent. The conditions imposed by the statute, McKenna said, were "contrary to every conception of leases that the world has ever entertained, and of the reciprocal rights and obligations of lessor and lessee." The constitutional prohibitions on denial of due process and impairment of the obligation of contracts were "so direct and definite as to need no reinforcing words", and the only question was whether the statute fell within the purview of these limitations. McKenna dismissed the claim of wartime necessity, stating that "the country has had other wars with resulting embarrassments, yet they did not induce the relaxation of constitutional requirements nor the exercise of arbitrary power." He warned that the Court's decision might presage a slippery slope of government mandates in other areas deemed necessary for the public improvement:
In light of this danger, legislative judgement should not be accorded determinative weight: "It is to be remembered that the legality of power must be estimated not by what it will do, but by what it can do." McKenna characterized the statute as an example of socialism:
Significance
In 1924, the rental property statute upheld in the case reached the Court for a second review. This time, despite the language being the same, the statute was struck down in a unanimous decision. In Chastleton Corp v. Sinclair, the Court held that the emergency necessitating the measure had passed, and that that which "justified interference with ordinarily existing property rights as of 1919 had come to an end by 1922."
Notes
External links
Category:1921 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Legal history of the District of Columbia
Category:United States Fifth Amendment case law
United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Blockburger v. United States" ==> """
Blockburger v. United States, 284 U.S. 299 (1932), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States set an important standard to prevent double jeopardy.. 
Background
The defendant was charged with violations of the Harrison Narcotics Act. Specifically, he was indicted on five separate counts, all involving the sale of morphine to the same purchaser.
The jury returned a verdict against petitioner upon the second, third, and fifth counts only. The second count charged a sale on a specified day of ten grains of the drug not in or from the original stamped package. The third count charged a sale on the following day of eight grains of the drug not in or from the original stamped package. The fifth count charged the latter sale also as having been made not in pursuance of a written order of the purchaser as required by the statute.
The district court sentenced petitioner to five years' imprisonment and a fine of $2,000 upon each count, the terms of imprisonment to run consecutively. The judgment was affirmed on appeal by the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals.
The defendant advanced two legal theories as his defense:  
The two sales charged in the second and third counts had been made to the same person constitute a single continuous offense.
The sale charged in the third count had been made not from the original stamped package, and the same sale charged in the fifth count had been made not in pursuance of a written order of the purchaser, which constituted one offense for which only a single penalty could lawfully be imposed.
Decision
Justice Sutherland, writing for a unanimous court, first held that the two sales, having been made at different times (albeit to the same person), were two separate and distinct violations of the law. He then held that under the statute, two distinct offenses are created by each section. Section 1 of the Act created the offense of selling any of the forbidden drugs except in or from the original stamped package, and Section 2 creates the offense of selling any of such drugs not in pursuance of a written order of the person to whom the drug is sold. Because the defendant had violated both sections, he could be prosecuted separately under the therland reasoned negatively:
While Sutherland conceded that the penalties under the Act were harsh, he wrote that it was up to Congress, rather than the courts, to change the sentencing scheme.
Although the case is often cited for the standard that it set with regard to double jeopardy, the Fifth Amendment to the US Constitution is not mentioned anywhere in the text of the opinion itself.
The landmark case established the "same elements test" to determine if two offenses are the same for the purposes of double jeopardy. Under the Blockburger test, a defendant may be convicted of two offenses arising out of the same criminal incident if each crime contains an element that is not found in the other.
The appellate court determines whether each crime contains an element that is not found in the other by examining only the relevant statute, the information and the bill of particulars, not by examining the evidence presented at trial. State v. Tweedy, 594 A.2d 906 (Conn. 1991).
References
External links
Category:1932 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:Morphine
"""

From "Blonder-Tongue Labs., Inc. v. University of Ill. Foundation" ==> """
Blonder-Tongue Labs., Inc. v. University of Ill. Foundation, 402 U.S. 313 (1971), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court holding that a final judgment in an infringement suit against a first defendant that a patent is invalid bars the patentee from relitigating the same patent against other defendants.. In so ruling, the Supreme Court overruled its 1936 decision in Triplett v. Lowell, ("Neither reason nor authority support the contention that an adjudication adverse to any or all the claims of a patent precludes another suit upon the same claims against a different defendant. While the earlier decision may, by comity, be given great weight in a later litigation, and thus persuade the court to render a like decree, it is not res adjudicata, and may not be pleaded as a defense.") which had required mutuality of estoppel to bar such preclusion, and held that the better view was to prevent relitigating if the plaintiff had had a full and fair opportunity to litigate the issue in question.
Background
thumb|250px|right|Isbell antenna involved in lawsuit
The University of Illinois Foundation owned Isbell U.S. Patent No. 3,210,767, covering "Frequency Independent Unidirectional Antennas," which were used for transmission and reception of radio and television signals. The Foundation sued Winegard Co., an antenna manufacturer in Iowa, and the court held the patent invalid as obvious.402 U.S. at 314. On appeal, the Eighth Circuit affirmed the judgment in the Iowa case.University of Illinois Foundation v. Winegard Co., 402 F.2d 125 (8th Cir. 1968), affirming 271 F. Supp. 412 (S.D. Iowa 1967).
The Foundation also sued a customer of another antenna manufacturer, Blonder-Tongue, in Illinois. Blonder-Tongue intervened to defend its customer and filed a counterclaim for invalidity. The Illinois court held the patent valid and infringed, despite the contrary ruling in Iowa, because it disagreed with the conclusion that the Iowa court reached in the case against Winegard.402 U.S. at 315-14. Blonder-Tongue appealed to the Seventh Circuit, which upheld the ruling that the Isbell patent was valid and infringed.
Blonder-Tongue then appealed to the Supreme Court. Under prior law, a patentee was entitled to sue an alleged infringer, even though a different court had ruled the patent invalid: The second court was free to decide the second case on the basis of the evidence before it, irrespective of the first court's ruling, according to Triplett v. Lowell. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to decide the question, "Should the holding of Triplett v. Lowell, 297 U. S. 638, that a determination of patent invalidity is not res judicata as against the patentee in subsequent litigation against a different defendant, be adhered to?"—even though Blonder-Tongue had asked the Court to rule only on the merits of the patentee's infringement case.
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|150px|right|Justice Byron White
Justice Byron White delivered the opinion of a unanimous Court that Triplett should be overruled and that patent owners should be entitled to only one bite at the apple, because the doctrine requiring mutuality of estoppel—that both parties must be bound by the prior judgment or neither party is bound—was contrary to public policy, at least in patent cases.
White began by noting that the doctrine allowing multiple litigation on a patent held invalid had been criticized, yet both parties' patent lawyers in this case were unwilling to ask for Triplett to be overruled.  White quoted Blonder-Tongue's counsel as saying, "Though petitioners stand to gain by any such result, we cannot urge the destruction of a long-accepted safeguard for patentees merely for the expediency of victory."402 U.S. at 319. The Assistant Attorney General of the Antitrust Division, however, arguing for the Government as amicus curiae, urged the Court to overrule Triplett partially—to permit or preclude relitigating patents on a case-by-case fact-specific basis.
A preliminary question was whether it was proper for the Court to overrule Triplett when both party litigants were unwilling to urge its being overruled. Under intense questioning by the Court in oral argument, however, counsel for the accused infringer (who initially sought to argue that the patented antenna structure should have been held obvious over the prior art) receded to the position that in the particular circumstances of the case (the trial court had forced Blonder-Tongue to go to trial without its witnesses) the evidence from the Winegard case in Iowa should have been considered. No party argued for so-called in rem invalidity, and neither did the United States as amicus curiae.Under in rem invalidity, a judgment of invalidity would in all circumstances preclude relitigating a patent once held invalid. See 402 U.S. at 339-40. In the last few minutes of Blonder-Tongue counsel's rebuttal argument, Justice White asked him: "Petitioner decided finally to forego any request for reconsidering Triplett entirely or in any part? I had understood you previously say you would welcome a modification of it to some extent?" Counsel replied that, in a case in which a party had not been given the opportunity to present its witnesses, "it ought to be considered whether there ought to be an estoppel in a situation such this."Recording of oral argument, at 01:36:08. See 402 U.S. at 319 & n.6. In view of Blonder-Tongue's "change of attitude," the Court said, "we consider that the question of modifying Triplett is properly before us."402 U.S. at 320.
The Court then turned to whether Triplett should be overruled. It pointed out that requirement of mutuality of estoppel was a judge-made doctrine. Triplett was decided in 1936, but even then "the mutuality rule had been under fire." The Court quoted Judge Henry Friendly's observation that Jeremy Bentham "had attacked the doctrine 'as destitute of any semblance of reason, and as a maxim which one would suppose to have found its way from the gaming-table to the bench."Zdanok v. Glidden Co., 327 F.2d 944, 954 (2d Cir. 1964) (quoting 3 J.  579 (1827). Moreover, there had been considerable "ferment in scholarly quarters."402 U.S. at 320–23.
The Court approvingly cited the unanimous decision of the California Supreme Court in Bernhard v. Bank of America Nat. Trust & Savings Assn.,19 Cal. 2d 807, 122 P.2d 892 (1942). which had "listed criteria since employed by many courts in many contexts." These were: "Was the issue decided in the prior adjudication identical with the one presented in the action in question? Was there a final judgment on the merits? Was the party against whom the plea is asserted a party or in privity with a party to the prior adjudication?"402 U.S. at 323–24.
The Court approved the decision in Bernhardt for having chosen "to extirpate the mutuality requirement and put it to the torch." Instead, it considered it appropriate that "a party who has had one fair and full opportunity to prove a claim and has failed in that effort, should not be permitted to go to trial on the merits of that claim a second time. Both orderliness and reasonable time saving in judicial administration require that this be so unless some overriding consideration of fairness to a litigant dictates a different result in the circumstances of a particular case."402 U.S. at 324-25.
The Court saw a misallocation of resources in allowing "relitigation of issues where that can be achieved without compromising fairness in particular cases." It is no "longer tenable to afford a litigant more than one full and fair opportunity for judicial resolution of the same issue."402 U.S. at 328–29.
The Court then turned from general considerations of the soundness of requiring mutuality of estoppel to the specific context of patent validity determinations. The Court rejected the patentee's argument that "the unrestricted right to relitigate patent validity is ... an essential safeguard against improvident judgments of invalidity" by courts ill-equipped to deal with complex technological issues. Rather, it would be sufficient just to require that the patentee have "a fair opportunity procedurally, substantively and evidentially to pursue his claim the first time." To determine that it would be sufficient to rely "on the trial courts' sense of justice and equity."402 U.S. at 330–34.
Further, the costliness of patent litigation is an important consideration. Moreover, patent suits consume above average, indeed "inordinate" amount of judicial resources. The expense to the litigants and courts could better be put to more productive uses. Also, "[t]he tendency of Triplett [is] to multiply the opportunities for holders of invalid patents to exact licensing agreements or other settlements from alleged infringers," which can lead to harmful public consequences, including that "consumers will pay higher prices for goods covered by the invalid patent than would be true had the initial ruling of invalidity had at least the potential for broader effect."402 U.S. at 337–43, 346.
Based on these considerations the Court concluded:
When these judicial developments are considered in the light of our consistent view—last presented in Lear, Inc. v. Adkins—that the holder of a patent should not be insulated from the assertion of defenses and thus allowed to exact royalties for the use of an idea that is not in fact patentable or that is beyond the scope of the patent monopoly granted, it is apparent that the uncritical acceptance of the principle of mutuality of estoppel expressed in Triplett v. Lowell is today out of place.  Thus, we conclude that Triplett should be overruled to the extent it forecloses a plea of estoppel by one facing a charge of infringement of a patent that has once been declared invalid.402 U.S. at 349-50.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:Estoppel
Category:United States civil procedure case law
"""

From "Blue Chip Stamps v. Manor Drug Stores" ==> """
Blue Chip Stamps v. Manor Drug Stores, 421 U.S. 723 (1975), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which ruled that only those suffering direct loss from the purchase or sale of stock had standing to sue under federal securities law. The Court noted that under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, derivative investors are considered buyers or sellers of securities for application of SEC Rule 10b-5.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 421
Further reading
References
External links
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:United States securities case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Blueford v. Arkansas" ==> """
Blueford v. Arkansas, 566 U.S. 599 (2012), was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States that clarified the limits of the Double Jeopardy Clause. The Supreme Court held that the Double Jeopardy Clause does not bar retrial of counts that a jury had previously unanimously voted to acquit on, when a mistrial is declared after the jury deadlocked on a lesser included offense.
Alex Blueford was tried on capital murder and three lesser included offenses: first-degree murder, manslaughter, and negligent homicide. After deliberating, the jury reported that it had unanimously voted to acquit on the charges of capital murder and first-degree murder, but had deadlocked on manslaughter and had not voted on negligent homicide. The trial court declared a mistrial and denied a motion to dismiss the charges of capital murder and first-degree murder on double jeopardy grounds. The Supreme Court of Arkansas affirmed the denial of the motion on interlocutory appeal.
The Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the Supreme Court of Arkansas. Writing for the majority, Chief Justice Roberts held that because the jury did not formally acquit on any charges, the report of the foreperson that the jury had unanimously voted against capital murder and first-degree murder "lacked the finality" required to prevent a retrial. Further, Chief Justice Roberts found that the trial court's declaration of a mistrial was proper under the circumstances. Dissenting, Justice Sotomayor wrote that the state should not be able to retry Blueford on capital and first-degree murder because the jury had announced its unanimous vote against capital and first-degree murder in open court.
Background
Double Jeopardy Clause
The Double Jeopardy Clause of the United States Constitution generally prohibits criminally prosecuting a defendant twice for the same offense, mandating that:
The Supreme Court has delineated a number of exceptions to this general prohibition. In particular, retrial after a mistrial is governed by the "manifest necessity" rule first outlined by the Supreme Court's decision in United States v. Perez, which held that a retrial is not prohibited by the Double Jeopardy Clause after a mistrial where there is a "manifest necessity" in declaring a mistrialparticularly, following a hung jury.
Trial
Alex Blueford was tried in August 2009 on charges of capital murder and the lesser included offenses of first-degree murder, manslaughter, and negligent homicide arising from the death of his girlfriend's one-year-old son in November 2007. The trial judge instructed the jury to consider the lesser included offenses of first-degree murder, manslaughter, and negligent homicide only if the jury unanimously voted to acquit Blueford of the more serious charge of capital murder.Blueford v. Arkansas, , 132 S. Ct. 2044, 2054 (2012) (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). In the United States, juries must unanimously vote to give a verdict, whether to convict or to acquit. After deliberations, the jury foreperson informed the trial court that the jury was deadlocked. The trial judge and foreperson then engaged in the following colloquy:
The trial judge noted to the attorneys that the jurors "haven't even taken a vote on [negligent homicide].... I don't think they've completed their deliberation.... I mean, under any reasonable circumstances, they would at least take a vote on negligent homicide."Blueford v. Arkansas, , 132 S. Ct. 2044, 2059 (2012) (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). The trial judge then ordered the jury to continue deliberations. After further deliberation, the jury reported that it had still not come to a verdict, and the trial court declared a mistrial. The prosecution then decided to retry Blueford on all four original counts, and the trial judge denied Blueford's motion to dismiss the charges of capital murder and first-degree murder on double jeopardy grounds.
Supreme Court of Arkansas
Upon interlocutory appeal, the Supreme Court of Arkansas affirmed the denial of the motion to dismiss. The Supreme Court of Arkansas wrote that the jury foreperson's announcement that the jury had unanimously voted to acquit Blueford of capital murder and first-degree murder was not final and did not constitute a formal verdict. The Supreme Court of Arkansas further held that the trial court was not required to obtain a "partial verdict" on the capital murder and first-degree murder charges, and that the declaration of a mistrial on all charges was proper even though the jury had unanimously agreed to acquit on capital murder and first-degree murder charges. Accordingly, the Supreme Court of Arkansas held that the Double Jeopardy Clause did not prohibit Blueford's retrial.Blueford v. State, 2011 Ark. 8, 370 S.W.3d 496 (2011).
Supreme Court
Blueford sought review before the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.Blueford v. Arkansas, 565 U.S. ___, 132 S.Ct. 397 (2011).
Arguments
thumb|upright=1.3|Arkansas Attorney General Dustin McDaniel arguing the state's case before the United States Supreme Court.
Before the Supreme Court, Blueford argued that the Double Jeopardy Clause prohibits a retrial on charges of capital murder and first-degree murder because the foreperson's report that the jury had unanimously voted against those charges acquitted him of those charges. Blueford asserted that even though the jury had not filled out a formal form verdict, the foreperson's clear announcement in open court that the jury had unanimously voted to acquit Blueford of charges constituted a final verdict of acquittal. Additionally, Blueford argued that because the trial court had instructed the jury to consider the lesser included charges only if the jury had unanimously voted to acquit on the more serious charge, the jury's deadlock on manslaughter established that it had acquitted Blueford on capital murder and first-degree murder. Blueford also contended that because a conviction of a lesser included offense implicitly acquits on a more serious offense,Price v. Georgia,  a deadlock on a lesser included offense must also implicitly acquit on a more serious offense.
The prosecution replied that the jury never entered a final verdict which would foreclose further prosecution under the Double Jeopardy Clause. The prosecution noted that the foreperson's report was not final, and that the jury continued to deliberate after the foreperson announced the votes, and argued that because the trial judge did not engage in the typical "polling" of jurors to ensure the foreperson's report was truly unanimous, the report could not constitute a final verdict. The prosecution also contended that the trial judge's instructions that the jury unanimously vote that there was a reasonable doubt on one charge before discussing a lesser included charge did not require the jury to "acquit" Blueford because jurors could change their minds.
Various groups submitted arguments as amici curiae. The State of Michigan, joined by 22 states, submitted a brief in support of the prosecution arguing that requiring states to accept partial verdicts would overly coerce jurors. Conversely, the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers submitted a brief in support of Blueford asserting that partial verdicts should be required because the importance of double jeopardy protection outweighs any potential coercive effects on jurors.
Opinion of the Court
right|175px|thumb|Chief Justice Roberts delivered the opinion of the 6–3 majority.
In May 2012, the Supreme Court issued a decision affirming the Supreme Court of Arkansas by 6–3 vote. Writing for the majority, Chief Justice Roberts held that the foreperson's announcement to the trial court that the jury had unanimously voted to acquit on the charges of capital murder and first-degree murder did not constitute a verdict of acquittal because the jury resumed deliberating after the announcement:
The Court further held that the Constitution does not require states to accept "partial verdicts" before declaring a mistrial in order to retry a defendant in accordance with the Double Jeopardy Clause. The Court noted:
The Court accordingly found that there was no double jeopardy bar on retrial.
Dissent
left|175px|thumb|Justice Sotomayor wrote the dissent,  joined by two others.
Justice Sotomayor wrote a dissenting opinion joined by Justice Ginsburg and Justice Kagan. Justice Sotomayor wrote that the foreperson's announcement that the jury had unanimously voted against conviction on capital and first-degree murder constituted an acquittal under governing law:
Justice Sotomayor further wrote that states should allow juries to return partial verdicts before declaring mistrials because of hung juries:
Reception
Following the Supreme Court's decision, legal analyst Andrew Cohen, writing in The Atlantic, criticized the case as excessively narrowing the protections of the Double Jeopardy Clause, writing that "[t]he fact that it was theoretically possible that the jury could have changed its mind on the Blueford acquittals (during those 31 minutes of additional deliberations) was enough for Roberts and company to reward prosecutors with a second chance to convict Blueford of capital murder." Law review articles also criticized the decision as overly harsh: Warren M. Klinger of the University of Pennsylvania Law Review argued that the Supreme Court's decision was "too rigid", Jalem Peguero of the California Law Review critiqued the decision as "formality over substance", and James Sheppard of the Mississippi Law Journal argued that in light of the decision, "acquit first" states like Arkansas should act to give greater protection to criminal defendants.
Further trial
In June 2013, Blueford made no-contest plea to the first degree murder before a judge in the Pulaski County, Arkansas. In exchange for the plea, prosecutors dropped the charge of capital murder and offered a 10-year prison sentence. Blueford was denied parole in December 2014 due to nature and seriousness of the crime and age of the victim, but was granted parole in December 2016.
Blueford was shot dead in September 2019. 
See also
Double Jeopardy Clause
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 566
References
External links
 Supreme Court slip opinion
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
"""

From "Blyew v. United States" ==> """
Blyew v. United States (1871), was a court case that originated in Lewis County, Kentucky, where the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the states right to forbid African Americans to testify against white people.
 History 
On August 29, 1868, two white men by the names of John Blyew and George Kennard entered the house of the Foster family, an African American home in Lewis County, Kentucky. The two white men had a female with them, and they were arguing with the Foster family insisting they needed to house the woman. The two white men attacked the family with an axe; four African-Americans died and many were injured, including children.
The was a case heard before the U.S. Supreme Court in April 1872 addressing the civil rights of African Americans, as well as states' rights issues. The case involved the testimony of African-American victims of the attack. Kentucky state law prohibited the testimony of a "Negro" against a white man and barred African Americans from serving on juries. The case was eventually moved to Federal court, where the attackers were convicted. The State of Kentucky then appealed the case to the Supreme Court citing states' rights in defense of its laws prohibiting African Americans from testifying against whites. The case was a test of the Civil Rights Act of 1866. The Supreme Court ruled that victims were not entitled to protection from the state law because the word "affected" in the law did not apply to victims of crimes who are not defendants in a case. Noah Swayne (the first Republican appointed to the Supreme Court) and Joseph Bradley dissented.
Civil rights legislation was subsequently modified and comments in the dissent are noted for putting forth a group right to the adequate protection of the law. Justice William Strong wrote that any case involving an African American witness could be brought to a Federal Court if the court had ruled for the victims and upheld the right of African Americans to testify in court.
References
Further reading
The Family of Jack and Sallie Foster, Blyew v. United States," Notable Kentucky African Americans Database, accessed March 7, 2018
Blyew v. United States, 80 U.S. 13 Wall. 581 (1871)
Category:1872 in United States case law
Category:States' rights
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
"""

From "BMW of North America, Inc. v. Gore" ==> """
BMW of North America, Inc. v. Gore, 517 U.S. 559 (1996), was a United States Supreme Court case limiting punitive damages under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Facts
The plaintiff, Dr. Ira Gore, bought a new BMW, and later discovered that the vehicle had been repainted before he bought it. Defendant BMW of North America revealed that their policy was to sell damaged cars as new if the damage could be fixed for less than 3% of the cost of the car. Dr. Gore sued, and an Alabama jury awarded $4,000 in compensatory damages (lost value of the car) and $4 million in punitive damages, which was later reduced to $2 million by the Alabama Supreme Court. The punitive damages resulted not only from Dr. Gore's damages, but from BMW's egregious behavior across a broad spectrum of BMW purchasers over a multi-year period of time in which BMW repaired damaged vehicles and sold them as new to unsuspecting buyers as a matter of routine business operation.{L. Andrew Goggans, M.A.} The decision of the Alabama Supreme Court was then appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
Issue
Whether excessively high punitive damages violate the Due Process clause of the Constitution.
Opinion of the Court
The Court, in an opinion by Justice Stevens, found that the excessively high punitive damages in this case violate the Due Process clause. For punitive damages to stand, the damages must be reasonably necessary to vindicate the State's legitimate interest in punishment and deterrence. Punitive damages may not be "grossly excessive" – if they are, then they violate substantive due process.
The Supreme Court applied three factors in making this determination:
 The degree of reprehensibility of the defendant's conduct;
 The ratio to the compensatory damages awarded (actual or potential harm inflicted on the plaintiff); and
 Comparison of the punitive damages award and civil or criminal penalties that could be imposed for comparable misconduct.
Using these factors, the Court found that BMW's conduct was not particularly reprehensible (no reckless disregard for health or safety, nor even evidence of bad faith). The ratio of actual or potential damages to punitive damages was suspiciously high. Finally, the criminal sanctions available for similar conduct were limited to $2,000, making the $2 million assessment the equivalent of a severe criminal penalty.
The Court noted, however, that these three factors can be over-ridden if it is "necessary to deter future conduct".
Dissenting opinions were written by Justice Scalia and Justice Ginsburg, both contending that the Constitution was not implicated here, raising principles of federalism.
 Aftermath 
On remand, the Supreme Court of Alabama ordered a new trial unless plaintiff accepted a remittitur of all but $50,000 of the punitive damages awarded.BMW, Inc. v. Gore, 701 So. 2d 507 (Ala. 1997) The court reasoned that it may not have given sufficient weight to the degree of reprehensibility of BMW's conduct, and selected the $50,000 as in the range of other Alabama verdicts in cases of repaired cars being sold as new.
Federalism questions
In an academic article, following the arguments raised by the dissenting justices, Patrick Hubbard has questioned the appropriateness of federal courts reading substantive rights into the Due Process Clause of the United States Constitution in order to preempt the role of state courts and legislatures.F. Patrick Hubbard, "In Honor of Walter O. Weyrauch: Substantive Due Process Limits on Punitive Damages Awards: 'Morals With Technique?, 60 Fla. L. Rev. 349, 352 (2008). These same people say the Court should not spend its time as a "super jury", second-guessing jury verdicts, but rather, "[T]he court should be more deferential to state courts and legislatures, and more concerned with developing a coherent framework."
 See also 
 State Farm v. Campbell (2003)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 517
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
"Bad enough to punish: The application of the responsibility guidepost in punitive damages cases after BMW v. Gore" Federation of Insurance & Corporate Counsel Quarterly, Fall 1998
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States tort case law
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:BMW
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "BNSF Railway Co. v. Tyrrell" ==> """
BNSF Railway Co. v. Tyrrell, 581 U.S. ___, 137 S. Ct. 1549 (2017), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Montana courts lacked personal jurisdiction over a railroad that was not incorporated in Montana and did not have its principal place of business in Montana, even though the railroad had more than 2,000 miles of track and 2,000 employees within Montana. It was the first Supreme Court case argued before a Court that included newly appointed Associate Justice Neil Gorsuch.
Background
This case arose from two separate Federal Employers' Liability Act (FELA) actions involving employees of the BNSF Railway Company. The first action was brought by a North Dakota resident who claimed to have been injured while working as a truck driver for BNSF. The second action was commenced by the executor of a South Dakota resident who allegedly died following exposure to toxic substances while working for BNSF. Both plaintiffs filed their lawsuits in a Montana state court, although neither of the plaintiffs resided in Montana and the events underlying their cases did not take place in Montana.
BNSF moved to dismiss both lawsuits for lack of personal jurisdiction. The issue reached the Supreme Court of Montana, which sustained jurisdiction on two alternative grounds.Tyrrell v. BNSF Railway Co., 2016 MT 126, 383 Mont. 417, 373 P. 3d 1 (2016). First, the court concluded that personal jurisdiction over the railroad was authorized under Section 56 of FELA, which provides that a FELA action "may be brought in a district court of the United States, in the district of the residence of the defendant, or in which the cause of action arose, or in which the defendant shall be doing business at the time of commencing such action," and that "[t]he jurisdiction of the courts of the United States under this chapter shall be concurrent with that of the courts of the several States." Second, the court concluded that Montana could also exercise personal jurisdiction because BNSF had substantial operations in Montana, to the extent that it could be deemed "at home" in Montana for jurisdictional purposes.
BNSF sought U.S. Supreme Court review, contending that the first prong of the Montana Supreme Court's decision misconstrued FELA and the second was inconsistent with the U.S. Supreme Court's 2014 decision in Daimler AG v. Bauman.Daimler AG v. Bauman, 571 U.S. 117, 134 S. Ct. 746, 187 L. Ed. 2d 624 (2014). The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorariBNSF Railway Co. v. Tyrrell, 580 U.S. ___, 137 S. Ct. 810, 196 L. Ed. 2d 596 (2017). in order "to resolve whether [FELA] §56 authorizes state courts to exercise personal jurisdiction over railroads doing business in their States but not incorporated or headquartered there, and whether the Montana courts’ exercise of personal jurisdiction in these cases comports with due process."BNSF Railway Co. v. Tyrrell, 137 S. Ct. at 1555. The case was argued on April 25, 2017.
Opinion of the Court
On May 30, 2017, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg delivered the Court's opinion, which was joined by all but one of the Justices. The Court reversed the Montana Supreme Court's decision and held that Montana could not properly exercise personal jurisdiction over BNSF in these two cases.
Rejecting the Montana court's conclusion that personal jurisdiction could be based upon Section 56 of FELA, the Court held that Section 56 does not relate to personal jurisdiction. Rather, the first cited sentence of Section 56 governs selection of the venue in FELA cases brought in federal courts, and the next sentence confers concurrent subject-matter jurisdiction over FELA cases on state as well as federal courts. Section 56 did not establish a special rule for personal jurisdiction over railroads or other defendants subject to FELA claims.BNSF Railway Co. v. Tyrell, 137 S. Ct. at 1557-58.
The Court also concluded that Montana could not exercise personal jurisdiction over BNSF, on claims that did not arise in Montana, consistent with the federal Constitution as the Court had interpreted it in Daimler. The Court's decision in that case establishes that a state may exercise "general" personal jurisdiction over a corporation if the corporation is "at home" in that state. A corporation is deemed to be at home in its state of incorporation and the state in which it maintains its principal place of business, but BNSF is incorporated in Delaware and has its principal place of business in Texas. While Daimler recognized that a corporation might be found to be "at home" and subject to general jurisdiction in another state in "exceptional circumstances," there were no such circumstances here.BNSF Railway Co. v. Tyrell, 137 S. Ct. at 1558-59.
The employees also contended that BNSF had consented to personal jurisdiction in Montana. Because the Montana Supreme Court had not addressed this issue, the Court remanded the case to allow it to do so.BNSF Railway Co. v. Tyrell, 137 S. Ct. at 1559-60.
Concurring/dissenting opinion
Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote a separate opinion, concurring in part and dissenting in part. Justice Sotomayor agreed with the majority that Section 56 of FELA is not relevant to personal jurisdiction. However, she concluded that the Montana state courts could exercise jurisdiction over BNSF consistent with due process. Sotomayor continued to disagree with the Court's holding in Daimler, in which she had filed an opinion concurring in the judgment but disagreeing with the majority's reasoning, believing that the International Shoe Co. v. Washington standard should govern the inquiry. However, even if Daimler was correctly decided, the Montana courts should still have jurisdiction. At a minimum, she concluded, the Court should allow the Montana Supreme Court to reevaluate whether this case satisfies the "exceptional circumstances" test.BNSF Railway Co. v. Tyrell, 137 S. Ct. at 1560-62 (Sotomayor, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
References
Further reading
 Commentary, BNSF Railway Co. v. Tyrrell at Harvard Law Review
External links
Category:2017 in United States case law
Category:Montana state case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
Category:BNSF Railway
"""

From "Board of Airport Commissioners of Los Angeles v. Jews for Jesus, Inc." ==> """
Board of Airport Commissioners of Los Angeles v. Jews for Jesus, Inc., 482 U.S. 569 (1987), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that an ordinance prohibiting all "First Amendment activities" in the Los Angeles International Airport was facially unconstitutional due to its overbreadth.  
The unanimous opinion of the Court was written by Justice O'Connor. O'Connor wrote that the ordinance "reaches the universe of expressive activity, and, by prohibiting all protected expression, purports to create a virtual 'First Amendment Free Zone' at LAX". The Airport Commissioners argued that the ordinance would only be applied against activities that were related to the airport, but O'Connor pointed out that "wearing of a T-shirt or button that contains a political message" would still fall within the prohibition.
In a brief concurrence, Justice White expressed his concern that the decision did not address the question of whether the airport constituted a public forum.
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:Los Angeles International Airport
"""

From "Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet" ==> """
Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet, 512 U.S. 687 (1994), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court ruled on the constitutionality of a school district created with boundaries that matched that of a religious community – in this case, the Satmar community of Kiryas Joel, New York. The case was argued by Nathan Lewin on behalf of Kiryas Joel, Julie Mereson on behalf of the State of New York, and Jay Worona on behalf of the respondents.
Opinion of the court
The court, in an opinion by Justice Souter, held that the creation of a school district unit of government designed to coincide with the neighborhood boundaries of a religious group constitutes an unconstitutional aid to religion. Souter concluded that "government should not prefer one religion to another, or religion to irreligion": "There is more than a fine line between the voluntary association that leads to a political community comprising people who share a common religious faith, and the forced separation that occurs when the government draws explicit political boundaries on the basis of peoples'
faith. In creating the district in question, New York crossed that line."
Dissent
Justice Scalia, in his dissent, acknowledged that the residents of this district are Satmar Hasidic Jews, but noted of the Satmar community:
Scalia argued that the Satmar school district aided the Satmars as a culture rather than a religion, and thus did not constitute impermissible aid to a religious group.  The majority, Scalia asserted, would "laud this humanitarian legislation if all of the distinctiveness of the students of Kiryas Joel were attributable to the fact that their parents were nonreligious commune dwellers, or American Indians, or Gypsies," and concluded that "creation of a special, one-culture school district for the benefit of those children would pose no problem. The neutrality demanded by the Religion Clauses requires the same indulgence towards cultural characteristics that are accompanied by religious belief."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 512
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:Kiryas Joel, New York
Category:Satmar (Hasidic dynasty)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:1994 in religion
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Board of Education of Oklahoma City v. Dowell" ==> """
Board of Education of Oklahoma City v. Dowell, 498 U.S. 237 (1991), was a United States Supreme Court case "hasten[ing] the end of federal court desegregation orders." The Court held that a federal desegregation order should be ended even though it meant that schools would become re-segregated since the Oklahoma schools had been arranged into a unitary system.
 See also 
 National Gay Task Force v. Board of Education: An employment law case for the Oklahoma City schools
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:Education in Oklahoma City
Category:Segregation
Category:United States equal protection case law
"""

From "Board of Education of the Hendrick Hudson Central School District v. Rowley" ==> """
Board of Education of the Hendrick Hudson Central School District v. Rowley, 458 U.S. 176 (1982), is a United States Supreme Court case concerning the interpretation of the Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975. Amy Rowley was a deaf student, whose school refused to provide a sign language interpreter. Her parents filed suit contending violation of the Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975. In a 6–3 decision authored by Justice Rehnquist, the Court held that public schools are not required by law to provide sign language interpreters to deaf students who are otherwise receiving an equal and adequate education.
Background
In the early 1970s, a series of Federal District Court cases – namely Pennsylvania Association for Retarded Children (PARC) v. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (1971) and Mills v. Board of Education of District of Columbia (1972) – found a right to education for children with disabilities on the basis of due process and equal protection.Harvard Law Review, 1979, p. 1104 A 1974 investigation by Congress found that more than 1.75 million children with disabilities received no public education and that another 3 million who did attend school did not receive education services appropriate to their needs.  In 1975 Congress passed and President Ford signed into law the Education for All Handicapped Children Act (EAHCA). The Act mandated that all children with disabilities receive a "free appropriate public education." To achieve this goal, the act required the student, parents and teachers together devise an Individualized Education Program (IEP), however the Act did not specify that those IEPs include any particular services, standards or outcomes. 
In 1976, respondents Clifford and Nancy Rowley met with the principal of Furnace Woods Elementary  School in the Hendrick Hudson Central School District of Montrose, New York to discuss accommodations for their hearing-impaired daughter, Amy Rowley, who would be starting kindergarten there the following year. After having placed her in a regular kindergarten class on a trial basis, Amy was provided with an FM hearing aid and completed her kindergarten year, advancing on to first grade. In accordance with the Education for All Handicapped Children Act, an IEP was created for Amy which included the continued use of her FM hearing aid, but did not include a sign language interpreter. The school, in consultation with the school district's Committee on the Handicapped, contended that Amy did not need an interpreter. Her parents disagreed with that finding and received a hearing with an independent examiner. The examiner concluded that "Amy was achieving educationally, academically, and socially without such assistance." After losing their appeal to the New York Commissioner of Education, the Rowleys brought suit in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York contending that denial of a sign language interpreter violated the EAHCA's guarantee of a free appropriate public education.
Lower courts
The case was heard before District Court Judge Vincent L. Broderick in late September 1979. At the evidentiary hearing, the Rowleys presented evidence that showed Amy, despite her academic success so far, was not able to fully achieve in the classroom with the resources available. They provided test results showing that Amy understood only about 60 percent of discussion in the classroom, while an interpreter would put her closer to 100%. They further provided results from two academic achievement tests Amy took in first grade, one administered in English and the other in American Sign Language. She had average performance on the test administered in English, but performed "well above average" on the test administered in American Sign Language.Rowley, 483 F. Supp. at 532. Based upon this evidence, Judge Broderick determined that even with the existing accommodations, Amy was not achieving her full potential.
Because of his determination that Amy would be more successful with an interpreter, Judge Broderick ruled that failure to provide her with one violated the Education for All Handicapped Children Act. He stated that "The Act itself does not define 'appropriate education'" nor had a common law interpretation arisen.Rowley, 483 F. Supp. at 533. The requirements of the act, Judge Broderick argued, fell somewhere between a simply "adequate" education and one that allows the student to achieve their full potential, neither extreme being possible. Based on the testimony of Dr. Zavarella, Amy's principal, who said that the district would only provide an interpreter if Amy proved to be failing academically, Judge Broderick determined that the defendants were merely providing an adequate education but not an appropriate education.Rowley, 483 F. Supp. at 534. The New York Commissioner of Education was overruled and the defendants were ordered to provide Amy a sign language interpreter.
Hendrick Hudson School District and the Commissioner of Education appealed the decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. The three judge panel issued a per curiam decision affirming the district court's judgement. Circuit Judge Mansfield dissented from the opinion, arguing that the act did in fact define an "appropriate education", that deference should have been given to educational authorities on educational matters, and that certain affidavits admitted into evidence and used in the basis of the decision constituted impermissible hearsay. The Board appealed again and the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Supreme Court
The Supreme Court heard oral arguments on 23 March 1982. Raymond G. Kuntz, advocate for the petitioners, argued that the Education for All Handicapped Children Act did not require the provision of any specific services, but rather is a funding statute saying "the Act could have described specific services and it did not."Transcript of Oral Argument at 8,  The Justices questioned him as to the "full potential" standard laid out in the lower court rulings, particularly whether a sign language interpreter would be required to meet such a standard. Kuntz argued that the "full potential" standard could be satisfied without a sign language interpreter, but maintained that the standard was erroneous.  Such a standard, petitioners contended, was "not a requirement that can be fulfilled by any school district" and criticized the District Court ruling as creating "unworkable" tests that could not be adequately applied in practice.Transcript of Oral Argument at 20-21,  Kuntz also raised the argument that determinations of educational services and content were, constitutionally, matters delegated to the states.
Michael A. Chatoff, a deaf lawyer, represented the Rowleys. Although deaf, Chatoff was able to speak and delivered his arguments orally in English while he was able to respond to justices' questions using a computer-aided transcription system involving a stenographer and a computer monitor supplied by Gallaudet University and Translation Systems, Inc.Smith, 1989, p. 20 The equipment had to be specially approved by the Court, and it was the first time the Court approved the use of such electronic equipment and the first time a deaf person argued before the Supreme Court.Kleiman, 24 March 1982
Chatoff argued that "the goal of the Act is to provide handicapped children with equal educational opportunities."Transcript of Oral Argument at 23,  Asked to justify that interpretation, Chatoff pointed to the legislative record arguing it was the intent of the legislation rather than the text of the statute specifically.Transcript of Oral Argument at 27,  The justices also questioned him about the implications of upholding such an interpretation, specifically "will your interpretation of the statute require every school board to provide a sign language interpreter for every deaf child in the country?"Transcript of Oral Argument at 25-26,  Chatoff argued that the case was specific to Amy and distinguished between what Amy needed and what other students similarly situated may or may not need: "The deaf community is not a monolithic entity....Not every deaf child can be educated in the public school....Children who are educated in special schools or in research rooms have no need for interpreters. Children raised using the oral method have no need for interpreters. It will be only very specific instances."Transcript of Oral Argument at 26, 
Arguing on behalf of the United States in support of the respondents, Elliot Schulder focused largely on matters of statutory interpretation rather than specific outcomes for Amy. When pressed by the justices regarding the educational standards required, he contended that the district court opinion went too far: "the emphasis is not on potential or shortfall from potential, but on the making available to handicapped children the same opportunities that are available to non-handicapped children to benefit from the regular educational program that the state or local school authorities provide."Transcript of Oral Argument at 30-31,  The justices brought up an issue Kuntz, for the petitioner, touched on: "what's this court supposed to do? Independently make its own judgment or ... [say] all I'm allowed to do is to decide whether the school acted arbitrarily?"Transcript of Oral Argument at 33,  Essentially, should the court rule on whether aspects of the individual education program allow a disabled child to reach their full potential or is the approval of an individual education program sufficient to satisfy the act. Schulder argues a middle ground: "We don't think the court has to measure potential, but we do believe that the court has to make an independent determination whether, in this particular case, for example, the plan as developed provides the child in question access to the same educational opportunity available to non-handicapped children."Transcript of Oral Argument at 36, 
On rebuttal, Kuntz argued against the district court's contention that Amy only understands 59% of what occurs in the classroom. He contended that their evidence was more persuasive to show that Amy was understanding everything without a sign language interpreter. The district court based its finding on a word discrimination test conducted outside the classroom. Their experts, who observed Amy in the classroom, had determined "Amy understands nearly all of what transpires in her classroom."Transcript of Oral Argument at 45, Transcript of Oral Argument at 42-46, 
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|upright|alt=A portrait of William Rehnquist|Justice William Rehnquist wrote for the majority.
On June 28, 1982, the Court handed down a 6–3 decision in favor of the petitioners. Justice William Rehnquist wrote for the majority, with Justice Byron White writing the principle dissent joined by Justices William Brennan, Jr. and Thurgood Marshall. The Court answered two questions: "what is meant by the Act's requirement of a 'free appropriate public education'? And what is the role of state and federal courts in exercising the review granted by 20 U.S.C. § 1415?"
The Court held that both District and Appeals Courts were wrong in their contention that the intent of the law was to provide for disabled children's full potentials but rather to simply give them access. They specifically overruled the District Court's finding that "The Act itself does not define 'appropriate education'", with Justice Rehnquist quoting the text of the statute itself: "The term 'free appropriate public education' means special education and related services" followed by further definitions of those terms. quoting (18) Instead, the text of the legislation and the legislative intent show that the purpose of the law was not to allow each child to achieve their full potential, but to simply provide sufficient resources for disabled children to access education. Rehnquist pointed to the text of the Act creating a prioritization of how resources are to be allocated: "States receiving money under the Act must provide education to the handicapped by priority, first "to handicapped children who are not receiving an education" and second "to handicapped children ... with the most severe handicaps who are receiving an inadequate education." quoting (3) In his concurrence, Justice Blackmun disagreed with the majority's finding of legislative intent, quoting his previous concurrence in Pennhurst State School v. Halderman: "it seems plain to me that Congress, in enacting this statute, intended to do more than merely set out politically self-serving but essentially meaningless language about what the handicapped deserve at the hands of state authorities." quoting  He agreed with the final judgement of the Court, however, as he, like the majority, believed the District Court should not have prescribed its own remedy but "should have given greater deference than they did to the findings of the School District's impartial hearing officer and the State's Commissioner of Education".
They next tackled the question of the role of the Courts in the judicial review process. Under the Act, parents are provided a civil cause of action in courts when other administrative appeals are exhausted. The Court rejected the petitioners' contention that this right to judicial review only applied to procedural review of the administrative appeals and whether the decision was based on sufficient evidence. However they likewise stopped short of the de novo review that the Rowleys had advocated for which would allow the courts to prescribe particular educational methods like the District Court had. Rather, the majority held that a court must assess two question: "First, has the State complied with the procedures set forth in the Act? And second, is the individualized educational program developed through the Act's procedures reasonably calculated to enable the child to receive educational benefits? If these requirements are met, the State has complied with the obligations imposed by Congress, and the courts can require no more." Quoting San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez, the Court reiterated that the judicial branch lacks the expertise "to resolve persistent and difficult questions of educational policy." quoting  (internal quotation marks omitted)
Subsequent developments
Since the  Supreme Court made its ruling on the basis of a statute (the EAHCA), not the Constitution, the precedent is only controlling so long as the relevant language of the law remains in effect. There is significant debate today over whether the standard enunciated in Board of Education v. Rowley has been superseded by such legislative changes. Amendments to IDEA during the 1997 and 2004 reauthorizations, the No Child Left Behind Act of 2002 and Common Core all include standards that potentially replace the judiciary standard. In J.L. and M.L., and their minor daughter, K.L. v. Mercer Island School District (2006), U.S. District Court Judge Marsha J. Pechman wrote that the IDEA reauthorization of 1997 represents "such a significant departure from the previous legislative scheme that any citation to pre-1997 case law on special education is suspect," though Judge Pechman's decision was overturned by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in 2010.Wright & Wright, 2007
The Rowleys had already decided to move to New Jersey and one year after losing the Supreme Court case did so. Rowley stated decades later that when the school district found out they were moving, they put a lien on the house to recover their costs in litigation.Rowley, 2008, p. 327 In New Jersey, Amy was enrolled in a day school for the deaf where deaf students were mainstreamed. She completed a PhD. in Second Language Education at the University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee in 2014 and is presently Associate Professor and Coordinator of the American Sign Language Program in the Modern Languages and Literatures Department at California State University, East Bay.
In 2004 the Rowley family donated their papers pertaining to the case to Syracuse University Library.Finding Aid, Rowley Family Papers, circa 1974-1984, n.d., Special Collections Research Center, Syracuse University Libraries, Syracuse, N.Y.
Commentary and analysis
Board of Education v. Rowley is the most significant court case concerning the interpretation of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. It was the only occasion the U.S. Supreme Court has ruled on the requirement of public schools to provide an appropriate education to students with disabilities until Endrew F. v. Douglas County School Dist. RE–1 was decided in 2017. It is estimated that it has been cited by at least 3,279 cases.Weber, 2012, p. 1 In a 2008 article published in the Journal of Law and Education, Julie F. Mead and Mark A. Paige described Rowley as "the primary precedent whenever the educational rights of children with disabilities are considered." Likewise, in a 2012 article, Mark C. Weber wrote that Rowley "remains the most important American special education case ever decided." Joyce O. Eckrem and Eliza J. McArthur stated in 2001 that Rowley has been described as a "seminal case", though they also recognized that the case did not "provide clarity on the issue of appropriateness" and that the Court only "cryptically addressed" the question of how to measure benefits for students. In a 2005 article published in the Suffolk University Law Review, Lester Aron also noted that circuit courts of appeal have issued conflicted rulings when interpreting Rowley.
Several scholars, including Elizabeth Drake, Scott F. Johnson and Maureen A. MacFarlane, have observed that some courts have moved away from Rowley "some educational benefit" standard and have instead adopted a heightened "meaningful educational benefit" standard.; ;  Some commentators, such as Charlene K. Quade, argue that this "expanded reading" of Rowley reflects "sound" policy. Similarly, Scott F. Johnson has argued that the "some educational benefit" standard should be disfavored because it leads to "a system where schools do not necessarily have to do what is best for the child", though Johnson recommends pursuing legislative revisions rather than further reinterpretations of Rowley. On the other hand, some commentators, such as Terry Jean Seligmann, have argued that courts interpreting Rowley should give "due weight" to administrative determinations made by school boards and that courts should generally defer to the judgment of these administrators.
See also
 Education for All Handicapped Children Act
 Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
 Free Appropriate Public Education
 Individualized Education Program
 Least restrictive environment
Select subsequent case law effecting Rowley
 Polk v. Central Susquehana Intermediate Unit 16 (1988)
 Cypress-Fairbanks Independent School District v. Michael F. (1997)
 Endrew F. v. Douglas County School District (2017)
References
Bibliography
Court documents
Secondary sources
External links
 Finding Aid for the Rowley Family Papers (circa 1974-1984) at Syracuse University Library
Category:United States disability case law
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Public education in the United States
Category:Special education in the United States
"""

From "Board of Education v. Earls" ==> """
Board of Education v. Earls, 536 U.S. 822 (2002), was a case by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held, 5–4, that it does not violate the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution for public schools to conduct mandatory drug testing on students participating in extracurricular activities.
The case centered around a policy adopted by the school district of Tecumseh, Oklahoma requiring all students involved in extracurricular activities, including the school's sports teams, to consent to urinalysis testing for drugs. Two students, Lindsay Earls and Daniel James, brought a lawsuit against the school board, alleging that the policy violated the Fourth Amendment's prohibition of unreasonable search and seizure.
Background
The Student Activities Drug Testing Policy adopted by the Tecumseh, Oklahoma School District requires all middle and high school students to consent to urinalysis testing for drugs in order to participate in any extracurricular activity. Two Tecumseh High School students and their parents brought suit, alleging that the policy violates the Fourth Amendment. The District Court granted the School District summary judgment. In reversing, the Court of Appeals held that the policy violated the Fourth Amendment. The appellate court concluded that before imposing a suspicionless drug-testing program, a school should demonstrate some identifiable drug abuse problem among a sufficient number of those tested, such that testing that group will actually redress its drug problem, which the School District failed to demonstrate.
Opinion of the Court
In a majority opinion delivered by Justice Clarence Thomas, the Court held that students in extracurricular activities had a diminished expectation of privacy, and that the policy furthered an important interest of the school in preventing drug use among students. This rationale was based on the precedent Vernonia School District 47J v. Acton (1995), which allowed drug testing for athletes. Justice Stephen Breyer filed an opinion concurring in the Court's judgment.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:2002 in United States case law
Category:2002 in education
Category:Education in Pottawatomie County, Oklahoma
Category:Student rights case law in the United States
Category:Drug testing
"""

From "Board of Estimate of City of New York v. Morris" ==> """
Board of Estimate of City of New York v. Morris, 489 U.S. 688 (1989), was a case argued before the United States Supreme Court regarding the structure of the New York City Board of Estimate.
Background
Under the charter of the City of Greater New York established in 1898, the Board of Estimate was responsible for budget and land-use decisions for the city. It was composed of eight ex officio members: the Mayor of New York City, the New York City Comptroller and the President of the New York City Council, each of whom was elected citywide and had two votes, and the five Borough presidents, each having one vote.Being Borough President  , Gotham Gazette, July 18, 2005
In 1981, attorney Richard Emery recruited three NYC women to file suit that the board was unconstitutional, an unpopular opinion at the time that lost in its first district court hearing. The ruling was later reversed on appeal, and the city's counter was picked up by the Supreme Court in 1988.
Opinion of the Court
The court unanimously declared the New York City Board of Estimate unconstitutional on the grounds that the city's most populous borough (Brooklyn) had no greater effective representation on the board than the city's least populous borough (Staten Island), in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause pursuant to the Court's 1964 "one man, one vote" decision (Reynolds v. Sims).Cornell Law School Supreme Court Collection: Board of Estimate of City of New York v. Morris, accessed June 12, 2006. The Board was disestablished.
The case was argued on December 7, 1988, and decided on March 22, 1989. Justice Byron White delivered the Court's opinion.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 489
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 One Person, One Vote
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States One Person, One Vote Legal Doctrine
Category:Government of New York City
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:City of New York litigation
"""

From "Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth" ==> """
Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564 (1972), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court concerning alleged discrimination against a nontenured teacher at Wisconsin State University-Oshkosh.
David Roth was hired as a first year assistant professor of political science in 1968 for a fixed term of one year, with a possibility of extension on mutual consent of the parties. In accordance with procedural rules set by the Board of Regents, the president of the University informed Roth he would not be rehired for the next academic year, giving him no reason for the decision and no opportunity to challenge it in any sort of hearing. The Board's employment rules provided opportunity for review of teachers "dismissed" before the end of the employment term, but did not extend these protections to teachers whose contracts were simply not renewed.
Roth brought suit in federal district court alleging that he was being punished for statements he had made that were critical of the university administration. He said the decision not to rehire him infringed his First Amendment right to freedom of speech. He also alleged that the university's failure to provide a hearing violated his Fourteenth Amendment right to procedural due process of law.
In an opinion delivered by Justice Stewart, the Supreme Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment does not require an opportunity for a hearing prior to the nonrenewal of a nontenured state teacher's contract, unless he can show that the nonrenewal deprived him of an interest in "liberty" or that he had a "property" interest in continued employment, despite the lack of tenure or a formal contract.
Justice Douglas dissented, writing "When a violation of First Amendment rights is alleged, the reasons for dismissal or for nonrenewal of an employment contract must be examined to see if the reasons given are only a cloak for activity or attitudes protected by the Constitution."
Justice Marshall wrote a separate dissent saying that "every citizen who applies for a government job is entitled to it unless the government can establish some reason for denying the employment." He held government to higher scrutiny than private employers and said that government employees deserve "fair and adequate information" at their terminations in order to protect against arbitrary behavior.
See also
Perry v. Sindermann, 408 U.S. 593 (1972)
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 408
External links
 Full-text opinion from Findlaw.com
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:Higher education case law
Category:University of Wisconsin–Oshkosh
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System v. Southworth" ==> """
Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System v. Southworth, 529 U.S. 217 (2000), is a ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States which held that public universities may subsidize campus groups by means of a mandatory student activity fee without violating the students' First Amendment rights.. 
Background
On April 2, 1996, three law students at the University of Wisconsin–Madison sued in federal court challenging the constitutionality of the university's mandatory student fee system, arguing that it was unconstitutional for portions of their student fee to fund political or ideological activities with which they disagreed.  The plaintiff students were particularly concerned with multi-cultural groups, environmental groups, and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender groups.  The Board of Regents and the university system defended the fee system.
On November 29, 1996  the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin in Southworth v. Grebe granted summary judgment in favor of the three law students. The district court ruled that the fee system violated the students' free-speech rights by compelling them to fund speech they disagreed with. On August 10, 1998, a three-judge panel of the 7th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Southworth v. Grebe upheld the district court decision in favor of the three students. The appeals court panel concluded that the university funding of private political speech was not germane to its mission and that even if it were the university did not have a compelling reason to require students to fund speech they opposed.
On October 27, 1998, the full 7th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals denied a petition for rehearing. The University of Wisconsin appealed the case to the Supreme Court, arguing that the marketplace of ideas created by student fees is an appropriate and important part of the school's educational mission.  On March 29, 1999 the U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari because the 7th Circuit's decision conflicted with precedent established in other circuit courts.
On March 22, 2000, the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously overturned the 7th Circuit ruling that ruled mandatory student fees unconstitutional.  Mandatory student fees currently fund a diverse array of activities ranging from lecture series to health services to the student newspaper. The Supreme Court's ruling provided a legal framework for a student fee system that engages students on issues ranging all over the political, social, and activist spectrum.
Summary of the ruling
The Court held that the government can require public university students to pay a student activity fee even if the fee is used to support political and ideological speech by student groups whose beliefs are offensive to the student, as long as the program is viewpoint neutral.
The opinion of the Supreme Court, written by Justice Kennedy, made these key points:
(1) The range of activities funded is appropriate to the mission of the university.
 (a) "The speech the University seeks to encourage in the program before us is distinguished, not by discernible limits, but by its vast, unexplored bounds. To insist upon asking what speech is germane would be contrary to the very goal the University seeks to pursue. It is not for the Court to say what is or is not germane to the ideas to be pursued in an institution of higher learning."Southworth, 529 U.S. at 232.
 (2) Student organizations cannot be denied funding based on their viewpoint.
(a) "We conclude that the University of Wisconsin may sustain the extracurricular dimensions of its programs by using mandatory student fees with viewpoint neutrality as the operational principle."Southworth, 529 U.S. at 234-35.
(3) Campuses that allocate mandatory fees to a wide variety of student groups are constitutionally allowable.
 (a) "We decline to impose a system of that sort as a constitutional requirement, however. The restriction could be so disruptive and expensive that the program to support extracurricular speech would be ineffective."
 (4) Universities enjoy unique free-speech protections that are different and separate from labor unions and Bar associations because "the means of implementing First Amendment protections, adopted in those decisions, are neither applicable, nor workable in the context of extracurricular student speech at a university."Southworth, 529 U.S. at 230.
 (5) It makes no difference if the activities supported by the fee are conducted on or off campus.
 (a) "We make no distinction between campus activities and the off-campus expressive activities of objectionable [student groups]. Universities, like all of society, are finding that traditional conceptions of territorial boundaries are difficult to insist upon in an age marked by revolutionary changes in communications, information transfer, and the means of discourse."Southworth, 529 U.S. at 234.
"Viewpoint neutrality" and the First Amendment
When the Court states that funds must be allocated in a viewpoint-neutral manner, it means that funding decisions cannot be based on a particular group or activity's point of view. Thus, the decision to fund or not to fund an organization cannot be contingent on the content of the group's message. This method of allocating funds protects students' free speech rights by ensuring that all viewpoints, including those that are controversial, have an equal chance to receive student fee funding. However, the concept of viewpoint neutrality has been subject to misinterpretation:
Viewpoint neutrality does not mean that all groups should receive the same amount of money. If this were true, then the chess club would receive the same amount of funding as the student newspaper, which would result in either excessively extravagant chess sets or a student paper unable to publish and distribute its work. Instead, all viewpoints receive the same opportunity to receive student funding.
Viewpoint neutrality does not mean that by funding one point of view, the university must automatically fund an "opposite" point of view. First, most organizations and activities do not have an opposite point of view. Second, even in a situation where a pro-life group and a pro-choice group apply for funding, it is not necessary to fund both groups at the same level, or even to fund both at all. Chances are strong that one of the two groups provides a greater level of services to the student body, and thus, deserves more funding. However, the level of services provided and other objective criteria should direct the funding decision rather than the viewpoint of either group.
The Court makes "no distinction between the on and off-campus activities" of student organizations and states that "universities possess significant interests in encouraging students to take advantage of the social, civic, cultural, and religious opportunities available in surrounding communities and throughout the country."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:University of Wisconsin System
Category:2000 in education
Category:Student rights case law in the United States
Category:Higher education case law
"""

From "Board of Trade of City of Chicago v. Olsen" ==> """
Board of Trade of City of Chicago v. Olsen, 262 U.S. 1 (1923), is a United States Supreme Court decision in which the Court upheld the Grain Futures Act as constitutional under the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution.Board of Trade v. Olsen, 262 U.S. 1, 31-33 (1923).
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 262
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States commodity and futures case law
Category:1923 in United States case law
Category:Chicago Board of Trade litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
"""

From "Board of Trustees of Scarsdale v. McCreary" ==> """
Board of Trustees of Scarsdale v. McCreary, 471 U.S. 83 (1985), was a United States Supreme Court case in which an evenly split Court upheld per curiam a lower court's decision that the display of a privately sponsored nativity scene on public property does not violate the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment..
 Background 
The Village of Scarsdale (coextensive with the Town of Scarsdale) in Westchester County, New York had permitted since 1957 the annual display of creches sponsored by the Scarsdale Creche Committee, a private organization, in Boniface Circle, a small public park in the central business district, for about two weeks during the Christmas season. However, in 1981, the Village Board of Trustees began barring the placement of nativity scenes in the park due to increasing opposition from residents, fifty percent of whom were Jewish, who deemed it "unneighborly" and "insensitive."
In 1983, the Creche Committee along with a group of twelve residents (one of whom is resident Kathleen McCreary), referred to as the Citizens' Group, brought a suit against the Scarsdale Board of Trustees in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York, arguing that the Board's withdrawal of permission to display the nativity scene in the park was a violation of the First Amendment's protection of free speech and free exercise of religion. Judge Charles E. Stewart, Jr. ruled on December 8, 1983, in the case of McCreary v. Stone that the display of the nativity scene did, indeed, constitute an impermissible establishment of religion, stating that ''when a symbol is left on public land, the land becomes the message-bearer.''
The decision was appealed and argued before the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in June 1984. The appeals court affirmed the district court's determination that the Village's denial of the display of the nativity scene was content-based (meaning the denial was based on the religious nature of the display) as well as its findings of fact. However, the court of appeals disagreed with the district court's analysis of Widmar v. Vincent (on which its decision was partially based) in light of Lynch v. Donnelly (which came only one month after the district court's ruling) saying "an equal-access policy would not contravene the establishment clause." The court of appeals reversed the decision and remanded the case.
The Scarsdale Board interpreted the court of appeals' decision to mean it was compelled to display the nativity scene on public land. The board of trustees voted unanimously to appeal the decision to the Supreme Court.
 Issue 
At issue was whether the display of a privately sponsored nativity scene, a religious symbol, on public land was a violation of the separation of church and state laid out in the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the Constitution. This protection against the establishment of religion was balanced against the First Amendment protections of free speech and free exercise of religion.
 Opinion of the Court 
The case was argued before the Supreme Court on February 20, 1985, and a decision was announced on March 27, 1985.
Justice Powell did not partake in the consideration and decision of the case because he was recovering from surgery at the time. With an evenly split Court, the decision of the lower court of appeals was affirmed per curiam. The Supreme Court declined to order that the case be re-argued at a later date.
It is ambiguous in the lower court's decision whether the village government may adopt neutral rules permitting or excluding the display of a privately sponsored nativity scene on public land or whether it is obliged to permit the display of the nativity scene on public land.
Justices O'Connor, Rehnquist and White during oral argument disagreed with the Village's interpretation of the appeals court's decision as meaning it was compelled to display the nativity scene on public lands. Instead, they read the decision more narrowly to state that the Village may prohibit the nativity scene on a more neutral basis.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 471
 Lynch v. Donnelly (1984)
 References 
 External links 
 United States' amicus brief
 U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit opinion on McCreary v. Stone
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Westchester County, New York
Category:1985 in religion
Category:Christmas in New York (state)
Category:Scarsdale, New York
"""

From "Board of Trustees of State University of New York v. Fox" ==> """
Board of Trustees of State University of New York v. Fox, 492 U.S. 469 (1989), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court instructed a lower court to reevaluate the compatibility of a resolution of the State University of New York that prohibited private commercial enterprises from operating in SUNY facilities with the First Amendment..  "Viewing the challenged application of the resolution as a restriction on commercial speech, and therefore applying the test articulated in Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Comm'n of New York, 447 U.S. 557, the Court of Appeals concluded that it was unclear whether the resolution directly advanced the State's asserted interests and whether, if it did, it was the least restrictive means to that end. The court therefore reversed and remanded to the trial court." The Court instructed the lower court to use the standard outlined in Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission (1980). and determine whether the restriction on speech advanced the state's interest and, if so, whether the state's method was the least restrictive means to that end.
 References 
External links
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Overbreadth case law
Category:State University of New York
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett" ==> """
Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett, 531 U.S. 356 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case about Congress's enforcement powers under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Supreme Court decided that Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act was unconstitutional, insofar as it allowed states to be sued by private citizens for money damages.
Background
The plaintiffs were Milton Ash and Patricia Garrett, both employees of the University of Alabama school system. They were disabled under the definition of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Ash was a security guard who had a lifelong history of severe asthma, and Garrett was a nurse who had been diagnosed with breast cancer requiring time-consuming radiation and chemotherapy treatments. Both alleged that they had been discriminated against at their jobs. The university had refused to assign Ash to duties that would alleviate his asthma and insisted on transferring Garrett because of her absences. Ash and Garrett filed a suit in federal court against the University of Alabama for damages, arguing that the university had violated Title I of the ADA, which prohibiting discrimination in employment on the basis of disability.
The University of Alabama responded with a motion to dismiss on the grounds that the Eleventh Amendment prohibited the suit. The United States District Court for the Northern District of Alabama dismissed both cases on that ground, but the Eleventh Circuit reversed and held that Congress had expressly abrogated the sovereign immunity of the states.
Issue
Can Congress abrogate states' immunity under its Fourteenth Amendment power to enforce the Equal Protection Clause?
Decision
The majority opinion stated that Congress, in enacting the ADA, had satisfied the requirement that it make clear its intention to abrogate state sovereign immunity and allow states to be sued for damages under the Fourteenth Amendment.  However, the majority opinion also stated that part of the ADA to lack the "congruence and proportionality" required when Congress exercises its enforcement power under the Fourteenth Amendment, citing City of Boerne v. Flores (1997).
Under the Equal Protection Clause, discrimination against people with disabilities is analyzed by "rational basis" scrutiny: if the discrimination has a rational basis, it is constitutional. In this case, the Court held that Congress, like the judiciary, was required to use rational basis review of state action, with its presumptions favoring constitutionality.  The Supreme Court decided that the legislative record of the ADA "fails to show that Congress did in fact identify a pattern of irrational state discrimination in employment against the disabled."
The Supreme Court stated that the "reasonable accommodation" requirement of the ADA law failed the congruence and proportionality test despite the hardship exception to the accommodation requirement:
"The ADA does except employers from the 'reasonable accommodatio[n]' requirement where the employer 'can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity.' § 12112(b)(5)(A). However, even with this exception, the accommodation duty far exceeds what is constitutionally required in that it makes unlawful a range of alternate responses that would be reasonable but would fall short of imposing an 'undue burden' upon the employer. The Act also makes it the employer's duty to prove that it would suffer such a burden, instead of requiring (as the Constitution does) that the complaining party negate reasonable bases for the employer’s decision. See ibid."
The Supreme Court called disability discrimination rational in that hiring non-disabled employees would conserve scarce financial resources by avoiding the need for costly reasonable accommodations: "whereas it would be entirely rational (and therefore constitutional) for a state employer to conserve scarce financial resources by hiring employees who are able to use existing facilities, the ADA requires employers to 'mak[e] existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities.'"
Thus, states have rational reasons for violating the part of the ADA law banning policies that have a disparate impact on the disabled. Even in cases of racial discrimination in which the courts apply a different standard of scrutiny to government action from rational basis review, evidence of disparate impact is insufficient:
"The ADA also forbids 'utilizing standards, criteria, or methods of administration' that disparately impact the disabled, without regard to whether such conduct has a rational basis. § 12112(b)(3)(A). Although disparate impact may be relevant evidence of racial discrimination, see Washington v. Davis, 426 U. S. 229, 239 (1976), such evidence alone is insufficient even where the Fourteenth Amendment subjects state action to strict scrutiny."
The Supreme Court had held in Village of Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Housing Corp. (1977) that disparate impact was not proof of discrimination based on "race, color or national origin," which would trigger strict scrutiny.
The Supreme Court considered the burden of proof to be on those who allege a state action toward the disabled to be irrational: "Moreover, the State need not articulate its reasoning at the moment a particular decision is made. Rather, the burden is upon the challenging party to negative "'any reasonably conceivable state of facts that could provide a rational basis for the classification.'" Heller, supra, at 320 (quoting FCC v. Beach Communications, Inc., 508 U.S. 307, 313 (1993))."
The Supreme Court mentioned the government's argument that "the inquiry as to unconstitutional discrimination should extend not only to States themselves, but to units of local governments, such as cities and counties." It admitted that local governments "are 'state actors' for purposes of the Fourteenth Amendment" but added, "These entities are subject to private claims for damages under the ADA without Congress' ever having to rely on § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment to render them so. It would make no sense to consider constitutional violations on their part, as well as by the States themselves, when only the States are the beneficiaries of the Eleventh Amendment."  Also, "States are not required by the Fourteenth Amendment to make special accommodations for the disabled, so long as their actions towards such individuals are rational. They could quite hardheadedly – and perhaps hardheartedly – hold to job-qualification requirements which do not make allowance for the disabled. If special accommodations for the disabled are to be required, they have to come from positive law and not through the Equal Protection Clause."
The ADA, by allowing states to be sued for damages by private plaintiffs for failing to provide reasonable accommodations provided significantly more Fourteenth Amendment protection for people with disabilities than was allowed by Boerne.  That level of protection, the Supreme Court held, was not "congruent and proportional" to the wrong of discrimination against people with disabilities.
The Supreme Court did not address the ability of the federal government to sue the states directly or the ability of Congress to subject local governments to private lawsuits, enforcing federal anti-discrimination laws enacted pursuant to Article I, for example.
Thus, the ADA did not constitutionally abrogate the states' sovereign immunity.
The decision's scope, however, should not be overstated. While it prevents states from being subject to money damages for violations of Title I of the ADA, states are still subject to prospective injunctive relief, under Ex parte Young (1908).Ann Althouse, "Vanguard States, Laggard States: Federalism and Constitutional Rights," 152 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1745, 1798 (2004).
Dissent
The Court split 5–4, with Justice Stephen Breyer filing a dissenting opinion in which he was joined by Justices John Paul Stevens, David Souter, and Ruth Bader Ginsburg. The dissent stated the following about rational basis review:
On "congruence and proportionality," Justice Breyer said that City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc (1985) and Katzenbach v. Morgan (1966) were precedents that require deference by the Court, not Congress:
See also
 ADA Litigation in the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 531
 Lucy v. Adams (1955)
For a discussion as to why Title II of the ADA should (1) be construed as covering employment and (2) validly abrogates state sovereign immunity in the employment context, see Derek Warden, Four Pathways of Undermining Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett, 42 U. of Ark. Little Rock L. Rev. 555 (2020)
References
 Further reading 
External links
Category:Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
Category:United States disability case law
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment, section five case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:University of Alabama
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Higher education case law
"""

From "Bob Jones University v. Simon" ==> """
Bob Jones University v. Simon, 416 U.S. 725 (1974), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States holding that Bob Jones University, which had its 501(c)(3) status revoked by the Internal Revenue Service for practicing "racially discriminatory admissions policies" towards African-Americans, could not sue for an injunction to prevent losing its tax-exempt status..  The question of Bob Jones University's tax-exempt status was ultimately resolved in Bob Jones University v. United States, in which the court ruled that the First Amendment did not protect discriminatory organizations from losing tax-exempt status..
Background
Bob Jones University is devoted to the teaching of fundamentalist religious beliefs, one of which is that God intended that people of different races live separately and not intermarry. When the university was founded in 1927, it denied admission to black students. The school began allowing unmarried blacks to enroll in 1975, but it forbade interracial dating or marriage.
Until 1970, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) granted tax-exempt status to all private schools, regardless of their admissions policies.. Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 lists organizations that qualify for tax-exempt status and includes those which are charitable, religious, or for educational purposes. But a rise in the prevalence of Christian private schools in the 1960s and the Civil Rights Act of 1964 led the IRS to re-evaluate its policy. The IRS announced in 1970 that private schools with racially discriminatory admissions policies would no longer receive tax exemptions. The IRS then notified Bob Jones University of its intention to revoke the university's tax-exempt status because of the university's racially discriminatory admissions policy. As a result, the university would be subject to taxation and its donors would not be able to claim their gifts to the school as charitable deductions.Bob Jones Univ. v. Simon, 416 U.S. at 727.
Bob Jones University filed suit to block the IRS from revoking its tax-exempt status, alleging "irreparable injury in the form of substantial federal income tax liability." In 1971, the United States District Court for the District of South Carolina granted a preliminary injunction, but in 1973 the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit reversed that decision.  The Court of Appeals relied on the Anti-Injunction Act, which states that "no suit for the purpose of restraining the assessment or collection of any tax shall be maintained in any court." A party cannot stop the government from collecting taxes. Instead, in order to protect the Government's need to assess and collect taxes efficiently, the proper procedure is for the party to pay the disputed tax and then file an action for refund.
The Supreme Court granted a petition for certiorari to determine whether the Anti-Injunction Act barred Bob Jones University's suit to enjoin the IRS from revoking its tax-exempt status.Bob Jones Univ. v. Simon, 416 U.S. at 734.
Before the Supreme Court
The case of Bob Jones University v. Simon was presided over by Chief Justice Warren Burger and Associate Justices William O. Douglas, William J. Brennan, Jr., Potter Stewart, Byron R. White, Thurgood Marshall, Harry A. Blackmun, Lewis F. Powell, Jr., and William H. Rehnquist.
Arguing on behalf of Bob Jones University was John D. "J.D." Todd Jr., a lawyer from Greenville, South Carolina, who served on the South Carolina Bar Board of Governors. The United States Treasury was represented by Assistant Attorney General Scott P. Crampton, with Solicitor General Robert Bork accompanying on the brief.
Todd argued that Bob Jones University had met all the requirements of 501(c)(3) as set forth by Congress but had its 501(c)(3) status revoked by the IRS nonetheless. Inclusion on the list of tax-exempt organizations was essential to receive donations from foundations and individuals, and Bob Jones argued that removal from this list constituted irreparable harm to the university. Todd claimed that "the lower court held that the [IRS] Commissioner exceeded the statutory authority given him, that he has authority to promulgate regulations but not to change law, and that that's a matter for Congress to decide, and we of course contend that that's absolutely correct." He also argued that Bob Jones University was not seeking an injunction on the collection of taxes resulting from the loss of tax-exempt status, but rather sought only an injunction on the removal of the university from the IRS list of registered 501(c)(3)s. This argument suggested that the case "involved taxes only very remotely" and was therefore not covered by the Anti-Injunction Act, which would bar Federal Courts from preventing the collection of any taxes by the IRS. Lastly, Todd contended that revocation of tax-exempt status by the IRS was an attempt to regulate the admissions policies of private universities, and not an effort motivated by protecting tax revenue.
On behalf of the Treasury, Crampton argued that Bob Jones would owe $1.25 million in income taxes and saw their actions as "taxpayers trying to stop the assessment of tax."
Supreme Court decision
thumb|US Supreme Court Justice Lewis Powell - Wrote the opinion of this case
Bob Jones University v. Simon was decided May 15, 1974 in an 8-1 decision with majority opinion written by Lewis F. Powell, Jr., in which Justice Burger, Brennan, Stewart, White, Marshall, and Rehnquist joined. Justice Blackmun filed an opinion concurring in the result of the Court's decision. Justice Douglas took no part in the decision of this case. The Court held that the Anti-Injunction Act of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC § 7421(a), prohibited the university from obtaining judicial review by way of injunctive action. The Court further upheld that the Court of Appeals did not err in "holding that § 7421(a) deprived the District Court of jurisdiction to the issue of injunctive relief the petitioner sought."Bob Jones Univ. v. Simon, 416 U.S. at 749. Lastly, the Court admits to recognizing the "harsh regime" in which § 7421(a) has placed on §501 (c)(3) organizations threatened with loss of tax-exempt status and withdrawal of advanced assurance of deductibility of contributions.  But, the Court stated that "this matter is for Congress, which is the appropriate body to weigh the relevant, policy-laden considerations, such as the harshness of the present law."
Within Section I of the Court's opinion the Court sought to detail the provisions which outlined the requirements needed in order for an organization to be exempt from the taxes and receive tax-deductibles as stated in the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, specifically Section 501(c)(3).
Additionally under the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for organizations that had their 501(c)(3) status revoked, a provision allowed for litigation concerning the legality of the IRS's action after the assessment and attempted collection of taxes.Bob Jones Univ. v. Simon, 416 U.S. 725 at 731. A legal suit could also be brought forward in a federal District Court or in the Court of Claims following the collection of any federal tax and the denial of a refund by the IRS.
The court made it explicit that the language of the Anti-Injunction Act mandates that "no suit for the purpose of restraining the assessment or collection of any tax shall be maintained in any court." Furthermore, the courts have interpreted the principle language of the act to serve as "the protection of the Government's need to assess and collect taxes as expeditiously as possible with a minimum of pre-enforcement judicial interference." Organizations seeking injunctive relief against the Service of the proposed action "conflict directly with a congressional prohibition of such pre-enforcement tax suits. In force continuously since its enactment in 1867.
It was held that: 
 operation of the Anti-Injunction Act could be avoided only if there was proof of both irreparable injury and certainty of success on the merits, a pre-enforcement injunction being permissible only if it was clear that under no circumstances could the government ultimately prevail; 
 the instant action was a suit "for the purpose of restraining the assessment or collection of any tax" under the Anti-Injunction Act, since (a) the plaintiff's allegations indicated that a primary purpose of the suit was to prevent the assessment and collection of income taxes from the plaintiff,Bob Jones University v. Simon, 416 U.S. at 736–48. (b) even if the plaintiff would owe no federal income taxes because of possible deductions for depreciation of plant and equipment, the plaintiff would still be liable for federal social security and unemployment taxes, which taxes were also contemplated by the Anti-Injunction Act, and (c) in any event, the plaintiff sought to restrain the collection of taxes from its donors by forcing the Internal Revenue Service to continue to provide advance assurance that contributions to the plaintiff would be tax-deductible, thereby reducing the donors' tax liability, which aspect was also covered by the Anti-Injunction Act even though the plaintiff sought to lower the taxes of persons other than itself; 
 the Anti-Injunction Act was not rendered inapplicable on the ground that the Service's actions constituted an attempt to regulate the admissions policies of private universities rather than an effort to protect the government's tax revenues, since there was no showing that the Service's position did not represent a good-faith effort to enforce technical requirements of the tax laws; 
 application of the Anti- Injunction Act did not deny due process of law to the plaintiff because of any irreparable injury it would suffer pending resort to alternative procedures for review whereby the plaintiff could obtain Tax Court review of any assessment for income taxes or alternatively could institute a refund suit after payment of income, social security, or unemployment taxes, since such alternative procedures offered the plaintiff a full, even though delayed, opportunity to litigate the legality of the Service's actions; 
 the Anti-Injunction Act barred the instant action since the plaintiff's contentions as to violations of its constitutional rights were sufficiently debatable so as to foreclose the necessary determination that under no circumstances could the government ultimately prevail.
Concurring opinion
  thumb|US Supreme Court Justice Harry Blackmun, concurred on the opinion of the Court
Justice Blackmun concurring on the result of the Court:
Justice Blackmun expressed the view that the purpose of the suit was to restrain "the assessment and collection" of a tax under the Anti-Injunction Act, since an injunction, if granted, would directly prevent the collection of income taxes from the plaintiff, and the action was barred since it had not been shown that under no circumstances could the government ultimately prevail. Concurring Opinion of Justice Harry Blackmun
Impact/reception
Following the trial, the Internal Revenue Service clarified its anti-discrimination guidelines for public and church-operated private schools. In order to gain tax-exempt status, private schools were required to publicize their non-discrimination policies for selecting students and employees. Student loans and scholarships were to be allotted on a non-discriminatory basis. Schools must not only fulfill the requirements, but also report the racial composition of their student body and staff as well as how loans and scholarships were distributed. Although protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, church-operated private schools cannot abstain from Federal public policies against racial discrimination if they are to receive tax-exempt status.
On January 19, 1976, the IRS revoked Bob Jones University's tax-exempt status.Bob Jones University v. United States, 461 U.S. at 581.  Subsequently, the university paid the Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) tax of $21 on one of its employees for that year in order to not come under the purview of the Anti-Injunction Act. After being denied a refund, the university proceeded to sue the IRS for revoking its tax-exempt status. The United States government filed for a counterclaim of $498,675.59 for unpaid federal unemployment taxes for the years 1971 to 1975.Bob Jones University v. United States, 461 U.S. at 582.
At the time, the school had already begun changing its admission policy by extending admission to unmarried blacks (married black people had already been admitted in 1971). However, interracial dating and interracial marriage remained strictly prohibited by the university. The IRS refused to reinstate the university's tax-exempt status, arguing that the dating policies violated its nondiscriminatory requirements. The US District Court for the District of South Carolina ordered the IRS to restore the university's tax-exempt status on the grounds that the IRS policies violated the Free Exercise and Establishment Clause. In 1980, the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in a split decision, determined that the dating policy, even if founded on religious conviction, violated its nondiscriminatory public policy. The request for a refund was dismissed and the government's counterclaim was reinstated. Bob Jones University proceeded to appeal the decision and the Supreme Court would determine the verdict in Bob Jones University v. United States.
Role in subsequent decisions
Bob Jones University v. Simon has been cited in multiple cases in the Court of Appeals and Supreme Court since its 1974 ruling. The exceptions to the Anti-Injunction Act laid out in Bob Jones University v. Simon have been followed in several cases,  notably in its "companion case" Alexander v. "Americans United" Inc.. In Alexander, the Supreme Court considered the exemptions in determining that a non-profit organization's suit against the IRS based on constitutional claims would not continue under the Anti-Injunction Act. The rulings in Bob Jones University v. Simon and Alexander are considered a stricter reading of the Anti-Injunction Act for limiting the kinds of suits allowed to proceed before the enforcement of taxation by the IRS.
Bob Jones Univ. v. Simon has also been cited and distinguished in the decisions of other cases. In Security and Exchange Commission v. Credit Bancorp Ltd. as considered by the District Court for the Southern District of New York, the use of liens by the IRS were considered to be too different from the facts of Bob Jones University v. Simon for application of the earlier ruling without careful consideration. When the case came before the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, the exceptions put forth by Bob Jones Univ. v. Simon were used in part to determine the case.
More recently, Bob Jones Univ. v. Simon has been cited and considered in a suite of cases concerning the legislation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. In cases such as Commonwealth ex rel. Cuccinelli v. Sebelius and Halbig v. Sebelius, injunctions against the IRS in regards to tax policies related to the Affordable Care Act were not granted by the District Courts.Commonwealth ex rel. Cuccinelli v. Sebelius. 728 F. Supp. 2d 768. United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, Richmond Division. 2010. p.790.Halbig v. Sebelius. 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 4853. United States District Court for the District of Columbia. 2014. p.64. In the lower court rulings of Thomas More Law Center v. Obama and Hobby Lobby Stores Inc. v. Sebelius, the Anti-Injunction Act was found to be not applicable in either case.Hobby Lobby Stores Inc. v. Sebelius. 723 F.3d 1114. United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit. 2013. p.1159. In the Supreme Court case National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius, the Court requested arguments to be made concerning the Anti-Injunction Act and its possible application to the Affordable Care Act by an outside attorney, as neither the government nor the plaintiffs wished to argue its potential implications. In each of these cases the Anti-Injunction Act was not applied primarily due to the use of the term 'penalties' in the language of the Affordable Care Act, which the language of the Anti-Injunction Act does not explicitly cover.
Partial overruling and criticism
In the 1984 ruling of South Carolina v. Regan, Justice William Brennan delivered the Supreme Court's opinion detailing that the Anti-Injunction Act could not be used to prevent a legal suit if there did not exist a judicial process through which a plaintiff could make their case. This occurred due to the state of South Carolina lacking a direct method of challenging the removal of bearer bonds. The ruling therefore expanded on the instances in which the Anti-Injunction Act was not applicable, beyond the two exceptions set out by Bob Jones Univ. v. Simon and the earlier court case Enochs v. Williams Packing Co., and thus partially overruling Bob Jones Univ. v. Simon with the modifications to the use of the Anti-Injunction Act concerning future suits.
Several cases have also criticized the criteria for exemption as discussed in Bob Jones University v. Simon. In the dissenting opinion of  Alexander v. "Americans United" Inc., Justice Harry Blackmun argued that the use of the Anti-Injunction Act to prevent suits based on constitutional arguments until after the IRS had acted disrupted the "system of checks and balances provided by judicial review."
Another such case is that of Kahn v. United States, in which the Third Circuit Court of Appeals considered the three criteria test provided by Mathews v. Eldridge to determine whether a lawsuit should be allowed to be litigated before policy enforcement by the IRS, even if a suit could be brought afterwards. The three criteria test is considered by some legal scholars to be valid in any case concerning the application of due process, including those of taxation.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:1974 in education
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:Bob Jones University
"""

From "Bob Jones University v. United States" ==> """
Bob Jones University v. United States, 461 U.S. 574 (1983), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court holding that the religion clauses of the First Amendment did not prohibit the Internal Revenue Service from revoking the tax exempt status of a religious university whose practices are contrary to a compelling government public policy, such as eradicating racial discrimination.
 Background 
Because of its interpretation of Biblical principles regarding interracial dating, Bob Jones University completely excluded black applicants until 1971, and from 1971 until 1975, admitted black students only if they were married. After 1975, the University began to admit unmarried black applicants, but continued to deny "admission to applicants engaged in an interracial marriage or known to advocate interracial marriage or dating." The University also imposed a disciplinary rule that prohibited interracial dating.
Under pre-1970 IRS regulations, tax exemptions were awarded to private schools regardless of their racial admissions policies, and Bob Jones University was approved for a tax exemption under that policy. Pursuant to a 1970 revision to IRS regulations that limited tax-exempt status to private schools without racially discriminatory admissions policies, the IRS informed the University on November 30, 1970, that the IRS was planning on revoking its tax exempt status as a "religious, charitable . . . or educational" institution. In response, the University filed suit in 1971 in Bob Jones University v. Schultz.
The United States District Court for the District of South Carolina granted a preliminary injunction, but the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit reversed in 1973, citing the Anti-Injunction Act.
The University petitioned for a rehearing in the Appeals Court in Bob Jones University v. Connally. The Appeals Court ruled March 21, 1973, stating that Americans United v. Walters did not conflict with the decision in 1973.
The Supreme Court affirmed the Court of Appeals decision in Bob Jones University v. Simon (416 US 725). The case was decided May 15, 1974, in an 8–0 decision (Douglas not participating). They stated that there was a lack of proof of "irreparable injury." Justice Powell wrote the decision.
The IRS again notified the University on April 16, 1975, of the proposed revocation. Officially, the IRS revoked the University's tax exempt status on January 19, 1976. The University paid $21 in unemployment taxes for one employee for tax year 1975 and then filed for a refund in the United States District Court for the District of South Carolina. The Government counterclaimed for unpaid federal unemployment taxes for the taxable years 1971 through 1975, in the amount of $489,675.59, plus interest.
The District Court ruled December 26, 1978, that the IRS had violated the University's First Amendment rights, and ordered the IRS to refund the University the $21 of taxes that it had paid.
The United States Court of Appeals of the Fourth Circuit ruled that the case be sent back to the District Court.
 Supreme Court decision 
Bob Jones University v. United States was decided May 24, 1983, in an 8–1 decision with majority opinion written by Warren E. Burger, and joined by William J. Brennan, Byron R. White, Thurgood Marshall, Harry A. Blackmun, John Paul Stevens, and Sandra Day O'Connor. The Court, speaking through Burger, read a "common law" public interest requirement into the statute governing tax-exempt charitable status, and cited Congress' refusal to intervene as proof that they approved of the IRS's construction of the statute. The Court applied a strict scrutiny analysis and found that the "Government has a fundamental, overriding interest in eradicating racial discrimination in education . . . which substantially outweighs whatever burden denial of tax benefits places on [the University's] exercise of their religious beliefs."  The Court made clear, however, that its holding dealt "only with religious schools—not with churches or other purely religious institutions."However, with this language the Court seemed "to apply a least restrictive means free exercise test to a nonprofit private school based on its sincerely held religious beliefs" even though BJU was not a church. Martin Wishnatsky, "Religious Rights of Non-Church Organizations," Liberty Legal Journal (Spring 2011), 28.
Lewis F. Powell wrote a separate concurring opinion, emphasizing the importance of Congressional approval for administrative policy changes. William H. Rehnquist was the sole dissenter, arguing that the literal terms of the governing statute could not be read to exclude Bob Jones from charitable status.
 Aftermath 
The case has been cited in many decisions that followed as well as by commentators, due to the significance of the precedent established in this case.
In 2000 BJU president Bob Jones III announced on Larry King Live that its ban on interracial dating had been dropped. The change was stimulated by a media uproar prompted by a visit of then-presidential candidate George W. Bush. In February 2017, BJU president Steve Pettit announced that Bob Jones University had regained its tax-exempt status.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 461
 Coit v. Green (1971)
 Notes 
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:1983 in religion
Category:Multiracial affairs in the United States
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Bob Jones University
"""

From "Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus" ==> """
Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus, 210 U.S. 339 (1908), was a United States Supreme Court decision concerning the scope of rights accorded owners of a copyright versus owners of a particular copy of a copyrighted work.  This was a case of first impression concerning whether the copyright laws permit an owner to control a purchaser's subsequent sale of a copyrighted work.  The court stated the issue as:
Does the sole right to vend (named in 4952) secure to the owner of the copyright the right, after a sale of the book to a purchaser, to restrict future sales of the book at retail, to the right to sell it at a certain price per copy, because of a notice in the book that a sale at a different price will be treated as an infringement, which notice has been brought home to one undertaking to sell for less than the named sum?
The case centered on the publisher setting additional terms not specifically stated in the statute and claiming that the work was licensed and not sold.  The Court's ruling established what came to be known as the "first-sale doctrine", which was later codified as § 109(a) of the Copyright Act of 1976.
Facts
Bobbs-Merrill Company sold a copyrighted novel, The Castaway by Hallie Erminie Rives, with  the notice, "The price of this book at retail is $1 net. No dealer is licensed to sell it at a lower price, and a sale at a lower price will be treated as an infringement of the copyright" printed immediately below the copyright notice. The defendants, Isidor and Nathan Straus representing R.H. Macy & Co., purchased large lots of books at wholesale and sold copies of the book at retail at the price of 89 cents a copy.
Holding
The court held first that the copyright statutes protect an owner's right to "multiply and sell" the work on their own terms.  The statutory right to sell, however, did not also create a right to limit resale.
The court did not hold that a contract or license imposed on the first sale could not create an obligation.  In this case, there was no contract between the owner and the original purchaser, and there was not privity of contract between the owner and any third party.
See also
Quality King Distributors, Inc. v. Lanza Research Intl, 
Bauer & Cie. v. O'Donnell, a similar ruling regarding patents
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 210
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:1908 in United States case law
"""

From "Bobby v. Van Hook" ==> """
REDIRECT 2009 term per curiam opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States#Bobby v. Van Hook
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment ineffective assistance of counsel case law
"""

From "Boddie v. Connecticut" ==> """
Boddie v. Connecticut, 401 U.S. 371 (1971), was a case before the United States Supreme Court.
Background
Complaint
A class action was formed representing female welfare recipients residing in Connecticut and wishing divorces, but prevented from bringing divorce suits by Connecticut statutes requiring payment of court fees and costs for service of process as a condition precedent to access to the courts.  There was no dispute as to their inability to pay the court fees or costs.
Plaintiffs sought a judgment declaring the statutes (requirements for payment of court fees and costs for service of process that restricted their access to the courts in an effort to bring an action for divorce) invalid as applied to the class, and an injunction requiring defendants to permit members of the class to sue for divorce without payment of any fees and costs.
United States District Court for the District of Connecticut
A three-judge court dismissed the complaint for failure to state a claim (286 F Supp 968). It held that a State could limit access to its divorce courts by the requirement of a filing fee or other fees, even when they effectively barred appellants from commencing actions therein.
Opinion of the court
On appeal, the Supreme Court of the United States reversed. The opinion by Justice Harlan expressed the views of six members of the court.
The Supreme Court concluded that, given the basic position of the marriage relationship in this society's hierarchy of values and the concomitant state monopolization of the means for legally dissolving this relationship, due process did prohibit a state from denying, solely because of inability to pay, access to its courts to individuals who sought judicial dissolution of their marriages. Thus, the Court held that a state could not, consistent with the obligations imposed on it by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, pre-empt the right to dissolve this legal relationship without affording all citizens access to the means it had prescribed for doing so.
Concurrences
Justice Douglas concurred in the result on the ground that the equal protection clause rather than the due process clause was the proper basis of decision.
Justice Brennan concurred on the ground that while denying indigents access to the courts for nonpayment of a fee is a denial of due process, it is also a denial of equal protection of the laws, and no distinction can be drawn between divorce suits and other actions.
Dissent
Justice Black dissented on the ground that charging practically nominal initial court costs in civil actions does not violate either the due process or equal protection clause. He asserted that nowhere in the Constitution was marriage mentioned, thus (as per the Tenth Amendment) reserving dissolution procedures as the state's prerogative.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 401
External links
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:1971 in Connecticut
Category:Legal history of Connecticut
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
"""

From "Boechler v. Commissioner" ==> """
Boechler v. Commissioner, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to Title 26 of the United States Code   (aka. Internal Revenue Code) and equitable tolling. It is regarding the statutory interpretation of  and whether the tax court would have jurisdiction over petitions to the tax court if the petition exceeded the 30 days time frame.
In a unanimous decision by the court, they ruled that 30 day timeline is non-jurisdictional and is protected by equitable tolling.
 Background 
On June 5, 2015, the Internal Revenue Services (IRS), sent a letter to Boechler, P.C. after noting a discrepancy with their prior submission of tax documents. Boechler, a North Dakota law firm, ignored the letter sent by the IRS, which led to them being imposed a 10% intentional disregard penalty. Similarly, Boechler did not pay the penalty. The IRS informed Boechler of their intent to levy, in which Boechler responded but did not establish reasonable grounds for relief.
The Independent Office of Appeals, the only method to settle a tax dispute without tax litigation in court, sustained the levy and sent Boechler the notice of determination on July 28, 2017. The notice of determination was received by Boechler on July 31, 2017, but it stated that they had to submit a petition for a Collection Due Process (CDP) hearing within 30 days (by August 28, 2017).
On August 29, Boechler submitted their petition for a CDP hearing, a day after the stated 30-day deadline. The IRS argued in the United States Tax Court that the court lacked jurisdiction to hear the case and requested the court to dismiss the case. The Tax Court agreed and dismissed the petition.
Boechler appealed this decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit arguing that the 30-day time limit is not jurisdictional, should be covered by equitable tolling, and to calculate the time limit from the issuance of the levy instead of the date of receiving the levy is in violation of due process.
In a 3-0 decision, the Eighth Circuit affirmed the Tax Court's decision and reiterated that the Tax Court has no jurisdiction for untimely petitions for review.
Boechler filed a petition for writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court of the United States.
 Supreme Court 
The court granted certiorari on September 30, 2021, and heard oral arguments on January 12, 2022. On April 21, 2022, the Supreme Court reversed and remanded the lower court judgements in a unanimous opinion by Justice Amy Coney Barrett.
In her opinion, Justice Barrett wrote how the phrase "such matters", held in parenthesis in , represents the Tax Court having jurisdiction over tax litigation and is not a jurisdictional deadline. She contends that the Commissioner's interpretation could be better than the petitioners, but the bottom line is that it is "not clear" and therefore rejecting the Commissioner's interpretation of "such matters" referring to the 30 day deadline as jurisdictional. She adds that such non-jurisdictional deadline would not help Boechler unless it is able to be equitably tolled, calling equitable tolling "traditional feature of American jurisprudence".
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Tax Court cases
"""

From "Bogan v. Scott-Harris" ==> """
Bogan v. Scott-Harris, 523 U.S. 44 (1997), is a ruling by the Supreme Court of the United States where the court decided unanimously local legislators are entitled to the same absolute immunity from civil liability under Section 1983 for their legislative activities as are federal, state and regional legislators regardless of motive or intent.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Bogardus v. Commissioner" ==> """
Bogardus v. Commissioner, 302 U.S. 34 (1937), was a United States Supreme Court case discussing, under United States tax law, how to distinguish compensation from tax-exempt gifts under § 102(a).. It is notable (and thus appears frequently in law school casebooks) for the following holdings:
 A payment cannot be both "compensation for personal service" within the meaning of § 22(a) of the Revenue Act of 1928 and a "gift" under (b)(3) of the same section. Old Colony Trust Co. v. Commissioner, distinguished..
 Payments made to present and former employees of a corporation by its former stockholders, acting through a new corporation which had taken over part of the property of the other, HELD: not "compensation for personal services," taxable to the recipients as income under § 22(a) of the Revenue Act of 1928, but "gifts," exempted from taxation by subdivision (b)(3) of that section.
Nothing connected the donees (or the old corporation) to the donors (and their new corporation). The gifts were made, without any legal or moral obligation, not for any consideration or for services rendered, but as acts of spontaneous generosity in appreciation of past loyalty of the donees which had benefited the donors when stockholders of the older company.
 When the facts and circumstances prove an intent to make a gift, the erroneous use of the terms "honorarium" and "bonus" cannot convert the gift into a payment for services.
 A gift is no less a gift because inspired by gratitude for the past faithful service of the recipient.
Facts
Issue
Is a sum of money paid to former stockholders and employees compensation which is subject to Federal Income Tax or a gift that is exempt from taxes?
 Opinion of the Court 
The term "gift" in §102(a) is largely to be defined by reference to the motives of the payor.  If the payment, though voluntary, is "in return for services rendered," or proceeds from "the constraining force of any moral or legal duty," or anticipates a "benefit" to the payor, then it is taxable to the payee even if characterized as a "gift" by the payor.
On the other hand, if the payment proceeds from a "detached and disinterested generosity," if it is made "out of affection, respect ... or like impulses," then it is an excludable gift even though the relationship between payor and payee has previously been in a business context.
 See also 
 Commissioner v. Duberstein cites this case
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1937 in United States case law
"""

From "Boggs v. Boggs" ==> """
Boggs v. Boggs, 520 U.S. 833 (1997), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a spouse that is not a participant in an ERISA account cannot will part or all of it before distribution of the pension plan.
 Background 
Isaac Boggs worked for South Central Bell for 36 years. He was married to Dorothy Boggs until she died in 1979.  Dorothy and Isaac had three sons together. A year after Dorothy's death, Isaac remarried to Sandra, and they stayed married until Isaac's death in 1989.
When Isaac retired in 1985 from South Central Bell he was given several benefits from his employer.  Among the benefits were a lump-sum distribution from the Bell System Savings Plan for Salaried employees (in the amount of $151,628.94); the amount was rolled over in to an Individual Retirement Account which was untouched during Isaac's lifetime, and at Issac's death was worth $180,778.05.  Isaac also was given at retirement 96 shares of AT&T stock.
In her will Dorothy left her sons an usufruct (which is similar to a common-law life estate; the Boggs lived in Louisiana which recognizes the concept) to 2/3 of Isaac's life-estate.  However Dorothy's will was based on Isaac's will; after Dorothy's death Isaac changed his will, giving everything to Sandra.
Two of his sons filed a complaint in United States District Court to seek a declaratory judgment.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 References 
 External links 
 DOJ link
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:Wills and trusts
Category:Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
"""

From "Bolles v. Outing Co." ==> """
Bolles v. Outing Co., 175 U.S. 262 (1899), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held under the Revised Statutes of the United States, someone seeking damages for copyright infringement is only eligible for damages from illicit copies found in the accused's possession. Copies already distributed are out of scope..
 References 
External links
Category:1899 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Bolling v. Sharpe" ==> """
Bolling v. Sharpe, 347 U.S. 497 (1954), is a landmark United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Constitution prohibits segregated public schools in the District of Columbia. Originally argued on December 10–11, 1952, a year before Brown v. Board of Education, Bolling was reargued on December 8–9, 1953, and was unanimously decided on May 17, 1954, the same day as Brown. The Bolling decision was supplemented in 1955 with the second Brown opinion, which ordered desegregation "with all deliberate speed". In Bolling, the Court did not address school desegregation in the context of the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause, which applies only to the states, but rather held that school segregation was unconstitutional under the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Court observed that the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution lacked an Equal Protection Clause, as in the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. However, the Court held that the concepts of equal protection and due process are not mutually exclusive, establishing the reverse incorporation doctrine.
Background
Beginning in late 1941, a group of parents from the Anacostia neighborhood of Washington, D.C., calling themselves the Consolidated Parents Group, petitioned the Board of Education of the District of Columbia to open the nearly-completed John Philip Sousa Junior High as an integrated school. The school board denied the petition and the school opened, admitting only whites. On September 11, 1950, Gardner Bishop, Nicholas Stabile and the Consolidated Parents Group attempted to get eleven African-American students (including the case's plaintiff, Spottswood Bolling) admitted to the school, but were refused entry by the school's principal.
James Nabrit Jr., a professor of law at Howard University School of Law, a historically black university, filed suit in 1951 on behalf of Bolling and the other students in the District Court for the District of Columbia seeking assistance in the students' admission. After the court dismissed the claim, the case was granted a writ of certiorari by the Supreme Court in 1952. Howard law professor George E. C. Hayes worked with Nabrit on the oral argument for the Supreme Court hearing. While Nabrit's argument in Bolling rested on the unconstitutionality of segregation, the much more famous Brown v. Board of Education (decided on the same day) argued that the idea of 'separate but equal' facilities sanctioned by Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537 (1896) was a fallacy as the facilities for black students were woefully inadequate.
Decision
The Court, led by newly confirmed Chief Justice Earl Warren, decided unanimously in favor of the plaintiffs. In his opinion, Justice Warren noted that while the 14th Amendment, whose Equal Protection Clause was cited in Brown in order to declare segregation unconstitutional, does not apply in the District of Columbia, the Fifth Amendment did apply. While the Fifth Amendment lacks an equal protection clause, Warren held that "the concepts of equal protection and due process, both stemming from our American ideal of fairness, are not mutually exclusive." While equal protection is a more explicit safeguard against discrimination, the Court stated that "discrimination may be so unjustifiable as to be violative of due process." Referring to the technicalities raised by the case's location in the District of Columbia, the Court held that, in light of their decision in Brown that segregation in state public schools is prohibited by the Constitution, it would be "unthinkable that the same Constitution would impose a lesser duty on the Federal Government".
The Court concluded: "racial segregation in the public schools of the District of Columbia is a denial of the due process of law guaranteed by the 5th Amendment".  The Court restored both Bolling and Brown to the docket until they could reconvene to discuss how to effectively implement the decisions.
Controversy
Some scholars have argued that the Court's decision in Bolling should have been reached on other grounds. For example, Judge Michael W. McConnell of the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit wrote that Congress never "required that the schools of the District of Columbia be segregated".  According to that rationale, the segregation of schools in Washington D.C. was unauthorized and therefore illegal.
In a debate, law professors Cass Sunstein and Randy Barnett agreed that while the result was desirable, Bolling does not reconcile with the Constitution, with Barnett saying: "You are right to point out that the Supreme Court's decision in Bolling v. Sharpe is very difficult to reconcile with the text of the Constitution. For this reason, you know that among constitutional scholars of all stripes Bolling is one of the most controversial and difficult cases ever decided by the Court."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 347
References
Further reading
External links
Category:African-American history of Washington, D.C.
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:1954 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of the District of Columbia
Category:United States due process case law
"""

From "Bond v. Floyd" ==> """
Bond v. Floyd, 385 U.S. 116 (1966), was a United States Supreme Court case.
 Background 
Julian Bond, an African American, was elected to the Georgia House of Representatives in June 1965. Bond was a member of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), which opposed the Vietnam War.   After his election, during a news interview, Bond endorsed SNCC's views, stating that he did not support the war, and that, as a pacifist, he was opposed to all war. Members of the Georgia House of Representatives objected to Bond's statements, and petitioned to prohibit him from joining the House. A hearing was held, and Bond repeated his pacifist viewpoints, but maintained that he never urged draft-card burning or other law violations. The House committee voted to prohibit Bond from joining the House.
Bond sued in federal court, but the District Court upheld the House, concluding that Bond's remarks exceeded criticism of national policy and that he could not in good faith take an oath to support the State and Federal Constitutions.   Bond appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court, in a unanimous decision, ordered the Georgia House of Representatives to permit Bond to take his seat. The Court held:
 Though a State may impose oath requirements on legislators, it cannot limit their capacity to express views on local or national policy.  
 A majority of state legislators is not authorized to test the sincerity with which another duly elected legislator meets the requirement for holding office of swearing to support the Federal and State Constitutions. 
 The State may not apply to a legislator a First Amendment standard stricter than that applicable to a private citizen.
External links
Category:1966 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Bond v. United States (2000)" ==> """
Bond v United States, 529 U.S. 334 (2000), was a United States Supreme Court Fourth Amendment case that applied the ruling of Minnesota v. Dickerson to luggage, which held that police may not physically manipulate items without a warrant without violating the Fourth Amendment.Bond v. United States, .
 Background 
During an immigration status check of a passenger on a bus in Texas, a United States Border Patrol Agent squeezed the soft luggage of Steven D Bond.Bond, 529 U.S. at 335.  The Agent thought the bag held a "brick-like" object. After Bond admitted that it was his bag and then consented to a search of the bag, the Border Patrol Agent found a "brick" of methamphetamine.Bond, 529 U.S. at 336. In a footnote, the Court noted that "[t]he Government has not argued here that petitioner's consent to Agent Cantu's opening the bag is a basis for admitting the evidence." Bond, 529 U.S. at 336, n.1. Bond was arrested and indicted on Federal drug charges.Bond, 529 U.S. at 336. Bond moved to suppress the "brick" of methamphetamine on the basis that the agent had conducted an illegal search of the bag when squeezing it. He claimed that this was a violation of the Federal Constitution's Fourth Amendment prohibition on unreasonable searches and seizures. The district court denied the motion, and found Bond guilty. The Court of Appeals held that the agent's manipulation of the bag was not a search under the Fourth Amendment.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a 7-2 opinion written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, the Court held that Agent Cantu's physical manipulation of Bond's bag violated the Fourth Amendment."Bond, 529 U.S. at 339.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2000 in United States case law
"""

From "Bond v. United States (2011)" ==> """
Bond v. United States, 564 U.S. 211 (2011), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that individuals, just like states, may have standing to raise Tenth Amendment challenges to a federal law.
The issue arose in the prosecution of an individual under the federal Chemical Weapons Convention Implementation Act for a local assault that used a chemical irritant. The defendant argued, in part, that the application of the law violated the Constitution's federalism limitations on the statutory implementation of treaties by Congress.
Having decided the defendant could bring the constitutional challenge, the Court remanded the case without deciding the merits of the claims.
Background
After the husband of Carol A. Bond of Lansdale, Pennsylvania, impregnated Myrlinda Haynes, Bond told Haynes, "I am going to make your life a living hell." Carol Bond stole the poisonous chemical: 10-chlorophenox arsine from her employer (Rohm and Haas) and  purchased potassium dichromate from the internet. Bond smeared the chemicals on doorknobs, car doors, and the mailbox. Haynes suffered a chemical burn on her thumb. Bond was indicted for stealing mail and for violation of the Chemical Weapons Convention Implementation Act of 1998.
Her appeal argued that applying the chemical weapons treaty to her violated the Tenth Amendment. The Court of Appeals found Bond lacked standing to make a Tenth Amendment claim.
Decision
The Supreme Court concluded unanimously that Bond had standing to argue that a federal statute enforcing the Chemical Weapons Convention in that instance intruded on areas of police power reserved to the states. Justice Kennedy reasoned that actions exceeding the federal government's enumerated powers undermine the sovereign interests of the states. Individuals seeking to challenge such actions are subject to Article III and prudential standing rules, but if the litigant is a party to an otherwise-justiciable case or controversy, the litigant is not forbidden to object that the injury results from disregard of the federal structure of American government.
The Court expressed no view on the merits of Bond's challenge to the federal statute and remanded the case to the Third Circuit Court of Appeals.
Subsequent history
The Third Circuit, on remand, found that the Supreme Court's decision gave Bond standing to raise federalism questions about the federal government's power to enforce legislation that implements a treaty. However, the circuit court found the 1920 Supreme Court precedent Missouri v. Holland made the legislation indisputably valid since the treaty is valid.
The case then returned to the Supreme Court in Bond v. United States, 572 U.S. 844 (2014) in which it ruled that since the Implementation Act did not reach her conduct, the Court declined to address the constitutional issue.
See also
 Reid v. Covert, a 1957 decision in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that an executive agreement cannot override the Constitutional right to trial by jury.
References
External links
Question Presented
https://web.archive.org/web/20140801104500/http://www.justice.gov/usao/pae/News/Pr/2007/sep/bondrelease.pdf
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States Tenth Amendment case law
Category:United States standing case law
"""

From "Bond v. United States (2014)" ==> """
Bond v. United States, 572 U.S. 844 (2014), follows up on the Supreme Court's 2011 case of the same name in which it had reversed the Third Circuit and concluded that both individuals and states can bring a Tenth Amendment challenge to federal law. The case was remanded to the Third Circuit, for a decision on the merits, which again ruled against Bond. On appeal, the Supreme Court reversed and remanded again, ruling that the Chemical Weapons Convention Implementation Act of 1998 did not reach Bond's actions and she could not be charged under that federal law.
 Background 
Carol Anne Bond is a microbiologist from Lansdale, Pennsylvania. In 2006, her best friend became pregnant. When Bond discovered that her husband was the child's father, she attempted to poison her former friend by putting organoarsenic and potassium dichromate on the woman's door knob. Bond was caught, and was convicted under the CWA. In her appeal, she argued that applying the chemical weapons treaty to her had violated the Tenth Amendment. The Court of Appeals ruled that Bond lacked standing to make a Tenth Amendment claim. On appeal, the Supreme Court reversed by stating that individuals can bring Tenth Amendment claims.. The Court then remanded the case for the Third Circuit to decide the case on the merits.
On remand, the Third Circuit found that "because the Convention is an international agreement with a subject matter that lies at the core of the Treaty Power and because Holland instructs that 'there can be no dispute about the validity of [a] statute' that implements a valid treaty, we will affirm Bond's conviction." Bond again appealed to the Supreme Court, asking the court to overrule Holland or to find that her actions were not covered by the CWA.
The case attracted a great deal of attention, with US Solicitor General Donald Verrilli arguing for the government and former Solicitor General Paul Clement arguing for Bond. Senator Ted Cruz wrote an essay for the blog of the Harvard Law Review, urging the Court to overturn Bond's conviction.Cruz, Ted. "Limits on the Treaty Power." Harv. L. Rev. F. 127 (2013): 93.
 Decision 
600px|thumbnail|Chief Justice Roberts opened his opinion by vividly describing John Singer Sargent's life-sized painting of mustard gas victims. Roberts closed by noting, "There are no life-sized paintings of Bond's rival washing her thumb."
In its judgment, the Court unanimously concluded that the convention was not meant to cover local activities such as Bond's poisoning attempt. Writing for the Court, Chief Justice Roberts declined to define the scope of Treaty Clause powers, invoking constitutional avoidance. Because the Chemical Weapons Convention is not self-executing and because it requires implementation by a signatory to be "in accordance with its constitutional processes," Roberts focused his attention on statutory interpretation of the federal criminal code.
According to Roberts, one of the key "background principles of construction" is federalism; there must be a "clear indication" by Congress if it intends to "dramatically intrude upon traditional state criminal jurisdiction." The Court concluded that there was no such clear indication in the text of the criminal statute.
Roberts rejected the Solicitor General's interpretation of the statute, noting that the government's reading would make it a federal offense to poison children's goldfish and that state authorities are fully capable of punishing burrito poisoners.Bond v. United States, , 134 S. Ct. 2077, 2092 (2014) (citing Gamiz, Family Survives Poisoned Burritos, Allentown, Pa., Morning Call, May 18, 2013).
Finally, Roberts briefly responds to Justice Scalia's interpretation by noting that adopting "the most sweeping reading of the statute would fundamentally upset the Constitution's balance."
A well-known line from his opinion is at the end: "The global need to prevent chemical warfare does not require the Federal Government to reach into the kitchen cupboard, or to treat a local assault with a chemical irritant as the deployment of a chemical weapon."Bond, 134 S. Ct. at 2093.
Concurrences
Justice Scalia, joined by Justice Thomas and partly by Justice Alito, concurred only in the judgment. Scalia departed from the majority by first reading the text as clearly federalizing a purely-local crime and Scalia concluding that it is unconstitutional for Congress to federalize a purely-local crime.
Scalia discounted the Court's logic as "result-driven antitextualism [that] befogs what is evident." Constitutional avoidance, according to Scalia, does not require interpreting the statute constitutionally because he reads the text as "utterly clear." Because the "unavoidable meaning of the text" is different from the meaning adopted by the majority, Scalia then proceeded to the constitutional question.
Scalia considered the necessary and proper clause not to apply to implementing treaties. Therefore, a treaty can be implemented only by the other enumerated powers of Congress. That is directly contrary to longstanding precedent, but he argued that he could overrule that precedent because he considered the holding of Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., in Missouri v. Holland (1920) to be unreasoned.
As a counterfactual, Scalia feared that by using unlimited treaty powers, Congress could enter into an anti-polygamy treaty and thereby ban polygamy.
Justice Thomas, joined by Justice Scalia and partly by Justice Alito, agreed with Scalia that the convention reached Bond and that Holland should be overruled. Rather than concluding that the implementation of the convention to be unconstitutional, Thomas instead argued that the treaty itself is unconstitutional. Because the scope of the treaty power cannot regulate "purely domestic affairs," Thomas argued that the US could not join a treaty banning domestic chemical weapons.Bond, 134 S. Ct. at 2103 (Thomas, J. concurring).
Seeking the founders' original understanding, Thomas began by reviewing international law publications from the 1600s.Bond, 134 S. Ct. at 2104 (citing H. Grotius, De Jure Belli Ac Pacis (1646), 2 S. Pufendorf, De Jure Naturae et Gentium 1331 (1688)). While noting that contemporary dictionaries disagreed with him, Thomas concluded that the founders understood treaties as governing only "international intercourse."Bond, 134 S. Ct. at 2104 (citing S. Johnson, A Dictionary of the English Language 2056 (rev. 4th ed. 1773)).
He then cited as support the 1796 floor speeches made by in the US Congress against the Jay Treaty.Bond, 134 S. Ct. at 2107 citing 5 Annals of Cong. 426 (1796).
Furthermore, an 1815 treaty could constitutionally pre-empt a South Carolina law authorizing the local kidnapping of free negroes because, according to Thomas, some of the sailors who were enslaved were British.Bond, 134 S. Ct. at 2108 (citing Elkison v. Deliesseline, 8 F.Cas. 493, 495 (No. 4,366)(C.C.S.C.1823) (Johnson, Circuit Justice)).
Thomas closed by acknowledging that his distinction " may not be obvious in all cases" but noted that although the parties to the case did not argue that chemical weapons bans are unconstitutional, he was sure that he would be able to apply his limits to the treaty power "soon enough."
Justice Alito agrees that the convention covered Bond's actions and that it exceeded the treaty-making power of Congress.
 Reactions 
The New Republic viewed the concurring justices' approach as an isolationist attempt to pass the failed Bricker Amendment judicially. Cato's Supreme Court Review focused on Scalia's use of Cato's amicus brief.Nicholas Quinn Rosenkranz, Bond v. United States: Concurring in the Judgment, 2014 Cato Sup. Ct. Rev. 285-306   The 43-page "Comment" by Heather K. Gerken on the case declared it "a trivial entry in the federalism canon."Heather Gerken, Slipping the Bonds of Federalism, 128 Harv. L. Rev. 85 (2014)
 Subsequent Events 
In 2014, on remand the U.S. District Court vacated the sentence on the chemical weapons charges and imposed an 18-month sentence on theft of mail charges.
 See also 
Missouri v. Holland
Reid v. Covert
Medellín v. Texas
 References 
External links
 SCOTUSBlog summary of Court opinion
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States Tenth Amendment case law
Category:United States standing case law
"""

From "Bong v. Campbell Art Co." ==> """
Bong v. Campbell Art Co., 214 U.S. 236 (1909), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held, under the International Copyright Act of 1891, A copyright cannot be granted to a non-citizen whose country has not been acknowledged as in a reciprocal copyright arrangement with the United States by a formal presidential proclamation. Because the non-citizen is not granted a copyright, they cannot assign a copyright for a work to a citizen of a country with American copyright privileges. That citizen cannot register a copyright for the work.
The case concerned the painting "Dolce Far Niente" by Daniel Hernández Morillo, a citizen of Peru. Because Peru had not entered into a mutual copyright arrangement with the United States, Hernández gave the painting to a German man named Bong. Germany had entered into such an arrangement with the United States in 1892, so Bong applied for a copyright on the painting in 1902. He wrote "Copyright by Rich. Bong" on the painting to comply with the notice requirement.
Alfred S. Campbell Art Company printed 1000 copies of the painting, retitled as "Sunbeam", with the copyright notice and attributing it to Hernández. Bong sued for copyright infringement. At one point, he asserted that Hernández was Spanish because Spain had copyright relations with the United States. He also contented that the copyright should be valid because both Peru and the United States were part of the Montevideo Union, an international copyright arrangement.
The Court determined that the copyright originates with the original creator, in this case Hernández. Because Hernández's citizenship mean that his works were ineligible for United States copyrights, he could not assign a right he did not possess to Bong. Bong's copyright was thus void and the painting was in the public domain when Campbell Art Company made its copies.
Additionally, the Court said that the proclamation from the president was required for a country's citizens to apply for American copyrights. The United States' membership in the Montevideo Union was not sufficient without the explicit proclamation.
The Court cited heavily from American Tobacco Co. v. Werckmeister.
 References 
External links
Category:1909 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Bonito Boats, Inc. v. Thunder Craft Boats, Inc." ==> """
Bonito Boats, Inc. v. Thunder Craft Boats, Inc., 489 U.S. 141 (1989), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court holding a state anti-plug molding law preempted because it partially duplicated and therefore interfered with the balance Congress had struck by federal patent law..  The decision reaffirmed the Supreme Court's earlier decision in Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Stiffel Co. (1964),. which held a state unfair competition law preempted on the same ground.
Background
Bonito Boats developed a hull design for a fiberglass recreational boat and marketed it as the "Bonito 5VBR." The manufacturing process involved creating a hardwood model that was then sprayed with fiberglass to create a mold. The mold then served to produce the finished fiberglass boats for sale. No patent application was filed to protect the utilitarian or design aspects of the hull or the manufacturing process by which the finished boats were produced.489 U.S. at 144
After the Bonito 5VBR had been on the market for six years, the Florida Legislature enacted a "plug molding" statute that prohibits the use of a direct molding process to duplicate unpatented boat hulls, and forbids the knowing sale of hulls so duplicated. Bonito Boats then filed an action in a Florida Circuit Court, alleging that Thunder Craft Boats had violated the statute by using the direct molding process to duplicate the Bonito 5VBR fiberglass hull and by knowingly selling such duplicates. Bonito Boats sought damages, injunctive relief, and an award of attorney's fees under the Florida law.489 U.S. at 144-45.
The Circuit Court granted Thunder Craft's s motion to dismiss the complaint on the ground that the statute conflicted with federal patent law, and was therefore invalid under the Supremacy Clause of the Federal Constitution. The Florida Court of Appeals and the Florida Supreme Court affirmed.
The Federal Circuit had reached a contrary result in Interpart Corp. v. Italia, upholding  a California law prohibiting plug molding. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the conflict.
Opinion of the Court
In a unanimous opinion for the Court, Justice O'Connor began by noting:
This concern continued, and federal patent law ever since has been concerned with "the difficult business 'of drawing a line between the things which are worth to the public the embarrassment of an exclusive patent, and those which are not.'"489 U.S. at 148 (quoting Thomas Jefferson). This balance is reflected in the statutory line drawing as to the required degrees of novelty and nonobviousness for issuance of a patent:
These novelty and nonobviousness requirements of patentability "embody a congressional understanding . . . that free exploitation of ideas will be the rule, to which the protection of a federal patent is the exception." Accordingly, a parallel state law system could disturb the balance Congress struck" "State law protection for techniques and designs whose disclosure has already been induced by market rewards may conflict with the very purpose of the patent laws by decreasing the range of ideas available as the building blocks of further innovation." Accordingly, "the federal patent laws must determine not only what is protected, but also what is free for all to use."489 U.S. at 151.
Thus, as such past decisions as Sears and Compco "have made clear that state regulation of intellectual property must yield to the extent that it clashes with the balance struck by Congress in our patent laws." And: "Where it is clear how the patent laws strike that balance in a particular circumstance, that is not a judgment the States may 
second-guess." The prior Supreme Court decisions "correctly concluded that the States may not offer patent-like protection to intellectual creations which would otherwise remain unprotected as a matter of federal law."489 U.S. at 152-53, 156.
The Federal Circuit, in its Interpart opinion argued that a plug-molding statute "prevents unscrupulous competitors" from taking advantage of the work of the originator while leaving later comers free to design and manufacture their own products, and "the patent laws say nothing about the right to copy or the right to use, they speak only in terms of the right to exclude."489 U.S. at 163. The Court found this reasoning "defective."
First: "Appending the conclusionary label 'unscrupulous' to such competitive behavior merely endorses a policy judgment which the patent laws do not leave the States free to make." That decision is left to the federal government and its determination was that copying the functional attributes of unpatented products that are in general circulation "is legitimate competitive activity."489 U.S. at 164.
Second, as for the Federal Circuit's proposition that the patent laws say "nothing about the right to copy or the right to use," there is a federal right to copy and the Federal Circuit's "assertion to the contrary is puzzling, and flies in the face" of decisions interpreting Sears and Compco. Those cases require that "copying of the article itself that is unprotected by the federal patent and copyright laws cannot be protected by state law."489 U.S. at 165.
This is a field that Congress has fully occupied, leaving no room for parallel state regulation, whether conflicting, complementary, or supplemental:
Impact and subsequent developments
In 1998, Congress subsequently enacted the Vessel Hull Design Protection Act (VHDPA). as part of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, providing copyright-like or sui generis protection to boat hull designs, under a registration system something like that of the Semiconductor Chip Protection Act (SCPA).Since the VHDPA is a federal statute, it is not subject to preemption by the patent law or other federal statutory law, but it is possible that constitutional problems might exist under the patent clause of the Constitution. See generally Malla Pollack, The Multiple Unconstitutionality of Business Method Patents: Common Sense, Congressional Consideration, and Constitutional History, 28  61 (2002). This law creates ten years of copyright-like protection for boat hull designs.For a summary of the boat hull law, see the Copyright Office's analysis.
The VHDPA was too late for Bonito Boats, however. According to the U.S. Coast Guard, Bonito Boats went out of business on July 16, 1991.Orlando Sentinel, "Boat Makers Flail Amid Sinking Sales" (May 25, 1992).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 489
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States federal preemption law
Category:1989 in United States case law
"""

From "Booth v. Churner" ==> """
Booth v. Churner, 532 U.S. 731 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned the extent to which a state prisoner must first utilize an administrative review process provided by the state, prior to filing a case in federal district court. The Court held that Booth still had a mechanism of administrative review, and thus his claim was premature.
Background
The Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1995 requires a prisoner to exhaust "such administrative remedies as are available" before suing over prison conditions. Timothy Booth, an inmate at the State Correctional Institution at Smithfield, Pennsylvania, filed a suit in District Court, claiming that corrections officers violated his Eighth Amendment right to be free from cruel and unusual punishment. Booth sought both injunctive relief and monetary damages. At the time of Booth's suit, Pennsylvania provided an administrative grievance and appeals system, which addressed Booth's complaints but had no provision for recovery of money damages. After the prison authority denied his administrative grievance, Booth did not seek administrative review. Subsequently, the District Court dismissed the complaint for failure to exhaust administrative remedies. In affirming, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals rejected Booth's argument that the exhaustion requirement was inapplicable because the administrative process could not award him the monetary relief he sought.
He appealed to the United States Supreme Court, which agreed to hear his case. The attorneys general of over 30 states filed amicus curiae briefs at the Court, urging affirmance of the decision.532 U.S. at 733.
Opinion of the Court
Justice David Souter wrote the unanimous majority opinion of the court, which agreed with the Third Circuit in rejecting Booth's claims. The Court held that even though the prison grievance procedure did not provide for requested monetary relief, Booth was nonetheless required to exhaust administrative remedies before filing suit with respect to prison conditions. Justice Souter wrote for the Court, "we think that Congress has mandated exhaustion clearly enough, regardless of the relief offered through administrative procedures." Therefore, Booth's suit was premature.
See also
 Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution
 Appeal
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States criminal procedure case law
"""

From "Borden v. United States" ==> """
Borden v. United States, 593 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the classification of prior convictions for "violent felony" in application of Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA); the ACCA provides for enhanced sentencing for convicted criminals with three or more such felonies in their history. In a 5–4 decision in June 2021, the Supreme Court ruled that crimes resulting from reckless conduct should not be considered as a "violent felony" for the purposes of the ACCA.
Background
The Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA) passed in 1984 is a federal law that enabled law enforcement to seek enhanced sentences for convicted criminals that have three or more violent felonies or serious drug offensives on their record. Past case law involving the ACCA has led to questions of what constitutes a violent felony to qualify under the ACCA.
Charles Borden Jr. was pulled over in a traffic stop in Tennessee in April 2017 and discovered to have a firearm in his vehicle. As he had a prior felony conviction on his record, he was charged with unlawful possession, which he pled guilty. Upon further evaluation of his record, the state found a prior conviction for reckless aggravated assault, along with two other violent felonies, and charged Borden under the ACCA, receiving a sentence of nine years and seven months.
Borden appealed his conviction to the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Tennessee, arguing that his reckless aggravated assault conviction should not be considered a violent crime under the ACCA and sought a reduced sentence. The District Court denied the appeal, ruling that the aggravated assault was a violent felony. The Sixth Circuit upheld the District Court's decision.
Supreme Court
Borden petitioned the Supreme Court, asking whether a criminal act with a mens rea of recklessness should be considered as a violent felony under the ACCA. The Court granted certiorari for the case in March 2020. Oral argument was held on November 3, 2020.
The Court issued its opinion on June 10, 2021. In a 5–4 vote, the Court reversed the Sixth Circuit's decision and remanded the case for review. The plurality decision was written by Justice Elena Kagan and joined by Justices Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, and Neil Gorsuch. Kagan wrote that crimes involving the mens rea of recklessness should not be categorized as "violent felonies" for purposes of the ACCA. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a concurrence, joining only in the judgment of the case.
A dissenting opinion was written by Justice Brett Kavanaugh, and joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Samuel Alito and Amy Coney Barrett.
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Armed Career Criminal Act case law
"""

From "Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri" ==> """
Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri, 564 U.S. 379 (2011), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held the public concern test limits Petition Clause claims by public employees. More specifically, state and local government employees may not sue their employers for retaliation under the Petition Clause of the First Amendment when they petition the government on matters of private concern. To show that an employer interfered with rights under the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment, an employee must show that his speech related to a matter of public concern. The court held that this test also applies when the employee invokes the Petition Clause. The case is significant under the Petition Clause because 1.) it recognized that lawsuits are “Petitions” under the First Amendment and 2.) it explains that the Petition Clause and Speech Clause are not always coextensive, and leaves open the possibility that here may be additional claims under the Petition Clause which plaintiffs may invoke consistent with the purpose of that Clause..
Background
Termination and reinstatement 
Charles Guarnieri was terminated as chief of police for the borough of Duryea, Pennsylvania. He filed a union grievance which proceeded to arbitration per the police union collective-bargaining agreement. The arbitrator found that procedural errors had been committed in connection with the termination of Guarnieri. The arbitrator also found misconduct on the part of Guarnieri. Guarnieri was ordered reinstated following a disciplinary suspension.
After Guarnieri was reinstated, he was issued a set of directives outlining Guarnieri's responsibilities in the performance of his duties. Guarnieri claimed his grievance was a petition protected by the Petition Clause of the First Amendment. He filed lawsuit against the borough, alleging that the directives were retaliation for that protected activity.
Lawsuit
During the lawsuit, the jury was instructed that the lawsuit and union grievance were "protected activity... under the constitution". The jury found for Guarnieri and awarded damages. The borough appealed on the ground that Guarnieri's lawsuit and grievance were not protected under the First Amendment as they did not address matters of public concern, a view affirmed by Courts outside the Third Circuit. The Court of Appeals concluded that "a public employee who has petitioned the government through a formal mechanism such as the filing of a lawsuit or grievance is protected under the Petition Clause from retaliation for that activity, even if the petition concerns a matter of solely private concern".  The Supreme Court granted certiorari in order to rule on the conflicting interpretations of the Petition Clause.
Opinion of the Court
The Court held that "a government employer's allegedly retaliatory actions against an employee do not give rise to liability under the Petition Clause unless the employee's petition relates to a matter of public concern."
Speech Clause
The Court had ruled in Connick v. Myers that a public employee must show he spoke as a citizen on a matter of public concern when suing his employer under the First Amendment's Speech Clause. After making this showing, the Court had stated in Pickering v. Board of Education that the court must balance the employee's right to engage in speech against the government's interest in being efficient and effective in the public services it performs. In this case, the Court outlined the close connection between the rights of speech and petition when making its ruling.
Petition Clause
The Court wrote that "the substantial government interests that justify a cautious and restrained approach to protecting public employees' speech are just as relevant in Petition Clause cases". The Court noted that holding a different standard for the Petition Clause could result in a loophole, as "petitions are a form of expression, and employees who invoke the Petition Clause in most cases could invoke as well the Speech Clause of the First Amendment".
Partial dissent
Justice Scalia concurred in the judgment in part and dissented in part. Scalia argued that the Court "has never actually held that a lawsuit is a constitutionally protected Petition". In this case the parties did not litigate on this issue and so the Court left it an open question. Scalia also argued against the holding Petition Clause and Speech clause being treated identically in public employment cases.
See also
 Connick v. Myers
 Pickering v. Board of Education
 Garcetti v. Ceballos
 References 
External links
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union of United States, Inc." ==> """
Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union of United States, Inc., 466 U.S. 485 (1984), was a product disparagement case ultimately decided by the Supreme Court of the United States. The Court held, on a 6–3 vote, in favor of Consumers Union, the publisher of Consumer Reports magazine, ruling that proof of "actual malice" was necessary in product disparagement cases raising First Amendment issues, as set out by the case of New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964). The Court ruled that the First Circuit Court of Appeals had correctly concluded that Bose had not presented proof of actual malice.
The magazine Consumer Reports had published in 1970 a review of an unusual loudspeaker system manufactured by Bose Corporation, called the Bose 901. The review expressed skepticism of the system's quality and recommended that consumers delay purchase until they had investigated for themselves whether the loudspeaker system's unusual attributes would suit them. Bose objected to numerous statements in the article, including the sentences, "Worse, individual instruments heard through the Bose system seemed to grow to gigantic proportions and tended to wander about the room. For instance, a violin appeared to be  wide and a piano stretched from wall to wall."  Bose demanded a retraction when they learned that Consumer Reports changed what the original reviewer wrote about the speakers in his pre-publication draft, which the magazine refused to do.
Lower court history
The Massachusetts district court had heard testimony from an author of the article that the instruments heard through the 901's speakers tended to wander "along the wall," rather than "about the room," as had been stated in the article; and found that this constituted a publication of a false statement with the knowledge that it was false. It had found Consumers Union liable for damages.
On appeal, Bose had argued that the district court's findings of fact could not be set aside by the appeals court under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure Rule 52(a) unless the findings were "clearly erroneous." The appeals court, however, had agreed with Consumers Union that under the precedent set by New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964), the appeals court had to review the entire matter de novo in order to determine whether the false fact was published with "actual malice." As Bose had not presented sufficient evidence of actual malice, the appeals court ruled, the judgment was required to be overturned.
See also
 Suzuki v. Consumers Union
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 466
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States defamation case law
v. Consumers Union of the United States
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:Consumer Reports
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Bostock v. Clayton County" ==> """
Bostock v. Clayton County, , is a landmark United States Supreme Court civil rights case in which the Court held that Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 protects employees against discrimination because they are gay or transgender.
The plaintiff, Gerald Bostock, was fired from his county job after he expressed interest in a gay softball league at work. The lower courts followed the Eleventh Circuit's past precedent that Title VII did not cover employment discrimination based on sexual orientation. The case was consolidated with Altitude Express, Inc. v. Zarda, a similar case of apparent discrimination due to sexual orientation from the Second Circuit, but which had added to a circuit split. Oral arguments were heard on October 8, 2019, alongside R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral Homes Inc. v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, a similar question of Title VII discrimination relating to transgender persons.
On June 15, 2020, the Court ruled in a 6–3 decision covering all three cases that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity is necessarily also discrimination "because of sex" as prohibited by Title VII. According to Justice Neil Gorsuch's majority opinion, that is so because employers discriminating against gay or transgender employees accept a certain conduct (e.g., attraction to women) in employees of one sex but not in employees of the other sex. 
The ruling has been hailed as one of the most important legal decisions regarding LGBT rights in the United States, along with Lawrence v. Texas (2003) and Obergefell v. Hodges (2015). Many legal analysts claimed that the case defined Gorsuch as a textualist in statutory interpretation.
 Background 
 Legislation and prior case law 
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed into law amid the civil rights movement. It had been proposed by President John F. Kennedy as a means to combat racial discrimination and racial segregation in the aftermath of the Birmingham campaign. After Kennedy's assassination in November 1963, his successor Lyndon B. Johnson advocated passage of the Civil Rights Act in the following year.
Among several provisions in the law is Title VII, which covers equal employment opportunities. Its key provision, codified at , states that it is illegal to discriminate in any hiring or employment practices based on an "individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national origin". To enforce this requirement, Title VII established the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), a federal agency based on an office Kennedy had established with Executive Order 10925, to help oversee any reported employment discrimination and file lawsuits against entities that the EEOC believes have discriminated in the employment context. In addition, the EEOC may make its own determination on cases rather than taking these to court. These decisions do not carry the weight of case law, but the Supreme Court does consider the weight of the EEOC opinions as the EEOC "constitute[s] a body of experience and informed judgment to which courts and litigants may properly resort for guidance".
The nature of protected classes under § 2000e-2(a)(1) have been refined through case law over the years. Three key Supreme Court cases prior to Bostock had considered the aspect of "sex" in the context of the statute:
 Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson, , which ruled that sexual harassment was considered a form of unlawful discrimination under Title VII;
 Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, , which determined that gender stereotyping was also a form of discrimination under Title VII and thus unlawful; and
 Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services, Inc., , which further refined Meritor Savings Bank that sexual harassment between members of the same sex was also considered unlawful discrimination.
LGBT employment protections
Until Bostock, whether the Civil Rights Act gave federal protection against employment discrimination to the class of LGBT people was in dispute. Individual states since 1973 acted on their own accord to extend employment discrimination protections to explicitly cover LGBT employees, and by 2020 before the Bostock decision, 21 states had included LGBT as a protected class against employment discrimination, while other states offered some but less extensive protections in their laws. States with such protections often have a state-level board that performs functions equivalent to the EEOC, and which will work with the EEOC to unify employment discrimination regulations. Numerous local governments passed similar LGBT employment discrimination statutes as well.
Since 1994, members of the Democratic Party in the U.S. Congress have introduced some form of the Employment Non-Discrimination Act in nearly every two-year term, which would have amended the Civil Rights Act to include both sexual orientation and gender identity as protected classes under Title VII at the federal level and thus applying across the entire country. Passage of these bills has generally failed because of partisan politics. More recently, the Equality Act, expanding the non-discrimination protections to include housing, education, and other areas, was introduced in 2015 and similarly introduced each term, failing to pass due to partisan politics.
The EEOC has used past case law and its evaluation of discrimination cases brought before it to establish that LGBT discrimination is unlawful under the context of the Civil Rights Act. In 2012, the EEOC ruled in Macy v. Holder that discrimination on the basis of gender identity is a form of sex stereotyping, and thus prohibited in employment as a form of discrimination on the basis of sex under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. In 2015, the EEOC ruled in Baldwin v. Foxx that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is also prohibited in employment under Title VII, on the exact same basis as in Macy. The following year, the EEOC filed its first pair of test cases in federal court arguing that sexual orientation is protected by Title VII.EEOC files test case to hold that Title VII Prohibits LGBTQ Discrimination
 Case background 
thumb|left|upright|Gerald Bostock at the Supreme Court on October 8, 2019
Gerald Bostock was an employee of Clayton County, within the Atlanta metropolitan area, as an official for its juvenile court system since 2003, with good performance records through the years. In early 2013, he joined a gay softball league and promoted it at work for volunteerism. In April 2013, Clayton County conducted an audit of funds controlled by Bostock and fired him for "conduct unbecoming a county employee". Georgia had no law protecting LGBT people from employment discrimination at the time.
Bostock believed that the county used the claim of misspent funds as a pretext for firing him for being gay, and sought legal recourse for workplace discrimination in 2016 in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia. The county sought to dismiss the claim of prohibited discrimination—the District Court agreed to dismiss, on the basis of the precedent established in the 2017 case Evans v. Georgia Regional Hospital decided by the Eleventh Circuit (of which the District is part), which held that the Civil Rights Act's Title VII does not include protection against discrimination towards sexual orientation.
Circuit split
Bostock appealed to the Eleventh Circuit, where the three-judge panel affirmed the District Court's ruling in 2018. The Eleventh Circuit relied on two prior cases: its previous ruling in Evans, and Blum v. Gulf Oil Corp. from the Fifth Circuit in 1976. In upholding the ruling, the Eleventh Circuit pointed to their ruling in Evans that dismissed the Supreme Court's precedent against sex discrimination set by Price Waterhouse and Oncale.
The Eleventh Circuit's ruling in Evans furthered a circuit split, as it conflicted with that of the Seventh Circuit in Hively v. Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana (2017) in which, by an 8–3 decision, the Circuit found that discrimination in employment on the basis of sexual orientation violated Title VII. The Second Circuit came to the same conclusion in Zarda v. Altitude Express, Inc. (2018) (Altitude Express). Thus the Eleventh Circuit, on the one hand, and the Second and Seventh Circuits, on the other, were divided on the question of the interpretation of Title VII. These cases and a related case, R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral Homes Inc. v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, (Harris Funeral Homes), in which the Sixth Circuit found Title VII also covered transgender employment discrimination, set the stage for the Supreme Court's decision in Bostock.
Supreme Court
Bostock petitioned the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari on the question of whether sexual orientation is covered by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act. The Supreme Court certified the petition in April 2019, and consolidated the case with Altitude Express. Between these cases, as well as prior Circuit court decisions, there had been a split of opinions on whether sexual orientation discrimination is covered by Title VII. The combined Bostock and Altitude Express cases drew numerous amicus curiae briefs. Over thirty-six briefs were filed in support of Bostock and the estate of Zarda, including one signed by over 200 major corporations such as Amazon, the Walt Disney Company, and Coca-Cola, that asserted that it would not be "unreasonably costly or burdensome" for them to accept sexual orientation as a protected class under Title VII. Over 25 briefs were filed to support Clayton County and Altitude Express; among them, the U.S. Department of Justice argued that sexual orientation was not covered, but asserted, "Congress of course remains free to legislate in this area; and employers, including governmental employers, remain free to offer greater protections to their workers than Title VII requires."
Oral arguments in the consolidated cases were heard on October 8, 2019, alongside the arguments in Harris Funeral Homes, the case related to Title VII protections for transgender individuals. Just prior to the hearings, police from the District of Columbia had discovered two suspicious packages near the Supreme Court building and temporarily cleared the plaza of arriving supporters to remove the packages.  In oral arguments, the statutory claims centered on the discrimination "because of ... sex" language of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Andrée Sophia Blumstein, the Solicitor General of Tennessee, predicted that the Supreme Court would make a consequential decision in this case because of the sensitivity of the issue and the Constitutional implications.Blumstein, A. (2019, September 5). Symposium: How the Title VII Trilogy May Test the Court. SCOTUSblog. https://www.scotusblog.com/2019/09/symposium-how-the-title-vii-trilogy-may-test-the-court/ In an article before oral arguments, Blumstein stated that the decision would determine whether the Supreme Court would remain solely as the "expositor of the law" or become the policymakers alongside Congress. 
Decision
Majority opinion
thumb|upright|Justice Neil Gorsuch delivered the opinion of the Court
Justice Neil Gorsuch delivered the opinion of the Court in this case on June 15, 2020. In a 6–3 decision, the Court held that Title VII protections pursuant to § 2000e-2(a)(1) did extend to cover sexual orientation and gender identity. The decision then involved the statutory interpretation of Title VII (specifically the original meaning of "sex"),Bostock v. Clayton County, . not constitutional law as in other recent landmark cases involving the rights of LGBT individuals such as Obergefell v. Hodges.. The Court further held that Title VII protections against sex discrimination in the employment context apply to discrimination against particular individuals on the basis of sex, as opposed to discrimination against groups. Thus, Title VII provides a remedy to individuals who experience discrimination on the basis of sex even if an employer's policy on the whole does not involve discrimination. Gorsuch wrote:
An employer who fired an individual for being homosexual or transgender fires that person for traits or actions it would not have questioned in members of a different sex. Sex plays a necessary and undisguisable role in the decision, exactly what Title VII forbids. Those who adopted the Civil Rights Act might not have anticipated their work would lead to this particular result. But the limits of the drafters' imagination supply no reason to ignore the law's demands. Only the written word is the law, and all persons are entitled to its benefit.In his opinion, Gorsuch wrote, "it is irrelevant what an employer might call its discriminatory practice, how others might label it, or what else might motivate it."Bostock v. Clayton County, . He referenced Phillips v. Martin Marietta Corp., in which a company refused to hire women with young children; and Los Angeles Dept. of Water and Power v. Manhart, in which an employer required women to make larger pension fund contributions than did men, on the premise that women on average live longer than men do. Both cases violated Title VII, and Gorsuch wrote, "just as labels and additional intentions or motivations didn't make a difference in Manhart or Phillips, they cannot make a difference here."
Gorsuch's decision also alluded to concerns that the judgment may set a sweeping precedent that would force gender equality on traditional practices. "They say sex-segregated bathrooms, locker rooms, and dress codes will prove unsustainable after our decision today but none of these other laws are before us; we have not had the benefit of adversarial testing about the meaning of their terms, and we do not prejudge any such question today."
Dissents
Justice Samuel Alito wrote a dissent, joined by Justice Clarence Thomas. In his dissent, Alito asserted that at the time of the crafting of the Civil Rights Act in 1964 the concepts of sexual orientation and transgender identity would have been unknown, and thus Congress's language should not be implied to cover these facets. Alito wrote, "Many will applaud today's decision because they agree on policy grounds with the Court's updating of Title VII. But the question in these cases is not whether discrimination because of sexual orientation or gender identity should be outlawed. The question is whether Congress did that in 1964. It indisputably did not." Alito further stated that "even if discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity could be squeezed into some arcane understanding of sex discrimination, the context in which Title VII was enacted would tell us that this is not what the statute's terms were understood to mean at that time." Alito was critical of the majority decision:
Justice Brett Kavanaugh wrote a separate dissent, arguing that the Court could not add sexual orientation or gender identity to Title VII due to the separation of powers, leaving this responsibility to Congress. He concluded by acknowledging that
 Reactions 
The Supreme Court ruling was seen as a major victory by proponents of LGBT rights. Sarah Kate Ellis, the CEO of GLAAD, stated that the "Court's historic decision affirms what shouldn't have even been a debate: LGBT Americans should be able to work without fear of losing jobs because of who they are". The Human Rights Campaign praised the decision, with the HRC President, Alphonso David, stating: "This is a landmark victory for LGBT equality. No one should be denied a job or fired simply because of who they are or whom they love. For the past two decades, federal courts have determined that discrimination on the basis of LGBT status is unlawful discrimination under federal law. Today's historic ruling by the Supreme Court affirms that view, but there is still work left to be done. In many aspects of the public square, LGBT people still lack non-discrimination protections, which is why it is crucial that Congress pass the Equality Act to address the significant gaps in federal civil rights laws and improve protections for everyone". Torie Osborn stated that the decision in Bostock represented a more significant advance than same-sex marriage, calling it a "watershed". Ken Mehlman took the decision as evidence that conservatism is not inconsistent with support for LGBT rights.
Legal scholars saw the ruling as having an impact beyond employment, extending to areas such as education, health care, housing and financial credit. Attorney Paul Smith, who argued Lawrence v. Texas (2003), said, "[a]ny law, and I think there are dozens, that says you can't discriminate because of sex is going to have a reckoning with this ruling"; indeed, Alito's dissent in Bostock notes that "[o]ver 100 federal statutes prohibit discrimination because of sex". American Civil Liberties Union lawyer Joshua Block said, "[a]ll of the Trump administration's actions ['curtailing protections for transgender Americans'] have been built around this assertion that Title VII [of the Civil Rights Act] and Title IX [of the Education Amendments of 1972] provide no protections to LGBTQ people ... [i]t's an Achilles' heel that's been built into every single thing they've done."
Some Christian conservatives, including Russell D. Moore and Franklin Graham, expressed concern that the decision would impact religious freedoms and affect faith-based employment, but Gorsuch's opinion said that the scope of how this decision intersects with past precedent for religious freedom would likely be the subject of future cases at the Court. Archbishop José Horacio Gómez, president of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (which had filed an amicus brief (friend of the court) against Bostock), called the ruling an "injustice" and said he was "deeply concerned that the U.S. Supreme Court has effectively redefined the legal meaning of 'sex' in our nation's civil rights law". Franklin Graham said it was "a very sad day". Dan McLaughlin of the National Review postulated that Dixiecrat Howard W. Smith's insertion of the word "sex" in Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 had inadvertently protected sexual orientation and gender identity from employment discrimination.
Gerald Bostock, the only surviving plaintiff from all three cases, stated that he was "proud to take part in a role to get us to this historic moment". The Supreme Court decision remanded his case to be reheard at the District Court.
Some legal scholars have expressed disappointment that the Supreme Court did not define the terms "transgender" or "gay" in its ruling, leaving doubt about who is covered by them. In the Connecticut Law Review, Mercer University law professor Pamela Wilkins wrote that the Court's decision regarding transgender people uses only examples in which someone identified as male or female and "does not address whether Title VII protects transgender non-binary individuals who identify as something other than exclusively male and female." Legal scholars have also debated whether the term "gay" in Title VII includes bisexual people.
Political
Many politicians across the political spectrum praised the ruling. Speaker Nancy Pelosi said that the ruling "secures critical protections for LGBT Americans across the country". Republican Senator Rob Portman of Ohio stated that the ruling was "a big deal" and emphasized that people should not be fired simply because of their sexual orientation. Some politicians, however, were critical of the ruling, such as Missouri Senator Josh Hawley, who argued that the ruling was simply "policymaking". President Donald Trump neither praised nor criticized the ruling, and stated in response to the decision that "some people were surprised" but said that the court had "ruled and we live with their decision". He called the decision "very powerful". 
Gorsuch and textualism
There was some surprise that Gorsuch, a conservative-leaning Trump appointee, wrote the majority opinion supporting LGBT employment rights. Some commentators claimed that his opinion was consistent with his textualism in statutory interpretation of the plain meaning of laws in general, while others asserted otherwise. Gorsuch wrote much on textualism in his book A Republic, If You Can Keep It, published in mid-2019, and some of his questioning at the oral hearings drew on using textual interpretation of the law.
Alito's dissent fundamentally criticized Gorsuch's opinion as textualism. He argued that the majority opinion went beyond the plain language of the law to claim that its intent in 1964 covered sexual orientation and gender identity as part of the meaning of "sex" in the statute. Alito called the majority's decision a "pirate ship", in that "It sails under a textualist flag, but what it actually represents is a theory of statutory interpretation that Justice Scalia excoriated—the theory that courts should 'update' old statutes so that they better reflect the current values of society."
In a Slate article, Mark Joseph Stern wrote that Gorsuch's argument "rests on textualism" and described it as "remarkably dismissive" of Alito's dissenting opinion. Stern agreed with Gorsuch, writing, "Alito does not want the court to stretch Title VII beyond its application—as expected by Congress in 1964—and that approach is not textualism", adding that Alito's opinion "elevates the alleged mental processes of long-dead lawmakers over the ordinary meaning of words". Michael D. Shear, a White House correspondent for The New York Times, wrote, "Justice Gorsuch employed a fundamentally conservative principle—a literal reading of the words of a statute—to reach a decision that contrasts sharply with the conclusions of the other conservative justices on the court". Carrie Severino, the president of the conservative Judicial Crisis Network and a former law clerk of Justice Thomas, said, "Justice Scalia would be disappointed that his successor has bungled textualism so badly today, for the sake of appealing to college campuses and editorial boards".
The religious journal First Things editor R. R. Reno called the opinion unworkable sophistry, comparing it to Dred Scott v. Sandford: "Historians may look back and judge Bostock the twenty-first-century analogue to Dred Scott, the Supreme Court decision that imposed the Southern slave regime on the entire country and contributed to the intolerable contradictions that led to the Civil War. Gorsuch's majority opinion leaves no wiggle room. It ties affirmations of homosexuality and transgenderism to our most basic conceptions of equality. And it does so by denying that there are any moral, legal, or even metaphysical differences between men and women."
Jonathan Skrmetti, Chief Deputy Attorney General of Tennessee (which, with a number of other states, had filed an amicus brief on behalf of the employers in Bostock), observed that all three opinions in Bostock adopted a textualist approach. Echoing a comment made by Justice Elena Kagan in memorializing Scalia, Skrmetti argued that Bostock shows "we really are all textualists now". He characterized Gorsuch's majority opinion in Bostock as "glorifying textualism in its narrowest literalist conception". Gorsuch's majority opinion, Skrmetti argues, means that this "narrow" form of textualism—which, on Skrmetti's view, does not look to legislative history or other potential sources of the meaning of the statute—is now ascendant. But Skrmetti notes that where a statute is ambiguous, such tools might still be available to judges in interpreting statutes.
 See also 
 2019 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States
 LGBT rights in the United States
 References 
External links
 Biskupic, Joan (July 28, 2020): "EXCLUSIVE: Anger, leaks and tensions at the Supreme Court during the LGBTQ rights case". A background article written by CNN's legal analyst & Supreme Court biographer Joan Biskupic who details the decision-making process leading to the landmark court decision in Bostock v. Clayton County. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved on November 24, 2020.
 Biskupic, Joan (July 29, 2020): "EXCLUSIVE: How Brett Kavanaugh tried to sidestep abortion and Trump financial docs cases". A background article written by CNN's legal analyst & Supreme Court biographer Joan Biskupic who details the decision-making process leading to the court decision in Bostock v. Clayton County. Archived from the original on November 15, 2020. Retrieved on February 19, 2020.
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:Clayton County, Georgia
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States transgender rights case law
Category:2020 in LGBT history
Category:LGBT rights in Georgia (U.S. state)
