"""

From "Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization" ==> """
Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, , is a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in which the court held that the Constitution of the United States does not confer a right to abortion. The court's decision overruled both Roe v. Wade (1973) and Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992), returning to individual states the power to regulate any aspect of abortion not protected by federal law.
The case concerned the constitutionality of a 2018 Mississippi state law that banned most abortion operations after the first 15 weeks of pregnancy. The Mississippi law was based on a model by a Christian legal organization, Alliance Defending Freedom, with the specific intent to provoke a legal battle leading to the overturning of Roe. Jackson Women's Health Organization—Mississippi's only abortion clinic—had sued Thomas E. Dobbs, state health officer with the Mississippi State Department of Health, in March 2018. Lower courts had prevented enforcement of the law with preliminary injunctions. The injunctions were based on the ruling in Planned Parenthood v. Casey, which had prevented states from banning abortion before fetal viability, generally within the first 24 weeks, on the basis that a woman's choice for abortion during that time is protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
The ideological shift of the Supreme Court during the Trump administration that culminated with the 2020 appointment of Justice Amy Coney Barrett made Dobbs a potential vehicle for social conservatives to challenge Roe. Several states passed legislation—including trigger laws—to strictly regulate abortion should the newly conservative court overturn Roe. Dobbs gained more attention in the wake of legal battles over the Texas Heartbeat Act, enacted in May 2021, leading to near record-setting amicus curiae submissions. Oral arguments before the Supreme Court were held in December 2021. In May 2022, Politico published a leaked draft majority opinion by Justice Samuel Alito, which prompted more states to pass trigger laws; the leaked draft largely matched the final decision.
On June 24, 2022, the Court issued a decision that, by a vote of 6–3, reversed the lower court rulings. A smaller majority of five justices joined the opinion overturning Roe and Casey. The majority held that abortion is not a constitutional right as the Constitution does not mention it and its substantive right was not "deeply rooted" in the country's history. Chief Justice John Roberts agreed with the judgment upholding the Mississippi law but did not join the majority in the opinion to overturn Roe and Casey. 
Leading Republican politicians supported the decision, while leading Democrats and many international observers criticized it. Protests and counterprotests over the decision occurred in many U.S. cities and internationally, with most polling indicating at the time of the decision that 55% to 60% of the public disapproved of overturning Roe.  
 Background 
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Roe v. Wade, a 1973 landmark decision, that a right to privacy within the scope of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution included a woman's qualified right to terminate her pregnancy. The Court partly reaffirmed this in Planned Parenthood v. Casey, a 1992 case that also struck down Roes pregnancy trimester framework in favor of a fetal viability standard, typically 23 or 24 weeks into pregnancy. Casey held that laws that restrict abortion before the fetus is viable and laws that create an undue burden on women seeking abortions that place a "substantial obstacle" are unconstitutional under the Due Process Clause given a woman's right to "substantive due process" under the Fourteenth Amendment. The Court also ruled that this right is not absolute, must be balanced with possible government interest, and may be affected by medical advancements that allow premature babies to survive at younger gestational ages.
After Roe, there was a national political realignment surrounding abortion. The abortion-rights movement in the United States initially emphasized the national policy benefits of abortion, such as smaller welfare expenses, slower population growth, and fewer illegitimate births. The abortion-rights movement drew support from the population control movement, feminists, and environmentalists. Anti-abortion advocates and civil-rights activists accused abortion-rights supporters of intending to control the population of racial minorities and the disabled, citing their ties to racial segregationists and eugenicist legal reformers. The abortion-rights movement subsequently distanced itself from the population control movement and took up choice-based and rights-oriented rhetoric similar to what was used in the Roe decision.
At the time of Roe, opposition to abortion was largely concentrated in the Catholic Church, with many Protestant faiths leaning in favor of or not taking a stance on it. Catholics and many Northern Democratic politicians supported an expansive welfare state, wanted to reduce rates of abortion through prenatal insurance and federally funded day care, and opposed abortion. Beginning in the late 1970s, the anti-abortion movement in the United States shifted to Protestant faiths that saw abortion rights as part of a liberal agenda to fight against, and became part of the new Christian right. The Protestant influence helped make opposition to abortion part of the Republican Party's platform by the 1990s. Republican-led states enacted laws to restrict abortion, including abortions earlier than Caseys general standard of 24 weeks. The courts enjoined most of these laws. Fetal viability's usage as a standard was questioned in U.S. abortion-related cases after Casey, including by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor in her dissenting opinion in City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health. These opinions argued that other scientific, philosophical, and moral considerations are involved.
During the Roberts Court since 2005, there had generally been a 5–4 conservative majority with the potential to overturn Roe and Casey. But one of those conservatives, Anthony Kennedy, had been part of the controlling plurality opinion in Casey and was generally seen as a safe vote to uphold it. Among the other conservative members were Samuel Alito, who had sat as a circuit judge on the three-judge appellate panel and dissented from the court's invalidation of the spousal notification in Casey; and Clarence Thomas, who believed the court's use of substantive due process to confer implicit rights, including a right to abortion, was incorrect. Chief Justice John Roberts was also considered part of the conservative majority, but he was a strong proponent of stare decisis, believing that even some wrongly decided cases should not be overturned, and a staunch defender of the Court's reputation.
In 2016, Senate Republicans led by majority leader Mitch McConnell prevented then-President Barack Obama from filling the vacancy left by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia. This allowed President Donald Trump to fill the vacancy with Justice Neil Gorsuch the following year, and initiated the ideological shift of the court with respect to abortion rights. The court appeared to shift further in 2018, when Kennedy retired and was replaced by Brett Kavanaugh, a known Casey opponent. Because of Roberts's stated positions, he was considered the "swing vote" in abortion cases, but his strong support for upholding even wrongly decided cases would make it difficult for Roe or Casey to be challenged. Nevertheless, several Republican-majority states passed bills restricting abortion, anticipating a potential shift in the Supreme Court and providing possible case vehicles for bringing the issue to it. When Amy Coney Barrett replaced Ruth Bader Ginsburg in late 2020, the Court's ideological makeup shifted further, creating a 6–3 conservative majority and providing an opportunity to additionally limit or even overturn Roe and Casey by moving Roberts out of the "swing vote" role. Ginsburg had generally been in the majority of past Supreme Court cases that enjoined stricter abortion laws. Conversely, Barrett held anti-abortion views; in 1998, she wrote in a law journal article that abortion is "always immoral".
 Gestational Age Act 
In March 2018, the Mississippi Legislature passed the Gestational Age Act, which banned any abortion operation after the first 15 weeks of pregnancy, with exceptions for a medical emergency or severe fetal abnormality but none for cases of rape or incest. The medical emergency exception allows abortions to save the life of a pregnant woman and in situations where "the continuation of the pregnancy will create a serious risk of substantial and irreversible impairment of a major bodily function". The severe fetal abnormality exception allows abortions of fetuses whose defects will leave them incapable of living outside the womb.
The legislature justified this prohibition on the basis that abortions for nontherapeutic or elective reasons were "a barbaric practice, dangerous for the maternal patient, and demeaning to the medical profession". Another basis was that the abortion procedures forbidden under the Act were said by the legislature to carry "significant physical and psychological risks", and could cause various medical complications.
The legislation was based on a model written by Alliance Defending Freedom, a Christian conservative legal organization. The model legislation was created with the intent to make it law in the states within the traditionally conservative Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals (Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas), and a means to bring abortion rights to the Supreme Court. Governor Phil Bryant signed the bill into law, saying he was "committed to making Mississippi the safest place in America for an unborn child, and this bill will help us achieve that goal". He added, "We'll probably be sued here in about a half hour, and that'll be fine with me. It is worth fighting over."
 Lower courts 
Within a day of the Gestational Age Act's passage, Mississippi's only abortion clinic, Jackson Women's Health Organization, and one of its doctors, Sacheen Carr-Ellis, sued state officials Thomas E. Dobbs, state health officer with the Mississippi State Department of Health, and Kenneth Cleveland, executive director of the Mississippi State Board of Medical Licensure, to challenge the Act's constitutionality. The clinic performed surgical abortions up to 16 weeks' gestation and was represented in court by the Center for Reproductive Rights. The case was heard by Judge Carlton W. Reeves of the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi. In November 2018, Reeves ruled for the clinic and placed an injunction on Mississippi enjoining it from enforcing the Act. Reeves wrote that, based on evidence that viability of the fetus begins between 23 and 24 weeks, Mississippi had "no legitimate state interest strong enough, prior to viability, to justify a ban on abortions". Dobbs sought to have the judges consider whether fetal pain might be possible after 15 weeks, but the District Court ruled his evidence as "inadmissible and irrelevant".
The state appealed to the Fifth Circuit, which upheld Reeves's ruling in a 3–0 decision in December 2019. Senior Circuit Judge Patrick Higginbotham wrote for the Court, "In an unbroken line dating to Roe v. Wade, the Supreme Court's abortion cases have established (and affirmed, and re-affirmed) a woman's right to choose an abortion before viability. States may regulate abortion procedures prior to viability so long as they do not impose an undue burden on the woman's right, but they may not ban abortions." A request for an en banc rehearing was denied.
In May 2019, the District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi issued another injunction, this time against a newly passed Mississippi abortion law. This was a heartbeat bill that forbade most abortions when a fetus's heartbeat could be detected, which is usually from six to 12 weeks into pregnancy. In a February 2020 per curiam decision, the Fifth Circuit also upheld the second injunction. The Fifth Circuit's statements for both injunctions were similar because they both cited the lack of fetal viability during earlier stages of gestation as a reason to enjoin the laws.
 Supreme Court 
thumb|upright=1.10|The Roberts Court at the time of the Dobbs decision.
Mississippi petitioned its appeal of the Fifth Circuit decisions to the Supreme Court in June 2020. Its petition, filed by Mississippi Attorney General Lynn Fitch, focused on three questions from the appeals process. In its petition, Mississippi asked the Court to revisit the viability standard on the basis of the standard's inflexibility, and inadequate accommodation of present understandings of life before birth. The filing stated that fetuses can detect pain and respond to it at 10–12 weeks gestational age, and asked the Court to allow the prohibition of "inhumane procedures". The petition also contended that the viability standard inadequately addresses the protection of potential human life. Mississippi considered this a State interest from the "onset of the pregnancy" onward.
A response brief, which focused on two questions asked in opposition to the petition, was filed by Hillary Schneller from the Center for Reproductive Rights on behalf of Jackson Women's Health Organization (JWHO). JWHO asked the Court to deny Mississippi's petition due to judicial precedent. The brief said that both the District Court and the Fifth Circuit found the Mississippi law unconstitutional by properly applying precedent in a manner that did not conflict with other courts' decisions, and argued that there was therefore nothing about the case that "warrants this Court's intervention". The brief also argued that Mississippi was misinterpreting its role in abortion regulation. While the state thought that its interest was greater than the individual right to abortion, JWHO argued that Mississippi's vested interest in regulating abortion was insufficient to ban it before viability, making the Gestational Age Act "unconstitutional by any measure".
The petition went through review at more than a dozen conferences for the Court, which is unusual for most cases. The Court granted the petition for a writ of certiorari on May 17, 2021, limiting the Court's review to a single question, "Whether all pre-viability prohibitions on elective abortions are unconstitutional." and  Over 140 amici curiae briefs were submitted before oral argument in Dobbs, approaching the record set by Obergefell v. Hodges, in part to separate and concurrent lawsuits filed over the Texas Heartbeat Act, which effectively gave citizens of the state the means to enforce abortion bans through civil suits.
 Oral argument 
The case was heard on December 1, 2021. During the oral arguments, Mississippi was represented by Scott G. Stewart, a state solicitor general, and argued that the U.S. Constitution does not directly guarantee a right to abortion. Because of this, he said that laws about abortion should be evaluated on a rational basis review instead of the higher level of scrutiny required by the undue burden standard. Stewart also argued for overturning Roe and Casey on the basis that the decisions were unworkable and that new facts had come to light since they were made. He argued that scientific knowledge had grown about "what we know the child is doing and looks like", and claimed that we now know that fetuses are "fully human" even "very early" in gestation. Stewart also defended Mississippi's claim in its briefs that new medical advances with viability were at odds with past assumptions made when formulating the viability line, and claimed that the understanding of when fetuses begin to feel pain had grown. He maintained that because of Roe and Casey, the government could not respond to these facts by prohibiting pre-viability abortions.
JWHO, represented by Julie Rikelman (who argued the last abortion case before the Court, June Medical Services, LLC v. Russo), argued that the Court should not overrule the two decisions, because the viability standard was correct. According to Rikelman, Mississippi's arguments against Roe were not new, but instead were similar to the ones Pennsylvania made during Casey. Since Roes essential holding was upheld for Casey, she said that the Court should do the same here, since there had been no new changes in the laws and facts since then that could justify changing the Court's position. Rikelman argued that Mississippi's argument against using the undue burden standard was wrong because the standard actually specifically applies to post-viability abortion regulations rather than to the prohibition of abortions before viability. She told the Court that the undue burden standard was workable and that the viability line incorporated into the standard was likewise workable. She said that for 50 years the viability line had been clearly and consistently applied in the courts.
Elizabeth Barchas Prelogar, the U.S. Solicitor General, argued that Roe and Casey should not be overruled. She argued that there has been a substantial reliance on the right to abortion by both individuals and society, and that the Court "has never revoked a right that is so fundamental to so many Americans and so central to their ability to participate fully and equally in society."
Based on their analysis of the questioning, Court observers said that its six conservative members were likely to uphold Mississippi's law. Chief Justice John Roberts appeared to suggest that viability was not relevant to the holdings of either Roe or Casey, and that only a fair choice or opportunity to seek an abortion was constitutionally protected. The other conservative justices appeared to be ready to overturn Roe and Casey.
 Leaked draft opinion 
thumb|The leaked draft majority opinion
On May 2, 2022, Politico released a draft of a majority opinion by Justice Samuel Alito circulated among the justices in February 2022. Alito's draft called the Roe decision "egregiously wrong from the start", arguing that abortion is not listed in the Constitution as a protected right, and instead allowed states to legislate abortion restrictions or guarantees under the Tenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. A New York Times article compared the sources Alito cited in the draft with information provided by historians and shed some light on the history of abortion in the United States.
Sources told Politico that Justices Thomas, Gorsuch, Kavanaugh, and Barrett had voted in conference with Alito in December and their positions had remained unchanged as of May 2022, though it was unclear whether they agreed with Alito's draft, as no other drafts in concurrence or dissent had yet been circulated. According to CNN, Chief Justice Roberts voted to uphold the Gestational Age Act but "did not want to completely overturn Roe v. Wade". The Washington Post reported from court sources that Roberts had been working since December 2021 on his own opinion, which would uphold Roe while narrowly allowing the Mississippi law to take effect. He had been trying to convince conservative justices in the then tentative majority to join his more moderate opinion, but the leak doomed that effort, according to sources familiar with communications between the justices.
The Supreme Court confirmed the draft's authenticity the next day; at the same time, the Supreme Court's press release said that "it does not represent a decision by the Court or the final position of any member on the issues in the case". Roberts said that he had directed the Marshal of the United States Supreme Court, Gail A. Curley, to investigate the news leak and that "to the extent this betrayal of the confidences of the Court was to undermine the integrity of our operations, it will not succeed."' CNN reported on May 31 that law clerks were asked to provide private cell phone records and sign affidavits. The unprecedented move has alarmed some clerks into exploring whether to hire independent counsel. The Supreme Court announced on January 19, 2023, that its forensic investigation could not determine the person responsible by a preponderance of the evidence. Curley said that her team formally interviewed 97 Supreme Court employees under affidavit and spoke to each of the justices. She found that at least 90 people had access to the draft decision, but none of the leads provided sufficient evidence to name an individual responsible for the leak. 
In response to the leak, Roberts said, "The work of the Court will not be affected in any way." At an Eleventh Circuit judicial conference, he called the leak "absolutely appalling" and said that "one bad apple" should not change "people's perception" of the Supreme Court; Thomas commented that the Court should not be "bullied" into delivering preferred outcomes and repeated his criticisms of stare decisis. He later added that the leak was an "unthinkable breach of trust" that "fundamentally" changed the Court.
Leaks about Supreme Court deliberations in a pending case are rare, and a leak of a draft decision is unprecedented. There is uncertainty about whether the leak violated federal laws, and experts differ as to whether the U.S. Department of Justice is likely to pursue criminal charges.
 Reactions 
thumb|An abortion-rights protest in New York City
Within hours of the news of the leak, both pro-abortion rights protesters and anti-abortion counterprotesters gathered outside the Supreme Court building in Washington, D.C., and elsewhere in the U.S. The response to the draft put unusual public pressure on the Court as it made its decision in the case. While over 450 large-scale marches and protests organized by Planned Parenthood, Women's March, and other groups under the name "Bans Off Our Bodies" were planned for 2022, the organizers pushed the event up to May 14, 2022, after the opinion leaked. The organizers said, "Folks are mobilizing because they see that the hour is later than we thought", and that the event would lead off a "summer of rage" if Roe and Casey were overturned. A leaked Department of Homeland Security (DHS) memo indicated that DHS was preparing for a surge of political violence on public officials, clergy, and abortion providers after the ruling. A DHS bulletin warned that the leak had spawned further violence in the summer before the 2022 midterms. A number of isolated attacks on crisis pregnancy centers were reported in May and June 2022 after the leak.
Nonviolent protests were held outside some of the justices' homes, leading the U.S. Senate to unanimously pass a bill that would expand protections for the justices and their families. The bill stalled in the U.S. House of Representatives before being passed on June 14 and signed into law by President Joe Biden on June 16. Republicans have argued that those protests violate a 1950 federal law () that criminalizes attempting to influence a judge in the course of their official duties by demonstrating near their residence. A man from California was arrested for attempted murder regarding an alleged assassination plot targeting Kavanaugh near his home over the leak and a pending decision in a gun control case, New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen. Protests continued outside the homes of some of the justices after the final decision, leading the Supreme Court marshall Gail Curley to ask officials in the District of Columbia, Maryland, and Virginia to take steps to remove the protesters under state and local laws.
The leak elicited outrage from high-ranking members of both major political parties, Democrats for the content of the draft, and Republicans out of concern for how the leak occurred. The leak renewed calls from Democrats, including Biden and pro-abortion rights activists, for the Senate to pass the Women's Health Protection Act, which had already passed the House of Representatives, to codify the rights established by Roe and Casey before Dobbs was decided and supersede the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. It failed to pass in the Senate on May 11, after a 49–51 vote primarily along party lines. Biden denounced the draft opinion as "radical" and said that same-sex marriage and birth control were also at risk.
Republicans immediately condemned the leak and called on the Supreme Court and Department of Justice, including the FBI, to launch an investigation. Twenty-two members of Congress signed a letter asking the U.S. Attorney General and FBI director to investigate. House Republican leadership issued a joint statement that called the leak "a clearly coordinated campaign to intimidate and obstruct the Justices".
In May 2022, the Marquette University Law School released a poll showing a drastic change of public opinion of the Supreme Court. In March 2022, when the survey was last conducted, 54% of respondents said they approved of the nine justices and 45% said they disapproved. In the newest survey, only 44% of respondents reported approval. In June 2022, a Gallup poll showed confidence in the Supreme Court at 25%, down from 36% in 2021, and the lowest in 50 years.
A November 2022 New York Times article investigated a possible earlier leak from the Supreme Court a few weeks before the 2014 decision Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc., a landmark case that allowed religious organizations to exempt themselves from having to pay for insurance-based contraceptives for their employees. The report was based on information from Rob Schenck, who said that after having dinner with Alito, he was told of the pending decision by a third party, allowing him to prepare Hobby Lobby and other religious groups when the decision was announced. Before talking to the Times about it, Schenck wrote to Chief Justice Roberts after the Dobbs leak was revealed to share what he knew of it. Alito denied having leaked the decision. The report of this earlier leak led members of the House and Senate Judiciary Committees to consider an investigation into both leaks. In a letter responding to an inquiry from Senator Sheldon Whitehouse and Representative Hank Johnson, the Supreme Court's legal counsel defended Alito, writing, "There is nothing to suggest that Justice Alito's actions violated ethical standards."
Opinions
Majority opinion
thumb|upright|Justice Alito delivered the opinion of the Court.
The Court issued its decision on June 24, 2022. In a 6–3 judgment, the Court reversed the Fifth Circuit's decision and remanded the case for further review. The majority opinion, joined by five of the justices, held that abortion was not a protected right under the Constitution, overturning both Roe and Casey, and returned the decision regarding abortion regulations back to the states. As a result, Dobbs is considered a landmark decision of the Court.
The majority decision was written by Justice Samuel Alito and joined by Justices Clarence Thomas, Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett. The final majority decision was substantially similar to the leaked draft, with only minor changes in the original arguments and rebuttals to Justices Stephen Breyer's, Elena Kagan's, and Sonia Sotomayor's dissenting opinion and John Roberts's concurrence in judgment.
In the introductory statement, Alito, writing for the majority, summarized a constitutional historical view of abortion rights, saying, "The Constitution makes no reference to abortion, and no such right is implicitly protected by any constitutional provision." Alito based his argument on the criterion from Washington v. Glucksberg (1997) that a right must be "deeply rooted" in the nation's history.
Alito wrote, "abortion couldn't be constitutionally protected. Until the latter part of the 20th century, such a right was entirely unknown in American law. Indeed, when the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted, three quarters of the States made abortion a crime at all stages of pregnancy." He wrote, "Roe was egregiously wrong from the start. Its reasoning was exceptionally weak, and the decision has had damaging consequences. And far from bringing about a national settlement of the abortion issue, Roe and Casey have enflamed debate and deepened division."
After briefly describing the background of the case in Part I of the opinion, Alito argued in Part II that the right to an abortion was different from other privacy rights. He wrote, "What sharply distinguishes the abortion right from the rights recognized in the cases on which Roe and Casey rely is something that both those decisions acknowledged: Abortion destroys what those decisions call 'potential life' and what the law at issue in this case regards as the life of an 'unborn human being'." In addition to the language from the draft, Alito responded to the dissenting opinion, writing, "The dissent is very candid that it cannot show that a constitutional right to abortion has any foundation, let alone a 'deeply rooted' one, 'in this Nation's history and tradition'. The dissent does not identify any pre-Roe authority that supports such a right—no state constitutional provision or statute, no federal or state judicial precedent, not even a scholarly treatise."
In Part III, Alito discussed stare decisis. He also addressed the dissent's concern that Dobbs would extend to other rights, stating that the extent of the majority opinion on Dobbs applied only to abortion. In Part IV, Alito shrugged off the concern that the American people would lose respect for the Court. He wrote that the Court "cannot allow our decisions to be affected by any extraneous influences such as concern about the public's reaction to our work."
In Part V, Alito further responded to Roberts's concurrence in judgment seeking middle ground, claiming there are "serious problems with this approach" that would only prolong what he described as the turmoil of Roe. Alito argued that by only ruling that Mississippi's 15-week law is constitutional, the Court would have to later decide whether other states' laws with different deadlines for obtaining an abortion were constitutional. Since Roberts did not claim there was a constitutional right to an abortion, the Court rejected any constitutional grounds for upholding a "reasonable opportunity" to obtain an abortion and called Roberts's proposal unconstitutional. In Part VI, Alito wrote that because abortion is not a fundamental right, the lowest standard of review must apply to abortion laws, under which the laws must be sustained if they rationally relate to a legitimate state interest.
Concurrences
Thomas and Kavanaugh wrote separate concurrences. Thomas argued that the Court should go further in future cases, reconsidering other past Supreme Court cases that granted rights based on substantive due process, such as Griswold v. Connecticut (the right to contraception), Obergefell v. Hodges (the right to same-sex marriage), and Lawrence v. Texas (banned laws against private sexual acts). He wrote, "Because any substantive due process decision is 'demonstrably erroneous,' we have a duty to 'correct the error' established in those precedents."
Kavanaugh wrote separately, making multiple comments. He stated that it would still be unconstitutional to prohibit a woman from going to another state to seek an abortion under the right to travel, and that it would be unconstitutional to retroactively punish abortions performed before Dobbs when they had been protected by Roe and Casey.
Concurrence in judgment
Writing separately, Roberts concurred in the judgment. He believed the Court should reverse the Fifth Circuit's opinion on the Mississippi law and that "the viability line established by Roe and Casey should be discarded." Roberts did not agree with the majority's ruling to overturn Roe and Casey in their entirety, finding it "unnecessary to decide the case before us". He suggested a more narrow opinion to justify the constitutionality of Mississippi's law without addressing whether to overturn Roe and Casey. Roberts also wrote that abortion regulations should "extend far enough to ensure a reasonable opportunity to choose, but need not extend any further." He said that the Court should "leave for another day whether to reject any right to an abortion at all."
Dissent
Breyer, Kagan, and Sotomayor jointly wrote the dissent. In an introductory statement, the three wrote, "The right Roe and Casey recognized does not stand alone. To the contrary, the Court has linked it for decades to other settled freedoms involving bodily integrity, familial relationships, and procreation. Most obviously, the right to terminate a pregnancy arose straight out of the right to purchase and use contraception. In turn, those rights led, more recently, to rights of same-sex intimacy and marriage. Either the mass of the majority's opinion is hypocrisy, or additional constitutional rights are under threat. It is one or the other."
In Part I of their dissent, the three wrote, "The majority would allow States to ban abortion from conception onward because it does not think forced childbirth at all implicates a woman's rights to equality and freedom. Today's Court, that is, does not think there is anything of constitutional significance attached to a woman's control of her body and the path of her life. A State can force her to bring a pregnancy to term, even at the steepest personal and familial costs." They cited New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen ("Historical evidence that long predates [ratification] may not illuminate the scope of the right"), and wrote, "Had the pre-Roe liberalization of abortion laws occurred more quickly and more widely in the 20th century, the majority would say (once again) that only the ratifiers' views are germane." Addressing the majority's argument, based on Glucksberg, that a right must be "deeply rooted in the Nation's history", the dissenters reflected on what that approach would have meant for interracial marriage:
In response to Alito's claim that their "criteria, at a high level of generality, could license fundamental rights to illicit drug use, prostitution, and the like", they wrote, "that is flat wrong. The Court's precedents about bodily autonomy, sexual and familial relations, and procreation are all interwoven—all part of the fabric of our constitutional law, and because that is so, of our lives. Especially women's lives, where they safeguard a right to self-determination." In response to Kavanaugh's concurrence, they wrote, "His idea is that neutrality lies in giving the abortion issue to the States, where some can go one way and some another. But would he say that the Court is being 'scrupulously neutral' if it allowed New York and California to ban all the guns they want?" In Part II, the three discussed stare decisis. In Part III, they concluded, "With sorrow—for this Court, but more, for the many millions of American women who have today lost a fundamental constitutional protection—we dissent."
 Impact 
 Pre-decision 
After the Dobbs litigation began, the Texas Heartbeat Act was enacted on September 1, 2021. Two lawsuits challenging the law, Whole Woman's Health v. Jackson and United States v. Texas, quickly propagated through the court systems and reached the Supreme Court. Oral arguments for both cases were on November 1, 2021, and decisions for both were issued in December 2021. The decisions primarily focused on standing rather than directly addressing constitutional matters and abortion-related issues; both allowed the Texas Heartbeat Act to remain in force while litigation continued in lower courts. Concern about the Supreme Court's considering three abortion-related cases in the 2021–22 term led to the near record number of amici curiae briefs filed for Dobbs before the case was argued on December 1, 2021.
thumb|U.S. states that have trigger laws that restricted abortions after Roe was overturned
Georgia had passed Georgia House Bill 481, best known as the Living Infants Fairness Equality (LIFE) Act, in 2019. The law banned most abortions after a fetal heartbeat was detected, about six weeks' time, with multiple exceptions: if the fetus were conceived by rape or incest, if the pregnancy were medically futile, or if the pregnancy threatened the mother's life. The law also revised who is considered a legal person, allowing pregnant women to receive child support and tax deductions for their offspring before birth. In October 2019, the LIFE Act was challenged, and in July 2020 the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Georgia deemed it unconstitutional under Roe. Georgia appealed this ruling to the Eleventh Circuit, but because Dobbs was scheduled to be argued in December 2021, the Circuit Court issued a stay of review until after the Supreme Court decided Dobbs.
At least 22 states with Republican leadership either passed or were in the process of passing anti-abortion related bills when the Supreme Court agreed to hear Dobbs in May 2021. Enforcement of most of the new laws was enjoined by courts, but they became enforceable after Roe was overturned. Thirteen states have trigger laws that ban most abortions in the first and second trimesters if Roe is overturned. The states with trigger laws are Arkansas, Idaho, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, and Wyoming. Nine states, among them Alabama (which also passed the Human Life Protection Act in 2019), Arizona, Arkansas, Michigan, Mississippi, Oklahoma, Texas, West Virginia, and Wisconsin, never repealed their pre-Roe abortion bans, such as the Texas abortion statutes (1961). Those laws were not criminally enforceable due to Roe but are enforceable with Roe overturned. At least some Democratic attorneys general or candidates for attorneys general have pledged not to enforce anti-abortion laws and prevent or hinder local prosecutors' efforts to enforce them, whereas at least some Republicans have pledged to enforce new state bans.
 Post-decision 
 State laws restricting abortion 
The overturning of Roe did not make abortion illegal nationwide. Abortion remains legal in most states, but those with trigger laws to restrict abortion with Roe and Casey overturned immediately did so. Multiple Republican governors and attorneys general moved to invoke their trigger laws to immediately ban abortion or call special sessions to implement abortion bans. In August 2022, Indiana became the first state to pass an abortion ban law after Dobbs.
Some states had older laws that restricted abortion but had been put on hold after Roe; after Dobbs, these states reviewed means to resume enforcement of the laws. Lawsuits challenging pre-Roe and newer laws were filed in multiple states; each argued that privacy provisions in the state's constitution provided abortion rights. In some states where such challenges were under way, injunctions against the laws restricting abortion were issued, including Louisiana and Utah on June 27, 2022. A lower state court placed an injunction on a 1928 pre-Roe ban in Texas on June 28; by July 1, the Texas Supreme Court reversed this order. Legal efforts to block a Wisconsin pre-Roe ban from being enforced were announced on June 28; by June 30, Michigan's state supreme court had yet to react to Governor Gretchen Whitmer's lawsuit alleging that the state's pre-Roe ban violated the state constitution. Abortion providers in Kentucky, Idaho, Mississippi, and Florida challenged newly passed abortion restrictions in those states; each suit alleged that the law violated provisions of the state's constitution. By June 30, judges had halted the enforcement of the laws in Kentucky and Florida.
An Ohio abortion law came under attention in July 2022. The law disallows abortions after embryonic cardiac activity is detectable (approximately six weeks into term), and makes no exceptions for rape or incest. The law passed in 2019 and had been blocked from enforcement by a court injunction, but with Dobbs, the injunction was lifted. A ten-year-old girl who had been raped traveled from Ohio to Indiana to have an abortion, as reported by the Indianapolis Star on July 1; her rapist was arrested by July 13. Before this arrest was made public, right-leaning politicians and media sources called the story a hoax; Ohio's attorney general Dave Yost said, "Every day that goes by, the more likely that this is a fabrication." After news of the arrest validated the Star story, these sources did not apologize for claiming the story was a hoax. Jim Bopp, the general counsel for the National Right to Life Committee, said in an interview that the girl should have been forced to bear the child, and that "She would have had the baby, and as many women who have had babies as a result of rape, we would hope that she would understand the reason and ultimately the benefit of having the child." Bopp's comment led to ire from several left-leaning politicians and media sources, deriding Dobbs and the stance taken by the right.
EMTALA and federal preemption 
Several states adopted, or began to enforce, laws that banned abortion without exceptions. But the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) issued guidance after Dobbs stating that even in these states, abortions are still allowed if a physician determines that the pregnant woman's life is at risk, under the federal Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA), which requires hospitals receiving Medicare funding to provide emergency stabilizing medical treatment. As a federal law, EMTALA preempts inconsistent state law. The HHS guidance said: "If a physician believes that a pregnant patient presenting at an emergency department is experiencing an emergency medical condition as defined by EMTALA, and that abortion is the stabilizing treatment necessary to resolve that condition, the physician must provide that treatment. When a state law prohibits abortion and does not include an exception for the life of the pregnant person—or draws the exception more narrowly than EMTALA's emergency medical condition definition—that state law is preempted."
The U.S. Department of Justice sued Idaho, arguing that EMTALA preempts Idaho's law making it a criminal offense to perform any abortion, without exception.High-Stakes Abortion Lawsuits Force Clash on Emergency Care Law, Bloomberg Law (August 4, 2022). A district judge granted a preliminary injunction blocking Idaho's abortion ban "to the extent that [the ban] conflicts with EMTALA-mandated care."United States v. Idaho (D. Idaho 2022).
Conversely, Texas responded to the HHS guidance by suing the Biden administration. In August 2022, a district judge in the Eastern District of Texas blocked HHS from applying the guidance. The White House criticized the ruling, and the Justice Department is appealing the ruling to the Fifth Circuit.
After Dobbs, the Department of Veterans Affairs continued its policy of offering abortion counseling to military veterans (as well as abortions to pregnant military veterans if the veteran's life is in danger and in cases of rape or incest), even in states where abortion is banned as a matter of state law. Beneficiaries of the VA's Civilian Health and Medical Program (CHAMPVA) are also entitled to the same services.
State laws expanding abortion access
In response to Dobbs, several states allowing abortion considered or adopted legislation expanding abortion access. Proposals by California, Oregon, and Washington state have included expanding abortion access by eliminating co-pays for abortion services, funding travel costs for those seeking abortion from states that ban abortion, and adding the right to an abortion to state constitutions. In early 2022, while Dobbs was pending, the Vermont Legislature had already approved sending Proposal 5 to the referendum ballot in November 2022, which would amend the state's constitution "to guarantee sexual and reproductive freedoms" (including the right to abortion). In the November 2022 election, Vermont voters overwhelmingly approved the reproductive-rights amendment to the state constitution.Hannah Getahun, Results: Vermont overwhelmingly votes to protect reproductive autonomy, including abortion, Business Insider (November 17, 2022). Also in the November 2022 election, abortion-rights referendums were passed by voters by broad margins in California (Proposition 1) and Michigan (Proposal 3).Michigan, California and Vermont Affirm Abortion Rights in Ballot Proposals, New York Times (November 9, 2022).Poppy Noor & Gabrielle Canon, US states vote to protect reproductive rights in rebuke to anti-abortion push, The Guardian (November 9, 2022).
In the hours after Dobbs was issued, Massachusetts Governor Charlie Baker issued an executive order with several measures to protect abortion access in Massachusetts. The Massachusetts Legislature subsequently passed a reproductive rights package that codified many of the provisions in the executive order, and was the outcome of compromise discussions among the legislature. Baker signed the bill, which passed the House 137-16 and the Senate 16–1. Among other things, the Massachusetts law strengthens an existing requirement that health insurers cover abortion services and shields Massachusetts patients and providers from penalties from states with more restrictive abortion laws; for example, it prohibits the state from extraditing to another state any person charged with offenses that would be legal under Massachusetts law, and protects abortion providers from lawsuits based on extraterritorial jurisdiction.Matt Murphy, Mass. House and Senate pass reproductive rights bill, now on governor's desk, State House News Service (July 26, 2022).
Alison Kuznitz, Massachusetts abortion protections bill, shielding providers and patients, signed into law by Gov. Charlie Baker, MassLive (July 29, 2022).
Steve LeBlanc, Massachusetts governor signs bill protecting abortion access, Associated Press (July 29, 2022).
Congressional proposals
Following Dobbs, Congress has introduced bills related to abortion rights. House Democrats passed two bills on July 15 to enhance abortion rights. The first, the Women's Health Protection Act of 2022, would prevent states from restricting abortions before fetal viability and prevent states from blocking access to abortion services. The second, the Ensuring Access to Abortion Act of 2022, would prevent states from blocking travel to other states to obtain abortions and support. Both bills passed primarily on party lines, and are expected to have difficulty passing the Senate. Some House Republicans have proposed a nationwide 15-week abortion ban, while over 100 have signed onto a six-week abortion ban. Top House Republicans have been reported to be wary of such plans, instead favoring a nationwide ban on late-term abortions only.
Due to concerns based on Thomas's concurrence, in July 2022 the House passed bills aimed to protect rights that Thomas had mentioned, including the right to same-sex and interracial marriages via the Respect for Marriage Act, and access to contraceptives. The Senate passed the Respect for Marriage Act with amendments for exempting religious-based organizations, which the House passed in December and Biden signed into law on December 13, 2022.
Executive action by President Biden
After the decision, President Biden said there was a need to protect abortion rights, but said he would not support an executive order to mandate them though he did ultimately endorse reforming the Senate's filibuster to allow Democrats to pass federal abortion protections."Biden says he supports changing Senate filibuster rules to protect abortion rights" Amanda Becker, 2022-06-30 On July 8, 2022, Biden issued Executive Order 14076, "Executive Order on Protecting Access to Reproductive Healthcare Services", which instructed the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to review and find ways to assure access to "the full range of reproductive health services", including "emergency contraception and long-acting reversible contraception like intrauterine devices (IUDs)", within the birth control coverage of the Affordable Care Act. The executive order also instructed HHS to evaluate ways to provide "technical assistance to states affording legal protection to out-of-state patients as well as providers who offer legal reproductive health care".
On August 3, 2022, Biden issued another executive order aimed at protecting women seeking abortions in other states.
 Medical abortion and other processes
The Court's decision also sparked concern over access to medication abortion options, including the prescription of mifepristone and misoprostol. These medications have been approved for use by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) within the first ten weeks of pregnancy. Secretary of Health and Human Services Xavier Becerra asserted that after the Dobbs decision, "We stand unwavering in our commitment to ensure every American has access to health care and the ability to make decisions about health care—including the right to safe and legal abortion, such as medication abortion that has been approved by the FDA for over 20 years." In April 2023, in Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine v. US Food and Drug Administration in the Northern District of Texas, Judge Matthew J. Kacsmaryk ruled that the government's approval of mifepristone in 2000 was invalid, banning the use of the drug across the United States. On appeal of the ruling to the Supreme Court, the Court ruled to stay the order, leaving mifepristone available on the market, while the Fifth Circuit heard the appeal.
Despite the federal stance, states opposed to abortion were considering laws to ban access to medical abortion, including out-of-state shipments in the U.S. mail and telemedicine support. Some states seeking to block medical abortion options are also considering censoring information about this option to residents, leading to potential First Amendment legal battles. Whether such state bans are legal under the Supremacy Clause, where federal law overrules conflicting state law, is unknown, as there is little case law to establish the strength of the FDA over state interests.
States that support abortion rights expected an influx of requests for medical abortion. Doctors and prescribers saw increased demand for contraception after both the leak and the ruling, including emergency and long-lasting after the latter. Some national pharmacy chains imposed limits on purchases. Other Americans have been denied refills of medical prescriptions for methotrexate, a form of chemotherapy taken long term for many autoimmune diseases, as it is considered an abortifacient.
Doctors throughout the U.S. reported an increase in requests for vasectomies. A Florida doctor said requests have doubled since the ruling with a prominent and continuous increase since June 24. Many of the men said they had previously considered a vasectomy but the ruling had been the tipping point.
 Privacy rights 
Privacy rights related to data tracking through Internet usage, mobile phone usage, and mobile applications have been raised after the leak and subsequently after the decision. States with strict abortion laws could use this information to determine if women were seeking to have abortions. In addition to users taking steps to minimize their data footprint, groups like the Electronic Frontier Foundation urged companies that make these apps to take steps to reduce the amount of data they collect and use end-to-end encryption to further aid those seeking abortions outside of states that have banned them. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said Democrats will introduce a bill to set certain requirements for reproductive health apps such as Flo. She said the legislation would aim to prevent data these apps collect from identifying women seeking abortions. Google announced it would delete location history data after users visit "medical facilities", including abortion clinics, counseling centers, and domestic violence shelters. The company also stated that it would introduce a way to mass-delete period data for Fitbit users.
 2022 United States election season 
Dobbs made abortion rights a major issue in the November 2022 United States elections. Democrats, who generally support abortion rights, used the issue to try to offset the 2021–2022 inflation surge and Biden's lower approval rating when Dobbs was announced. Republicans, who were seeking to retake seats in both the House and Senate and gain several state governor and legislature positions but face tight races, had some concern that the negative reaction to Dobbs could work against them. They hoped that by November there will be more focus on the economy and other issues on which they expect to win. According to analyst firm AdImpact, by September 2022, Democrats had spent  on political advertising that highlighted abortion rights, while Republicans had spent only  on abortion-related ads, instead focusing on other issues.
At least six states had an abortion-related ballot initiative in response to Dobbs, the most ever in a single year. The first test came with Kansas's referendum on August 2, 2022. The state's Value Them Both constitutional amendment was approved for public vote about a year before Dobbs was decided. It would have removed Kansas's constitutional protections for abortion, allowing the legislature to enact more restrictions on the procedure. In the wake of Dobbs, voter registration in Kansas surged, particularly among Democratic and female voters. Almost 60% of voters voted against the amendment.
The backlash to the decision resulted in a boost in polling and performance for Democrats in special congressional races. According to election analysis site FiveThirtyEight, by August 2022 the impact of Dobbs led to an unusual swing in favor of Democrats ahead of the general election by nine points. The results of the midterm elections showed a significant impact of Dobbs, with voters supporting abortion rights helping Democrats retain control of the Senate as well as to support state-level changes to support abortion rights in five states.
 Legal analysis 
Alito's final opinion mirrored points made in the leaked draft, evaluating abortion from a historical standpoint and arguing that the Fourteenth Amendment covers only those rights that were "deeply rooted" at the time of its ratification in 1868, which did not include abortion. He referenced common law as far back as 17th-century English law, which had established that abortion was illegal after quickening, the point when fetal movements are detectable, about 16 to 22 weeks of gestation. Alito subsequently pointed to a wave of laws introduced in the U.S. in the 19th century that outlawed pre-quickening abortions, and claimed "abortion couldn't be constitutionally protected. Until the latter part of the 20th century, such a right was entirely unknown in American law. When the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted, three quarters of the States made abortion a crime at all stages of pregnancy." Some historians say that Alito's view skews the history of abortion in the U.S. and creates a flawed basis for overturning Roe. Patricia Cline Cohen, a professor emeritus at the University of California, Santa Barbara, said that these laws had come about not because society saw abortion as a crime, but from a small group of white male doctors from Boston who had taken it upon themselves to prove to the rest of the county that pre-quickening abortion should be seen as a crime. The doctors used flawed math to convince the American Medical Association to accept that pre-quickening abortion should also be outlawed, leading to the raft of state laws banning abortion in the latter half of the 19th century.
Many legal observers have said the ruling creates an independent legal framework, as it lays out a state's ability to determine independent abortion laws. As many states have rulings prosecuting abortions, even out of state, some have argued that this produces a legal framework in which a U.S. state can act more like a sovereign country, prosecuting individuals from taking actions outside the state's legal jurisdiction. The enforceability and practicality of such a decision has been criticized. The ruling has been seen in the context of ever-increasing partisanship and political division in the country.
The decision raised concerns about similar rights recognized by the Court that are not enumerated in the Constitution according to originalism. According to Thomas's concurrence, the rights to contraceptives and to same-sex marriage could be challenged based on Dobbs, since they were not recognized during the 19th century either. Some legal experts cautioned that Alito's and Thomas's interpretation of the Constitution could harm women, minorities, and other marginalized groups. University of Colorado Boulder Associate Professor of Law Scott Skinner-Thompson said, "The Court has for a long, long time said: Look, if we define liberty only in terms of what was permitted at the time of ratification of the Bill of Rights or the 14th Amendment, then we're stuck in time. Because in the 18th and 19th centuries, this country was not very free for many, many people—particularly women, particularly people of color." Further, Roe itself was built on the legal reasoning of the two cases that assured contraceptive availability, Griswold v. Connecticut and Eisenstadt v. Baird, which held that the Fourteenth Amendment establishes a "zone of personal privacy and autonomy" with which the states cannot interfere, according to Emily Berman, an associate professor at the University of Houston. Berman said that the way Alito had rationalized overturning Roe could lead to challenges to both Griswold and Eisenstadt based on the apparent lack of explicit Fourteenth Amendment coverage. Alabama used the Dobbs rationale of deeply rooted rights to argue for lifting a federal injunction placed in May 2022 on its law that would ban sex reassignment therapy for minors that was to go into effect in 2023.
Adam Liptak of The New York Times commented on the frequent mention of Brown v. Board of Education, the Supreme Court case that overturned Plessy v. Ferguson and required desegregation of public schools. Liptak said that Alito had argued for overturning Roe and Casey in the same manner that Brown argued for overturning Plessy. Liptak said the dissents in Dobbs stated that the decision was "the majority's method of constitutional construction" in originalism, and that the Court "might not ever have overruled Plessy, whether five or 50 or 500 years later" if originalism had been applied to Brown.
Some commentators criticized the idea that abortion was not "deeply rooted" in American "history and tradition". Nancy Gertner and John Reinstein pointed out that in earlier centuries, American society was deeply sexist and excluded women from politics, banning contraception to ensure "that women performed their duties as wives and mothers". Molly Farrell argued that abortion techniques were widely known and practiced in colonial America, if poorly documented because illiterate women acted as midwives. She pointed out Benjamin Franklin, one of the Founding Fathers of the United States, added a how-to section on abortion in a book intended to convey the most basic knowledge all Americans needed.Benjamin Franklin gave instructions on at-home abortions in a book in the 1700s In 1728, Franklin condemned publisher Samuel Keimer for publishing an article on abortion. According to biographer Walter Isaacson, Franklin did not have a strong view on the issue.
 Reaction 
 Supreme Court 
Alito gave his first public comments on the ruling in a keynote address largely about religious liberty for Notre Dame Law School's Religious Liberty Initiative in Rome. He mocked several foreign leaders for criticizing the decision, particularly U.K. Prime Minister Boris Johnson, whose pending resignation Alito referenced; and Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex, who had compared the decision to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.
 Political 
 Support 
Those aligned with the United States anti-abortion movement celebrated Dobbs, including the National Right to Life Committee, other anti-abortion activists, Republican Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, and many other congressional Republicans. After former president Barack Obama criticized the Court for overruling the longstanding precedent of Roe v. Wade, Senator John Cornyn tweeted, "Now do Plessy vs Ferguson/Brown vs Board of Education", alluding to the fact that the latter Supreme Court decision had largely overruled the former, a then-58-year-old precedent that racial segregation was constitutional.
In a statement, former president Donald Trump took credit for the decision and called it "the biggest WIN for LIFE in a generation", although in private Trump was allegedly more ambivalent about overturning Roe, speculating that it might be "bad for Republicans" by leading to backlash among suburban female voters in the upcoming midterm elections. In the aftermath of the contest, he publicly blamed anti-abortion extremism for the underperformance of Republican candidates. Former vice president Mike Pence also applauded the decision, saying that "life won", and called for a national ban on abortion.
Republican Florida Governor Ron DeSantis said, "By properly interpreting the Constitution, the Supreme Court has answered the prayers of millions upon millions of Americans," adding that he would work to further restrict abortion in Florida. A new law in Florida, currently under review by state courts, would restrict abortions to 15 weeks of pregnancy, without providing exceptions for rape or incest. Republican Florida Senate President Wilton Simpson, who was adopted as a child, argued the Court's decision would promote adoption as an alternative to abortion. Simpson said, "Florida is a state that values life."
 Opposition 
thumb|220px|President Biden addresses the nation on the decision
Conversely, those aligned with the United States abortion-rights movement opposed the decision, including President Joe Biden, who said, "It's a sad day for the Court and for the country ... the health and life of women in this nation are now at risk"; former president Barack Obama, who called it an "attack" on "the essential freedoms of millions of Americans"; U.S. Attorney General Merrick Garland, who warned states not to forbid women to seek abortions beyond their borders; U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services Xavier Becerra, who called the decision "unconscionable" and said that abortion is an essential part of healthcare; Senator Elizabeth Warren, who called for increasing the number of justices on the court; and many other congressional Democrats.
Senator Susan Collins, a Republican who supports abortion rights and voted in the Senate to confirm Kavanaugh, said she felt "misled" by Kavanaugh, who, she claimed, said in a private meeting with her that he would respect precedent, assuring her that he is "a don't-rock-the-boat kind of judge". Democratic Senator Joe Manchin, who crossed party lines and voted to confirm both Kavanaugh and Gorsuch, made similar comments, saying, "I trusted Justice Gorsuch and Justice Kavanaugh when they testified under oath that they also believed Roe v. Wade was settled legal precedent and I am alarmed they chose to reject the stability the ruling has provided for two generations of Americans." Massachusetts Governor Charlie Baker, a Republican, expressed disappointment in the decision and signed an executive order protecting abortion rights in the state. Governors Jay Inslee, Kate Brown, and Gavin Newsom of Washington, Oregon, and California, respectively, announced a formation of the "West Coast offense", a joint policy to allow and protect abortion rights.
Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez called Dobbs and other recent decisions some deemed favorable to conservatives—including Oklahoma v. Castro-Huerta, which weakened tribal oversight of Native American lands; New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, Inc. v. Bruen, which expanded the right for open carry of guns; Kennedy v. Bremerton School District, which drew back the separation of church and state in the Establishment Clause; and West Virginia v. EPA, which weakened the power of federal agencies—a "judicial coup", demanding that President Joe Biden and Congress act to curtail the Supreme Court's power.
 Religious 
The decision was seen as a victory for the Christian right in American politics. The president of the anti-abortion group Operation Rescue, Troy Newman, called the decision a "human rights victory". Support was widespread among leaders of the Catholic Church, including Pope Francis, who compared abortion to "hiring a hit man"; the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops; Archbishops José Horacio Gómez and William E. Lori; and many other bishops. President Bart Barber and other officials of the Southern Baptist Convention, and the Life Ministry of the Lutheran Church—Missouri Synod, celebrated the decision.
Mainline Protestant leaders were generally critical of the decision, including Bishop Elizabeth Eaton of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the General Ministers of United Church of Christ, and Presiding Bishop Michael Curry of the Episcopal Church.
Many American Jewish organizations, including the National Council of Jewish Women, Hadassah, American Jewish Committee, the Anti-Defamation League, Hillel International, the Rabbinical Assembly, and the Women's Rabbinic Network, opposed the decision. They cited support for legal abortion and religious freedom, disagreeing with the court's opinion and "conservative Christian theology" on the beginning of human personhood. The Haredi Orthodox Jewish organization Agudath Israel of America, though, "welcome[d]" the end of Roe v. Wade.
American Muslims' reactions were varied, as views on abortion differ within Islam. Many said Dobbs curtailed religious freedom, reflected only Christian right views, and damaged cultural and religious pluralism.
 Civil rights 
Multiple civil and reproductive rights groups, including the NAACP, criticized the decision. The Congressional Black Caucus called for the declaration of a national emergency. Liberals argued that the ruling and Thomas's concurrence created the potential to jeopardize other civil rights. Laurence H. Tribe, a constitutional scholar and a professor at Harvard Law School, called it not only "reactionary" and "unprincipled" but also damaging to the Ninth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Linda Coffee, a leading attorney for Norma McCorvey in Roe v. Wade, said the Supreme Court's decision to overturn it "flies in the face of American freedom" and "destroys dignity of all American women". Jim Obergefell, the lead plaintiff in the Supreme Court case Obergefell v. Hodges that ruled same-sex marriage bans unconstitutional, criticized Thomas, whose own interracial marriage required Loving v. Virginia in order to be recognized by all states, for urging the Court to revisit and overrule its prior decisions.
 Health and education 
The president and CEO of the Association of American Medical Colleges, David J. Skorton, released a statement that said the decision "will significantly limit access for so many and increase health inequities across the country, ultimately putting women's lives at risk, at the very time that we should be redoubling our commitment to patient-centered, evidence-based care that promotes better health for all individuals and communities." The statement further affirmed the association's commitment to providing abortion access, saying that it "will continue working with our medical schools and teaching hospitals to ensure that physicians are able to provide all patients with safe, effective, and accessible health care when they need it." The president of the American Academy of Pediatrics, Moria Szilagyi, released a statement that the organization reaffirmed the policy to support "adolescents' right to access comprehensive, evidence-based reproductive healthcare services", including abortion. She added that the decision threatened adolescents' health and safety and jeopardized the patient-physician relationship.
Academics from the University of Minnesota School of Public Health and the University of Colorado Boulder criticized the decision, saying that as there is going to be an increase in pregnancies, there will be an increase in maternal and infant deaths. In 2020, there were 23.8 deaths from pregnancy or childbirth-related causes for every 100,000 births, the highest maternal mortality rate of any developed country, with black mothers 2.9 times more likely to die than white mothers.
A study published in JAMA Internal Medicine found that demand for abortion medications in the United States, as reflected by internet search trends, reached record highs nationally after the draft Dobbs opinion was leaked online. Public health activists have begun exploring ways to make medical abortion more available, particularly in states where it is subject to limitations, using social media for this purpose.
 International 
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, said that the decision "represents a major setback after five decades of protection for sexual and reproductive health and rights". The Director-General of the World Health Organization, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said, "I am very disappointed, because women's rights must be protected. And I would have expected America to protect such rights."
Western world foreign leaders generally condemned the decision. Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau called the decision "horrific", while pledging, "[I]n Canada, we will always defend the woman's right to choose." British Prime Minister Boris Johnson called the decision "a big step backwards", while reassuring that there were laws "throughout the UK" for a "woman's right to choose". Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon tweeted after the ruling that this was "[o]ne of the darkest days for women's rights" in her lifetime. Belgian Prime Minister Alexander De Croo said that he was "very concerned about implications of U.S. Supreme Court decision" and "the signal it sends to the world". French President Emmanuel Macron said that "abortion is a fundamental right for all women. It must be protected." He expressed his "solidarity" with U.S. women. Danish Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen called the decision "a huge setback" and said that her "heart cries for girls and women in the United States". New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern called the decision "incredibly upsetting" and "a loss for women everywhere". Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis said he was "really troubled" by the decision, saying it is "a major step back in the fight for women's rights". Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez said that "we cannot take any right for granted" and that "women must be able to decide freely about their lives".
The President of the Vatican's Pontifical Academy for Life, Archbishop Vincenzo Paglia, called the ruling "a powerful invitation to reflect together on the serious and urgent issue of human generativity and the conditions that make it possible". Members of some European far-right parties, notably Beatrix von Storch of Alternative for Germany, approved of the decision. Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro indirectly signaled his approval, tweeting, "May God continue to give strength and wisdom to those who protect the innocence and future of our children, in Brazil and around the world," the day the decision was released, one day after he had criticized abortion.
In July 2022, the European Parliament voted 324–155, with 38 abstentions, to condemn the ruling.
 News 
The editorial boards of many news outlets opposed the ruling, including The New York Times, The Washington Post, Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, The Boston Globe, Newsday, Houston Chronicle, Miami Herald, Detroit Free Press, Star Tribune, and The Denver Post.
The ruling was supported by the senior editorial staff of National Review, and the editorial boards of The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Times, and the New York Post.
Readership of women-centric news publications increased during the aftermath of the ruling.
 Public 
thumb|Protesters outside of the Supreme Court after the announcement of Dobbs
The decision was divisive among the American public. Around 55–60% of respondents expressed disapproval when asked if they believed Roe should be overturned. But polls conducted before the ruling also showed that only around 29% of Americans believe abortion should generally be legal until fetal viability (24 weeks), the threshold set by Planned Parenthood v. Casey. A June 2022 Harvard/Harris poll found that 44% of Americans believe that state legislatures should set abortion standards, while 25% believe the Supreme Court should, and 31% believe Congress should; a June 2022 CBS/YouGov poll found that 58% of Americans support federal legislation to protect abortion rights nationwide. A May 2022 Gallup poll showed that 67% of Americans support legal abortion in the first trimester of pregnancy, 36% support legal abortion in the second trimester, and 20% support legal abortion in the third trimester. Public support for abortion rights increased after the decision, with an August 2022 Wall Street Journal poll finding that 60% of Americans supported access to abortion to in most or all circumstances, up from 55% in a poll conducted in March. The same August poll also found that bans after six or 15 weeks of pregnancy (with the exception of cases where the mothers' health was threatened) were unpopular, with 62% and 57% of Americans opposed, respectively.
Large numbers of protesters gathered at the Supreme Court building after the decision's announcement. Clashes between police and protesters, resulting in tear gassing and arrests, occurred in Los Angeles, New York City, and Phoenix. Protests also took place in Chicago, along with solidarity protests in Berlin, London, and Toronto, and were planned to take place throughout the U.S. over the days after the decision. The DHS issued a memo to law enforcement agencies and first responders to be aware of potential extremist violence in the weeks following the decision, particularly at federal and state government offices, abortion clinics and other health providers, and at faith-based organizations.
The decision sparked at least one incident of trespassing into a state legislature by abortion-rights activists. Protesters breached a security barrier at the Arizona State Capitol and attempted to enter the building while the legislature was in session. The proceedings were temporarily halted as lawmakers were forced into the building's basement after tear gas was fired into the crowd.
Some politicians and academics questioned the Supreme Court's legitimacy in the wake of the leak and official ruling in Dobbs. A June 2022 Harvard/Harris poll showed that 63% of Americans consider the Supreme Court legitimate and 59% believe it is wrong to call it illegitimate.Harvard/Harris Poll June 2022 p. 43 NBC News had run polls on the public opinion of the Supreme Court since 1992, with majority opinion wavering between neutral and positive through May 2022. Its August 2022 poll, after Dobbs, had the majority with a negative opinion of the Court. Compared to only 17% of respondents with little to no confidence in the Court in June 2019, the number had increased to 37% by August 2022.
A 2023 Public Religion Research Institute poll found that a majority in every state opposed the overturn of Roe v. Wade.
 Corporate and celebrity 
Most corporations remained silent about the ruling, even ones that had been outspoken on social issues in the past. But some, including Amazon, Comcast, Dell, Disney, eBay, Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase, Levi Strauss & Co., Meta, Netflix, Paramount, Snap, Sony, Tesla, and Yelp, said they would cover travel benefits for employees seeking abortions in states that protected abortion access.
Several technology executives and celebrities have condemned the ruling. The NBA and WNBA released a joint statement supporting the right to abortion. The National Women's Soccer League Players Association also condemned the ruling.
 Aftermath 
By April 2023, abortion access had become "largely illegal" throughout much of the United States, with Republican-controlled states predominately passing near-total bans on the procedure. Republican politicians have also predominately advocated or taken measures toward a national ban on mifepristone, enforcement of the 1870s Comstock laws, and restrictions on interstate travel for the procedure.For sources on this, see:
According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, as of April 12, 2023, 15 states have de jure early-stage bans on abortion without exceptions for rape or incest: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Florida, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, West Virginia and Wisconsin. In states with early abortion restrictions that grant de jure exceptions, it was reported that "very few exceptions to these new abortion bans have been granted" and that patients who had been raped or otherwise qualified were being turned away, citing "ambiguous laws and the threat of criminal penalties make them unwilling to test the rules".
In February 2023, 67 Republican members of Congress and 23 (out of 25) state attorney generals backed a lawsuit overturning FDA approval of mifepristone and pulling the medication from the market.
 See also 
 Abortion law
 List of United States Supreme Court leaks
 Footnotes 
 References 
Inline
General
 {{cite journal |last = Ziegler |first = Mary |date = 2013 |title = ''Roes Race: The Supreme Court, Population Control, and Reproductive Justice |url = https://openyls.law.yale.edu/bitstream/handle/20.500.13051/7052/04_25YaleJL_Feminism1_2013_2014_.pdf |journal = Yale Journal of Law and Feminism |volume = 25 |issue = 1 |pages = |doi = }}
 Further reading 
 External links Written opinions Annotated Analysis The Dobbs v. Jackson Decision, Annotated Annotated analysis of the decision by The New York Times. June 24, 2022Texts of the two state laws 
 Oral arguments'''
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:History of women in Mississippi
Category:History of women's rights in the United States
Category:Medical lawsuits
Category:Right to abortion under the United States Constitution
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:Anti-abortion movement in the United States
Category:Articles containing video clips
"""

From "Dobson v. Commissioner" ==> """
Dobson v. Commissioner, 320 U.S. 489 (1943), was a United States Supreme Court case related to income tax..
Background
Facts
Four cases were consolidated in the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. The facts of one define the issue present in all.
The taxpayer, Collins, in 1929 purchased 300 shares of stock of the National City Bank of New York, which carried certain beneficial interests in stock of the National City Company. The latter company was the seller and the transaction occurred in Minnesota. 
In 1930 Collins sold 100 shares, sustaining a deductible loss of $41,600.80, which was claimed on his tax return for that year and allowed. In 1931 he sold another 100 shares, sustaining a deductible loss of $28,163.78, which was claimed in his return and allowed. The remaining 100 shares he retained. He regarded the purchases and sales as closed and completed transactions.
In 1936, Collins learned that the stock had not been registered in compliance with the Minnesota Blue Sky Laws and learned of facts indicating that he had been induced to purchase by fraudulent representations. He filed suit against the seller, alleging fraud and failure to register. Collins asked rescission of the entire transaction and offered to return the proceeds of the stock, or an equivalent number of shares plus such interest and dividends as he had received. 
In 1939 the suit was settled, on a basis which gave Collins a net recovery of $45,150.63, of which $23,296.45 was allocable to the stock sold in 1930 and $6,454.18 allocable to that sold in 1931.
Tax return
In his return for 1939 Collins did not report as income any part of the recovery. Throughout that year adjustment of his 1930 and 1931 tax liability was barred by the statute of limitations.
Tax commissioner
The Commissioner adjusted Collins' 1939 gross income by adding as ordinary gain the recovery attributable to the shares sold, but not that portion of it attributable to the shares unsold. The recovery upon the shares sold was not, however, sufficient to make good the taxpayer's original investment in them. And if the amounts recovered had been added to the proceeds received in 1930 and 1931 they would not have altered Collins' income tax liability for those years, for even if the entire deductions claimed on account of these losses had been disallowed, the returns would still have shown net losses.
Tax court
Collins sought a redetermination by the Board of Tax Appeals, now the Tax Court. He contended that the recovery of 1939 was in the nature of a return of capital from which he realized no gain and no income either actually or constructively, and that he had received no tax benefit from the loss deductions. In the alternative he argued that if the recovery could be called income at all it was taxable as capital gain. The Commissioner insisted that the entire recovery was taxable as ordinary gain and that it was immaterial whether the taxpayer had obtained any tax benefits from the loss deduction reported in prior years. The Tax Court sustained the taxpayer's contention that he had realized no taxable gain from the recovery.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit concluded that the "tax benefit theory" applied by the Tax Court "seems to be an injection into the law of an equitable principle, found neither in the statutes nor in the regulations." Because the Tax Court's reasoning was not embodied in any statutory precept, the court held that the Tax Court was not authorized to resort to it in determining whether the recovery should be treated as income or return of capital. It held as matter of law that the recoveries were neither return of capital nor capital gain, but were ordinary income in the year received.
In actions by petitioners challenging adjustments to their gross income made when respondent included recovery of certain previously claimed losses, the Tax Court awarded judgments based on the pertinent facts of the transactions as a whole, and determined that taxable gain was realized only where the deductions in prior years had offset gross income for those years.
Certiorari
Certiorari was granted to the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, to review a decision as to whether recovery of certain losses was treated as income or return of capital, in actions by petitioner taxpayers challenging the correctness of alleged income tax deficiencies by respondent Commission of Internal Revenue. "Questions important to tax administration were involved, conflict was said to exist, and we granted certiorari."
Opinion of the court
The court affirmed in part, and reversed in part the decision of the Tax Court. The court held that the Tax Court's decisions improperly relied on reasoning not embodied in any statutory or regulatory precept, and thus were not in accordance with the law. The court was not empowered to revise the Tax Court's decisions because of a difference of opinion on the existence of deficiencies. The Tax Court's decision settled matters of proper accounting, rather than questions of law, where no statute or regulation directed its method of deficiency determination. Since there was a rational basis for the Tax Court's factual determinations of petitioners' economic gain and tax benefit, the court possessed no compelling reason to substitute its judgment.
Justice Jackson, writing for the court, noted that Burnet v. Sanford & Brooks Co. "suggested its own distinction," i.e., "While [the money received] equalled, and in a loose sense was a return of, expenditures made in performing the contract, still, as the Board of Tax Appeals found, the expenditures were made in defraying the expenses. . . . They were not capital investments, the cost of which, if converted, must first be restored from the proceeds before there is a capital gain taxable as income."Dobson, 320 U.S. at 504 (quoting ).
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1943 in United States case law
"""

From "Doe v. Bolton" ==> """
Doe v. Bolton, 410 U.S. 179 (1973), was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States overturning the abortion law of Georgia.. The Supreme Court's decision was released on January 22, 1973, the same day as the decision in the better-known case of Roe v. Wade..
Background
The Georgia law in question permitted abortion only in cases of rape, severe fetal deformity, or the possibility of severe or fatal injury to the mother. Other restrictions included the requirement that the procedure be approved in writing by three physicians and by a three-member special committee that either (1) continued pregnancy would endanger the pregnant woman's life or "seriously and permanently" injure her health; (2) the fetus would "very likely be born with a grave, permanent and irremediable mental or physical defect"; or (3) the pregnancy resulted from rape or incest. In addition, only Georgia residents could receive abortions under this statutory scheme: non-residents could not have an abortion in Georgia under any circumstances.
The plaintiff, a pregnant woman who was given the pseudonym "Mary Doe" in court papers to protect her identity, sued Arthur K. Bolton, then the Attorney General of Georgia, as the official responsible for enforcing the law in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia. The anonymous plaintiff has since been identified as Sandra Cano, a young mother of three who was nine weeks pregnant at the time the lawsuit was filed. Cano, who died in 2014,  described herself as pro-life and claimed her attorney, Margie Pitts Hames, lied to her in order to have a plaintiff.White, Gayle.  "Roe v. Wade Role Just a Page in Rocky Life Story", The Atlanta Journal and Constitution (2003-01-22).
Hames claimed that Mrs. Doe had a neurochemical disorder which in her opinion and in the opinion of her physician made it inadvisable to continue her pregnancy. The lawyer claimed that the only way to avoid getting pregnant in the future was for Mr. and Mrs. Doe to abstain from sex. This argument described an ongoing harm to the couple's marital satisfaction in order to prevent judges from dismissing the case as moot once Cano gave birth.Substantive Due Process by any other name: The Abortion Cases by Richard A. Epstein, The Supreme Court Review 1973, University of Chicago Press, 1974, page 165
On October 14, 1970, a three-judge panel of the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Georgia consisting of Northern District of Georgia Judges Albert John Henderson, Sidney Oslin Smith Jr., and Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals Judge Lewis Render Morgan unanimously declared the conditional restrictions portion of the law unconstitutional, though upheld the medical approval and residency requirements. The court also declined to issue an injunction against enforcement of the law, similarly to the district court in the case Roe v. Wade. The plaintiff appealed to the Supreme Court under a statute, since repealed, permitting bypass of the circuit appeals court.
The oral arguments and re-arguments followed the same schedule as those in Roe. Atlanta attorney Hames represented Doe at the hearings, while Georgia assistant attorney general Dorothy Toth Beasley represented Bolton.
Opinion of the Court
The same 7–2 majority that struck down a Texas abortion law in Roe v. Wade invalidated most of the remaining restrictions of the Georgia abortion law, including the medical approval and residency requirements. The Court reiterated the protected "right to privacy," which applied to matters involving marriage, procreation, contraception, family relationships, child rearing, and education. Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote the majority opinion for the Court, in which he explained "the sensitive and emotional nature" of the issue and "the deep and seemingly absolute convictions" on both sides. Justice Blackmun went on to conclude that as a constitutional matter, the right to privacy was "broad enough to encompass a woman's decision whether or not to terminate her pregnancy."
Together, Doe and Roe declared abortion as a constitutional right and overturned most laws against abortion in other U.S. states. Roe legalized abortion nationwide for approximately the first six months of pregnancy until the point of fetal viability.
Definition of health
The Court's opinion in Doe v. Bolton stated that a woman may obtain an abortion after viability, if necessary to protect her health.  The Court defined "health" as follows:
Subsequent developments
thumb|Sandra Cano (right) at the 1998 March for Life
The records for Doe concerning Cano were sealed until 1988, when Cano had them unsealed in order to answer questions she had about the case. After abortion rights advocates found out about Cano's legal and political actions, her car was shot at and vandalized with graffiti,Plaintiff in Prominent Abortion Case Reunited with Last Missing Child by Gary L. Carter, Associated Press, December 8, 1989 and someone shot at her while she was on her front porch holding her baby grandchild.Extreme Makeover: Women Transformed by Christ Not Conformed to the Culture by Teresa Tomeo, San Francisco, California: Ignatius Press, 2011, page 67
In 2003, Sandra Cano filed a motion to re-open the case claiming that she had not been aware that the case had been filed on her behalf and that if she had known she would not have supported the litigation.“'Mary Doe' of Doe v. Bolton Files Motion To Overturn Companion Case to Roe v. Wade” , Kaiser Daily Reproductive Health Report, (2003-08-27).  The district court denied her motion, and she appealed.  When the appeals court also denied her motion, she requested review by the United States Supreme Court.  However, the Supreme Court declined to hear Sandra Cano's suit to overturn the ruling.Mears, Bill. "Court won't rethink 'Mary Doe' abortion case", CNN (2006-10-10). Sandra Cano died on September 30, 2014.
See also
Canadian Supreme Court case of R. v. Morgentaler finding Canada's abortion law unconstitutional
German Federal Constitutional Court abortion decision
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 410
References
External links
Written opinions
Oral transcripts
 Audio of oral arguments, oyez.org, transcripts accompany the audio
 Transcript of First Oral Argument in Doe v. Bolton, 410 U.S. 179 (1973), aul.org, edited September 2011
 Transcript of Reargument in Doe v. Bolton, 410 U.S. 179 (1973), aul.org, edited September 2011
Other media
Case file for Lewis Powell, memos and annotated copies for Doe v. Bolton and Roe v. Wade, law.wlu.edu
United States Senate Committee of the Judiciary Testimony of Sandra Cano
Attorney General Arthur Bolton with Governor Jimmy Carter, 1972, photo taken December 1972, Digital Collections, Georgia State University Library
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Medical lawsuits
Category:Right to abortion under the United States Constitution
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Void for vagueness case law
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:History of women in Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Doe v. Chao" ==> """
Doe v. Chao, 540 U.S. 614 (2004), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court. that interpreted the statutory damages provision of the Privacy Act of 1974..
Prior to the case, lower federal courts had split over whether plaintiffs whose rights were violated were automatically entitled to the statutory minimum damages award of $1000, or whether those plaintiffs had to prove that they had suffered at least some actual damage from the privacy breach (which would then be raised to $1000 if their actual damages were less than that).
The Court's 6–3 decision determined that the latter interpretation was correct; as a result, it will be more difficult for a plaintiff to prevail as he or she must now prove both a violation and some damages before being entitled to recovery.
This result is generally applauded by proponents of greater freedoms for the press, as a contrary result may have made government agencies more reluctant to release information out of fear of lawsuits.
Background of the case
The plaintiff in the case, coal miner Buck Doe (a pseudonym), filed for benefits under the federal Black Lung Benefits Act. et seq. The Department of Labor, which ran the benefits program, required applicants to provide a Social Security number as a part of the application.  The government's practice was to use the number for identification purposes, and as a result, claimants such as Doe had their Social Security numbers displayed on various legal documents and published in case reports and online legal research databases.
Doe, along with six other black lung claimants, sued the Department of Labor for violating their rights under the Privacy Act.  The government conceded that it had violated the statute.  At trial, Doe testified that he suffered "distress" from the release of his private information.  The district court awarded Doe $1000, which was the statutory minimum amount of damages that could be awarded under the statute.
The Fourth Circuit reversed.  It interpreted the statute to require a plaintiff to show some actual damages before the statutory minimum damages could be awarded.  Further, it found that plaintiff's testimony about his "distress" was not legally sufficient to show that he had been damaged by the disclosure.
This decision conflicted with decisions of the First, Fifth, Ninth, Eleventh, and District of Columbia circuits, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the dispute.
Statutory language
The statutory language at issue provided that if a government agency violated the act "in a manner which was intentional or willful, the United States shall be liable to the individual in an amount equal to the sum of actual damages sustained by the individual as a result of the refusal or failure, but in no case shall a person entitled to recovery receive less than the sum of $1,000.".
Supreme Court
The Court, in an opinion written by Justice David Souter, agreed with the Fourth Circuit's interpretation as a matter of "straightforward textual analysis."
The Court supported its interpretation with an analysis of the history of the statute, which showed that Congress specifically removed language from the bill that explicitly would have awarded $1000 without proof of any damages.  (Justice Antonin Scalia, an opponent of using legislative history in interpreting statutes, did not join this paragraph of the opinion).
Dissenting opinions
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote a dissenting opinion, arguing that a "sensible" reading of the statutory language supported Doe's position.  She also noted that reading the statute to require some proof of actual damages would have little practical effect.  She noted that it would be very easy for a plaintiff to prove actual damages in a similar case merely by purchasing a credit report following the publication of his Social Security number.  This small amount of damages would then be raised to $1000 by operation of the statute.
Justice Stephen Breyer also dissented, noting that the government's stated fear of large damage awards under a more permissive reading of the statute would likely not materialize, as courts had interpreted the statute to only permit damages where the government released private information in bad faith (as opposed to accidentally).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 540
List of United States Supreme Court cases
 References 
External links
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Coal mining in the United States
Category:Social Security lawsuits
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:Coal mining law
"""

From "Doe v. Commonwealth's Attorney of Richmond" ==> """
Doe v. Commonwealth's Attorney of Richmond, 425 U.S. 901 (1976), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States which gave summary affirmation of a lower court ruling which upheld the U.S. state of Virginia ban on homosexual sodomy.
About the case
Background
The first permanent English colony was established in 1607 in Jamestown, Virginia. Three years later in 1610, Virginia adopted England's sodomy laws, making sodomy punishable by death. The first person punished under a sodomy law in the English colonies was a woman, Elizabeth Johnson, in 1642 in the Massachusetts Bay Colony."Timeline of LGBT History in Virginia and the United States", p. 1. Gay men were not singled out by sodomy laws until the late 1800s, when gay subcultures developed in the growing cities. Police frequently raided restaurants and bars with gay and lesbian clientele throughout the 20th century."Timeline of LGBT History in Virginia and the United States", p. 4. By the 1950s, all 50 states had sodomy laws, and sodomy was considered a felony in all but two states.Pierceson 2008, p. 63. In the spring of 1969, several Richmond, Virginia, bars were forced to close for violating Virginia alcoholic beverage control laws which prohibited the sale of alcohol to known homosexuals.Green 1991 Many people wrote letters to the Richmond Times-Dispatch protesting the closing of these bars. In 1961, Illinois became the first U.S. state to repeal their law against consensual sodomy.Pierceson 2008, p. 65. At the time of the Doe case, 34 states had laws making homosexual acts between consenting adults punishable criminal offenses.O'Neill 1977, p. 750.
Following the U.S. Supreme Court's Roe v. Wade decision, members of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force (NGLTF) worked with an attorney from the Loving v. Virginia (1967). case, Philip Hirschkop, to challenge Virginia's sodomy laws.Ziegler 2016, p. 234. Hirschkop believed that the right to privacy established in previous cases, especially Roe, protected consenting adults' sexual behavior.
In 1975, with the assistance of NGLTF, two anonymous homosexual men filed suit in federal district court challenging the constitutionality of the criminalization of homosexual anal or oral sex. The Code of Virginia provided: "§ 18.1-212. Crimes against nature. If any person shall carnally know in any manner any brute animal, or carnally know any male or female person by the anus or by or with the mouth, or voluntarily submit to such carnal knowledge, he or she shall be guilty of a felony and shall be confined in the penitentiary not less than one year nor more than three years." The plaintiffs claimed this statute violated their First Amendment right to freedom of expression, their Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments right to due process, and the Eighth Amendment's prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment.O'Neill 1977, p. 759.
Court decisions
A three-judge panel of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia upheld the constitutionality of anti-sodomy laws. The majority opinion, written by Senior Circuit Judge Albert V. Bryan, concluded: "If a State determines that punishment therefor, even when committed in the home, is appropriate in the promotion of morality and decency, it is not for the courts to say that the State is not free to do so."Doe, 403 F. Supp. at 1202. Judge Robert R. Merhige Jr. disagreed with the ruling. In his dissenting opinion he wrote: "The Supreme Court has consistently held that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment protects the right of individuals to make personal choices.. A mature individual's choice of an adult sexual partner, in the privacy of his or her own home, would appear to me to be a decision of the utmost private and intimate concern.""Doe, 403 F. Supp. at 1203 (Merhige, J., dissenting).
The two plaintiffs appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which provided a one-sentence summary affirmation of the district court's decision.Doe v. Commonwealth's Attorney. Princeton University: 1-6.
Importance of the case
Doe v. Commonwealth's Attorney of Richmond was the first U.S. Supreme Court decision dealing with homosexual sodomy. Following the Civil Rights Movement and second-wave feminism, many believed privacy and equality should include sexual orientation. The Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause and Due Process Clause were used to defend the constitutionality of birth control, abortion, and pornography.
The plaintiffs in Doe argued that personal privacy took precedence over a state's right to regulate morality. Following the ruling, one of the plaintiffs and NGLTF co-director Jean O'Leary wrote an article in The New York Times criticizing the decision.Ziegler 2016, p. 235. O'Leary argued the Doe decision affected more heterosexuals than homosexuals because Kinsey Institute researchers found about 60 percent of heterosexuals engage in illegal sexual acts.O'Leary 1976 Many sexual acts deemed illegal by the state were recommended by marriage therapists and in sexual counseling books. Other people worried homosexuality could lead to child predators or threaten the institutions of marriage and family, although there was little evidence to support these claims.O'Neill 1977, p. 752.
Subsequent legal developments
In Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186 (1986), the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 5-4 that a Georgia state anti-sodomy law was constitutional. With an invalid warrant, Atlanta police officers entered Hardwick's home for failing to appear in court to answer a public drinking charge. Hardwick and another man were caught in the act of sodomy and both men were arrested. Neither were prosecuted, but Hardwick decided to file suit in federal district court claiming his constitutional right to privacy was violated.Urofsky 2013 The case reached the U.S. Supreme Court, where a majority ruled that sodomy laws had "ancient roots... homosexual conduct has been subject to state intervention throughout the history of Western civilization". (Burger, C.J., concurring).
In Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003), the Supreme Court ruled 6-3 that sodomy laws were unconstitutional, overturning Doe v. Commonwealth's Attorney and Bowers v. Hardwick. The court stated that "Far from possessing 'ancient roots,' American laws targeting same-sex couples did not develop until the last third of the 20th century... The Bowers Court was, of course, making the broader point that for centuries there have been powerful voices to condemn homosexual conduct as immoral, but this Court's obligation is to define the liberty of all, not to mandate its own moral code"..
In 2015, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in a 5–4 decision that the Fourteenth Amendment also guaranteed same-sex couples' right to marry in Obergefell v. Hodges..
 See also 
List of LGBT-related cases in the United States Supreme Court
References
Bibliography
Category:1975 in LGBT history
Category:1975 in Virginia
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:LGBT in Virginia
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
"""

From "Doe v. Reed" ==> """
Doe v. Reed, 561 U.S. 186 (2010), is a United States Supreme Court case which holds that the disclosure of signatures on a referendum does not violate the Petition Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution..
Background
The Washington State Constitution contains provisions for a referendum system whereby citizens resident in the state may challenge state law. For a challenge to be added to the ballot, a petition must be submitted to the Secretary of State of Washington containing the signatures of registered voters equivalent to 4% of those who voted in the last gubernatorial election. For a signature to be considered valid, the signor must not only be a registered voter but also provide his address as well as the county in which he was registered to vote.
Following a proposed bill to extend the rights afforded to those in domestic partnerships (so that they would be looked upon by the law as if they were married) in Washington, Protect Marriage Washington, an anti-gay marriage group, led a campaign to have the proposal brought forth as a referendum. This effort succeeded, however the referendum narrowly came out in favour of the bill to expand the rights afforded to those in a domestic partnership. Subsequent to this, a number of individuals requested the signature lists used to bring the question to referendum, as these were historically considered matters of public record relating to the passage of legislation. Protect Marriage Washington filed to block the release of these signatures due to the highly charged nature of the topic. The United States District Court for the Western District of Washington granted a preliminary injunction blocking the release of the signature lists, which was reversed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
The issue was moved to the Supreme Court when Anthony Kennedy issued a temporary injunction barring the release of the signatures on October 19, 2009. The arguments were heard on April 28, 2010, with the June 24, 2010 decision seeing the constitutionality of the Public Records Act under which the request for signatures had been made in an 8–1 decision, with Thomas dissenting. 
Opinion
The court found, with only Clarence Thomas dissenting, that the law in Washington state allowing for public disclosure of petition signatures for ballot initiatives was "subject to review under the First Amendment," but that it was subject to a standard of review lower than strict scrutiny, which the Court defined as "exacting scrutiny."<ref>See, e.g., ; ; .</ref> Exacting scrutiny "requires a 'substantial relation' between the disclosure requirement and a 'sufficiently important' government interest."
The Washington State Public Records Act (PRA) survived exacting scrutiny because the Court felt the state had a sufficiently important government interest in "preserving electoral integrity." The Court noted that the state was not only protecting against fraud, but also "simple mistake, such as duplicate signatures or signatures of individuals who are not registered to vote in the State." Even though the secretary of state is charged with reviewing the signatures, he only reviews 3 to 5% of them. "Public disclosure can help cure the inadequacies of the verification and canvassing process." Ultimately, the Court concluded that "public disclosure of referendum petitions in general is substantially related to the important interest of preserving the integrity of the electoral process."
The Court did clarify that the broad ruling in this case does not preclude a narrower holding in a future case in which a plaintiff can show "'a reasonable probability that the compelled disclosure [of personal information] will subject them to threats, harassment, or reprisals from either Government officials or private parties.'” Buckley, supra, at 74, 96 S.Ct. 612; see also Citizens United, 558 U.S., at ––––, 130 S.Ct., at 915. However, in most cases referendums have to do with subjects such as "'tax policy, revenue, budget, or other state law issues'. . . Voters care about such issues, some quite deeply—but there is no reason to assume that any burdens imposed by disclosure of typical referendum petitions would be remotely like the burdens plaintiffs fear in this case." In this case, plaintiffs failed to provide any specific evidence to show that people who voted on this referendum would face such obstacles.
The Court "conclude[d] that disclosure under the PRA would not violate the First Amendment with respect to referendum petitions in general and therefore affirm[ed] the judgment of the Court of Appeals."
Justice Clarence Thomas, in the lone dissenting opinion, argued that the PRA severely burdens the First Amendment right to free speech and "chills participation in the referendum process."
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 561
James Bopp
Related CasesNAACP v. AlabamaBrown v. Socialist Workers ’74 Campaign CommitteeMcIntyre v. Ohio Elections CommissionReferences
External links
Who is Publius? or, Who's Afraid of Anonymous Political Speech?, Reason.com'' (10-18-2010)
Category:Petition Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2010 in United States case law
"""

From "Doggett v. United States" ==> """
Doggett v. United States, 505 U.S. 647 (1992), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States.
The court held that the  year delay between Doggett's indictment and actual arrest violated his Sixth Amendment right to a speedy trial, arguing that the government had been negligent in pursuing him and that Doggett had remained unaware of the indictment until his arrest.
Background
Marc Doggett was indicted in February 1980 on charges of conspiring with several others to import and distribute cocaine. Douglas Driver, the Drug Enforcement Administration's principal agent in the case, informed the United States Marshals Service that DEA would oversee the arrest of Doggett and his confederates.
One month later, in March 1980, two police officers (under orders from Driver) traveled to Raleigh, North Carolina, to arrest Doggett at his parents' house. However, the officers learned from Doggett's mother that he had left for Colombia four days earlier. Upon learning of Doggett's actions, in an attempt to arrest Doggett upon his return, Driver notified the United States Customs stations and several law enforcement agencies, as well as posting Doggett's info on the Treasury Enforcement Communication System (the TECS info expired in September 1980 and was not re-entered).
Driver learned in September 1981 that Doggett had been arrested in Panama on drug charges.  Believing an extradition request to be futile, Driver merely asked Panamanian authorities to "expel" Doggett to the United States upon his release; though they promised to comply, upon Doggett's release they freed him the following July and allowed him to travel to Colombia.  The American Embassy in Panama notified the Department of State of Doggett's departure to Colombia, but DEA was never informed and presumed that Doggett was still in a Panamanian prison.  Driver would not learn of Doggett's travels to Colombia until he was reassigned to Colombia in 1985; he presumed that Doggett had settled in Colombia and (possibly believing that Colombia would also, like Panama, not agree to extradite Doggett) made no effort to track him down.
However, this was not the case: Doggett had returned to the United States on September 25, 1982, passing through Customs in New York City with no incident.  Upon his return, Doggett did not return to the drug trade; instead he settled down in Virginia, married, earned a college degree, found a steady job, lived openly under his own name, and "stayed within the law".  Most notably, Doggett was never made aware of the indictment against him.  Only in September 1988, when the Marshal's Service ran a credit check on several thousand people, did they find out where Doggett was living; Doggett was finally arrested on September 5 of that year, nearly  years after his indictment and almost  years after his return to the United States.
Court proceedings
Doggett moved to have the indictment dismissed on speedy trial grounds.
The federal magistrate (using the factors set forth in Barker v. Wingo) agreed with Doggett that the length of the delay was long enough to be "presumptively prejudicial", that the delay "clearly [was] attributable to the negligence of the government", "and that Doggett could not be faulted for any delay in asserting his right to a speedy trial, there being no evidence that he had known of the charges against him until his arrest".  However, the magistrate found "that Doggett had made no affirmative showing that the delay had impaired his ability to mount a successful defense or had otherwise prejudiced him" and in its recommendation to the district court "contended that this failure to demonstrate particular prejudice sufficed to defeat Doggett's speedy trial claim"..
The district court adopted the magistrate's recommendation and denied Doggett's motion. Doggett then entered a conditional plea of guilty, reserving the right to appeal the speedy trial claim.
A split panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit affirmed the district court's ruling in 1990.  The majority agreed with the magistrate that Doggett had not shown actual prejudice, and attributing the government's actions to "negligence" rather than "bad faith", "concluded that Barker's first three factors did not weigh so heavily against the government as to make proof of specific prejudice unnecessary". The dissent argued that the majority had placed too much emphasis on Doggett's inability to prove actual prejudice.
The United States Supreme Court granted a writ of certiorari in 1991.
Decision of the court
In a 5–4 decision in favor of Doggett, Justice Souter wrote the opinion of the court.  Justice Souter noted that the question before the court was whether or not eight and half years between the plaintiff's indictment and arrest violated his Sixth Amendment right to a speedy trial. Citing previous Supreme Court cases, Justice Souter notes, "[The Supreme Court has] observed in prior cases that unreasonable delay between formal accusation and trial threatens to produce more than one sort of harm, including 'oppressive pretrial incarceration', 'anxiety and concern of the accused', and 'the possibility that the [accused's] defense will be impaired, citing the three cases Barker, Smith v. Hooey, and United States v. Ewell.
Dissenting opinion
Justice O'Connor in dissent noted that Doggett's liberty was never inhibited between his indictment and arrest, and therefore did not have his Sixth Amendment right to a speedy trial violated.  "Although the delay between indictment and trial was lengthy, [the] petitioner did not suffer any anxiety or restriction on his liberty."Doggett, 505 U.S. at 658 (O'Connor, J., dissenting).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 505
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:Speedy Trial Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Dolan v. City of Tigard" ==> """
Dolan v. City of Tigard, 512 U.S. 374 (1994), more commonly Dolan v. Tigard, is a United States Supreme Court case.. It is a landmark case regarding the practice of zoning and property rights, and has served to establish limits on the ability of cities and other government agencies to use zoning and land-use regulations to compel property owners to make unrelated public improvements as a condition to getting zoning approval, citing the violation of the Fifth Amendment’s Takings Clause.
Facts
thumb|left|Bike path at issue 
Petitioner Dolan, owner and operator of A-Boy Plumbing & Electrical Supply store in the city of Tigard, Oregon, applied for a permit to expand the store and pave the parking lot of her store.  The city planning commission granted conditional approval, dependent on Dolan dedicating land to a public greenway along an adjacent creek, and developing a pedestrian and bicycle pathway in order to relieve traffic congestion.  The decision was appealed to the Oregon State Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA), alleging that the land dedication requirements were not related to the proposed development, and thus constituted an uncompensated taking of her property, which is disallowed by the Fifth Amendment.  LUBA found a reasonable relationship between the development and both conditions of the variance, as the larger building and paved lot would increase runoff into the creek, and the impact of increased traffic justified the requirement for a pathway.  The decision was subsequently affirmed by the Oregon State Court of Appeals and the Oregon Supreme Court. The case was appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States.
Decision
The Supreme Court overturned the state Land Use Board of Appeals and the Oregon appellate courts. The Court held that under the doctrine of unconstitutional conditions, a government agency may not require a person to surrender constitutional rights in exchange for discretionary benefits, where the property sought has little or no relationship to the benefit conferred. A two-prong test was applied:  Whether or not there is an "essential nexus" between the permit conditions and legitimate state interest, and whether or not the degree of the exactions required by the permit condition bears the required relationship to the projected impact of the proposed extra development.
The Court held that the first condition had been satisfied. However, the Court ruled that the City failed to make an individualized determination that the required dedications are related, in both nature and extent, to the proposed impact. Further, the Court held that the requirement for a public greenway (as opposed to a private one, to which Dolan would retain other rights of property owners, such as the right of exclusive access), was excessive, and that the City failed to meet its burden of establishing that the proposed pathway was necessary to offset the increased traffic which would be caused by the proposed expansion.
See also
 Nollan v. California Coastal Commission
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 512
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:Land use in Oregon
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:Tigard, Oregon
Category:United States land use case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1994 in the environment
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:Zoning in the United States
"""

From "Dolan v. United States Postal Service" ==> """
Dolan v. United States Postal Service, 546 U.S. 481 (2006), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States, involving the extent to which the United States Postal Service has sovereign immunity from lawsuits brought by private individuals under the Federal Tort Claims Act.  The Court ruled that an exception to the FTCA that barred liability for the "negligent transmission of mail" did not apply to a claim for injuries caused when someone tripped over mail left by a USPS employee.  Instead, the exception only applied to damage caused to the mail itself or that resulted from its loss or delay.
Background of the case
On August 25, 2001, Barbara Dolan fell over letters, packages and periodicals placed on her porch by an employee of the United States Postal Service, suffering serious injury.  Dolan initially filed an administrative claim with the Postal Service, which was denied on April 18, 2002. On October 15, 2002, Dolan filed a complaint against the United States and the USPS in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.Judge Mary A. McLaughlin presided over the case.  As "an independent establishment of the executive branch of the Government of the United States,"Under the Postal Reorganization Act, 39 U.S.C. § 101 et seq. the United States Postal Service enjoys federal sovereign immunity absent a waiver.  Dolan accordingly brought her claim under the Federal Tort Claims Act, which waives the government's sovereign immunity for certain claims arising from the negligence of federal employees committed in the course of their employment.
On March 19, 2003, the district court granted the government's motion to dismiss, holding that Dolan's claim was barred by the postal exception to the FTCA waiver of immunity, which applied to "any claim arising out of the loss, miscarriage, or negligent transmission of letters or postal matter."28 U.S.C. § 2680(b).  Dolan appealed, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit affirmed the dismissal.Dolan v. United States Postal Serv., 377 F.3d 285 (3d Cir. 2004).  Judges Anthony Joseph Scirica, Jane Richards Roth, and Theodore Alexander McKee heard the appeal, with Judge Roth writing the unanimous decision.
The court's decision
The Supreme Court reversed the Third Circuit, ruling 7-1The ninth justice, Samuel Alito, was confirmed to the Court after oral argument had already been heard, and so did not participate in the case. that the postal exception under the FTCA did not include all negligence that occurred in the course of mail delivery.  Instead, context and precedent required the exception to be limited to negligence that caused mail to be lost or to arrive late, in damaged condition, or at the wrong address.  Dolan's suit was accordingly not covered by the exception and could proceed.  The majority opinion was delivered by Justice Anthony Kennedy.  Justice Clarence Thomas filed a dissent, arguing that the majority ignored the plain language of the statute.
Kennedy's majority opinion
The Court first noted that, if considered in isolation, the phrase "negligent transmission" in the postal exception could include a wide range of negligent acts committed in the course of delivering mail, including creating hazards of the kind for which Dolan sued.  However, the complete statutory context and purpose behind a provision informs whether a word extends "to the outer limits of its definitional possibilities."  The Court observed that the words "negligent transmission" follow the terms, "loss" and "miscarriage, so as to limit the reach of "transmission."  Since both those terms refer to the failure to deliver mail in a timely manner to the right address, the Court considered it unlikely that "negligent transmission" could include injuries such as Dolan's that happened to be caused by postal employees but involved neither the failure to transmit mail nor damage to its contents.
The Court found support for its interpretation in Kosak v. United States, , a case involving a claim against the United States Customs Service.  The Court in Kosak discussed the postal exception to the FTCA to contrast it from the more general Customs Service exception, noting that one of the principal purposes behind the FTCA was to waive the government's immunity from liability for car accidents caused by postal employees.  The postal service exception was therefore drafted narrowly, such that it did not cover all negligence in the course of mail delivery, because postal trucks could be delivering (and therefore "transmitting") mail when they collide with other vehicles.  The Court could find no basis in the text of the statute for distinguishing injuries such as Dolan's that were "caused by the mail itself" from those caused by the negligent driving of postal vehicles.  "In both cases the postal employee acts negligently while transmitting mail."
The Court also did not believe that the general rule applied that the government's waiver of immunity should be strictly interpreted in its favor.  The Court considered this rule "unhelpful" in the FTCA context, because "unduly generous interpretations of the exceptions" would defeat the statute's central and sweeping purpose of waiving the government's immunity.
Thomas's dissent
Justice Thomas argued that the Court had failed to give the text of the postal exception its ordinary meaning.  The definitions of "transmission"—"act, operation, or process, of transmitting"—and "transmit"—"to send or transfer from one person or place to another; to forward by rail, post, wire, etc., . . . to cause . . . to pass or be conveyed"—would include the conduct for which Dolan sued.For both definitions, Thomas cited to Webster's New International Dictionary pp. 2692-93 (2d ed. 1934, as republished 1945), the edition in print when the FTCA and the postal exception were enacted.  Thomas did not believe there was any reason to conclude that Congress was unaware of these ordinary definitions when it enacted the FTCA and the postal exception in 1946, nor was there any contextual indication that a meaning other than the ordinary sense was intended.
Thomas considered that the discussion in Kosak at most established that the postal exception did not apply to auto accidents; that decision accordingly said nothing about "slip and fall" claims.  Thomas furthermore believed that the Court in Kosak considered discrete acts determinative of the scope of Postal Service liability, rather than the consequences of those acts.  Kosak therefore could not support for the majority's limitation, which was based on the consequence of the negligence—injury to the mail itself as opposed to injury caused by tripping over the mail.
Thomas further argued that even if the postal exception was ambiguous, any such ambiguity as to the scope of the Government's waiver of immunity should be resolved in its favor.  Thomas believed the majority erred in failing to apply this rule just because it was construing an exception to waiver rather than waiver itself.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 546
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Notes
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Postal Service litigation
Category:United States federal sovereign immunity case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Dollar General Corp. v. Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians" ==> """
Dollar General Corp. v. Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, 579 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court was asked to determine if an American Indian tribal court had the jurisdiction to hear a civil case involving a non-Indian who operated a Dollar General store on tribal land under a consensual relationship with the tribe. The Court was equally divided, 4–4, and thereby affirmed the decision of the lower court, in this case the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, that the court had jurisdiction.
 Background 
The Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, unlike many tribes, does not have a central reservation, but instead consists of eight tribal communities in Mississippi."MCBI Communities", Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians (accessed April 21, 2017). Those communities are on land held in trust by the U.S. Government for the benefit of the tribe.
Beginning in 2000, Dollar General has had a lease from the tribe to operate a store on tribal land, and obtained a business license from the tribe.Dolgencorp Inc. v. the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, 746 F.3d 167, 169 (5th Cir. 2014).Dolgencorp Inc. v. the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, 846 F. Supp. 2d 646, 648 (S.D. Miss. 2011)."The Supreme Court will hear the Dollar General Case", Nat. L. Rev. (June 17, 2015).Ned Blackhawk, "The Struggle for Justice on Tribal Lands", The New York Times, November 25, 2015, at A31.Ed Gehres, "Argument preview: The future of tribal courts — the power to adjudicate civil torts involving non-Indians", SCOTUSblog (November 30, 2015). In 2003, a 13-year-old tribal member, identified as John Doe in court documents, was working at the store as part of a joint tribal-Dollar General internship program.Dollar General Corporation v. Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, Oyez (accessed April 21, 2017). Doe alleged that the store manager sexually abused him in 2003 causing "severe mental trauma". The tribe took action to legally exclude the manager from tribal lands, but the United States Attorney did not criminally prosecute him.
 Tribal and District Courts 
In 2005, Doe sued the store manager and Dollar General in the tribal court. The defendants tried to get the case dismissed, claiming that the tribal court did not have subject matter jurisdiction over non-Indians. The tribal court refused to dismiss the lawsuit,Dolgen Corp. Inc. v. The Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, No. 4:08cv22TSL-FKB, 2008 WL 5381906, 6 (S.D.Miss. December 19, 2008). and the  Choctaw Supreme Court affirmed, noting the case of Montana v. United StatesMontana v. United States, 450 U.S. 544 (1981) (holding that a tribe could exercise jurisdiction over non-Indians who entered into a consensual relationship with the tribe on tribal land). allowed tribes to exercise civil, as opposed to criminal, jurisdiction over non-Indians on tribal land when the non-Indians had entered into a voluntary relationship with the tribe.
The store manager and Dollar General then sued the Tribe in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi, seeking to stop the suit in tribal court. The manager was dropped from the case by the district court but Dollar General was held to have been in a consensual relationship and subject to the tribe's jurisdiction.
 Court of Appeals 
The defendants then appealed to the Fifth Circuit, which affirmed the decision of the district court. The case was heard by a three-judge panel consisting of Judges Jerry Edwin Smith, Catharina Haynes, and James E. Graves Jr. Judge Graves delivered the opinion of the Court, finding that the facts in the case met the first exception noted in Montana, allowing the tribal court to exercise jurisdiction of Dollar General.
 Supreme Court 
 Arguments 
Dollar General then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, asking the court to determine if Indian tribes had the power to hear tort cases against non-Indians who were involved in a consensual relationship with the tribe. They argue that the power that tribes may have once had to adjudicate matters involving non-Indians had been stripped away, and that it would take action by Congress or the unambiguous consent of the non-Indian to confer such jurisdiction. Dollar General urged the Court to make a ruling on civil jurisdiction that was similar to the ruling it made on criminal jurisdiction, in Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe.
The Choctaw tribe argued that it had inherent tribal sovereignty until Congress expressly removed the tribe's authority. The tribe stated that this issue had been decided by Montana and that the only issue was the consent of Dollar General.
The Solicitor General supported the Choctaw position and urged the Court not to accept the case. He further argued that the decision of the Fifth Circuit was proper.
 Opinion 
The per curiam opinion of the Court was announced by Chief Justice John Roberts on June 23, 2016. The text of the opinion stated "The judgment is affirmed by an equally divided Court."Dollar General Corp. v. Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, 579 U.S. ____ (2016). The death of Justice Antonin Scalia in February had left the Court with eight members, and cases which are equally divided result in the lower case ruling standing, but without precedent being established.Tom Goldstein, "What happens to this Term's close cases? (Updated)", SCOTUSblog (February 13, 2016). It is as if the Court had never heard the case.
 Footnotes 
 References 
External links
Category:Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Dollar General
Category:Tie votes of the United States Supreme Court
"""

From "Dombrowski v. Pfister" ==> """
Dombrowski v. Pfister, 380 U.S. 479 (1965), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case brought forth by Dr. James Dombrowski along with William Kunstler, founder of the Center for Constitutional Rights, against the governor of Louisiana, law enforcement officers, and the chairperson of the state's Legislative Joint Committee on Un-American Activities for prosecuting or threatening to prosecute his organization under several state subversion statutes.
 Background 
James A. Dombrowski was executive director of the Southern Conference Education Fund (SCEF), a civil rights advocacy group that promoted desegregation and African-American voting rights. State officials in Louisiana declared the SCEF a subversive or communist-front organization whose members were violating the Louisiana Subversive Activities and Communist Front Control Law. Louisiana officials seized and searched Dombrowski’s and two lawyers’ papers and indicted them.
Dombrowski alleged that members of his organization, which consisted of a group of Southern liberals dedicated to fighting for civil rights for Blacks in the South, were subjected to continuous harassment, including arrests without intent to prosecute, and seizures of necessary internal documents. Furthermore, the State was threatening to use anti-subversion statutes to prosecute the organization.
The case was brought forth by Dombrowski after he was arrested and his offices were raided by authorities in October 1963. Dombrowski demanded all seized materials to be returned to him and $500,000 be paid in damages resulting from the arrest and search-and-seizure. However, a three-judge Federal district court dismissed the claim, stating that Dombrowski had failed to show evidence of irreparable damage and asserted the abstention doctrine, stating that State Courts had the right to refrain from ruling in Constitutional questions.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court overturned the earlier dismissal of the court below, making note of the "chilling effect" the ruling below would have had on First Amendment rights. Federal courts ordinarily should abstain from interfering in state litigation, even when constitutional issues are involved, according to the Supreme Court. They may intrude when a statute substantially chills free expression through overbroad application and when parties challenge a statute facially. Furthermore, when a statute is substantially overbroad, persons may challenge the entire statute and not just those aspects that apply to them. The Court found the Louisiana statutes to be void on their face and ordered the district court to grant the requested relief.
 Status as precedent 
Several years later, the Supreme Court decided in Younger v. Harris (1971) that existed a "national policy forbidding federal courts to stay or enjoin pending state court proceedings except under special circumstances." The Court specifically distinguished Dombrowski, stating that the holding of that case was merely a limited exception to the general rule forbidding the enjoining of state court proceedings.Erwin Chemerinsky, Federal Jurisdiction (5th ed. 2007), Aspen Publishers, p. 826-27 The Court stated that it was appropriate for a federal claim to go forward in Dombrowski because the consistent pattern of bad faith prosecutions denied the claimant the opportunity to pursue his constitutional challenge to anti-subversion statutes in state court. Moreover, the Younger Court asserted that the bare existence of a chilling effect as in Dombrowski was insufficient to justify enjoining state proceedings, without more.Chemerinsky, p. 826-27
The Supreme Court in Younger conceded that bad faith prosecution like the pattern in Dombrowski would justify a federal court in issuing an injunction against state proceedings. However, since the announcement of Younger in 1971, the Supreme Court has never found an instance of alleged bad faith prosecution to, in fact, meet the requirements of this exception to the no-injunction rule.Chemerinsky, p. 859 As the commentator Erwin Chemerinsky stated, the bad-faith prosecution exception seems narrowly limited to facts like those in Dombrowski.Chemerinsky, p. 860  Other scholars have even asserted that the possible range of cases that would fit the Dombrowski model and allow an exception to the no-injunction rule is so limited as to be an "empty universe."Chemerinsky, p. 859-60
 References 
External links
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1965 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:1965 in Louisiana
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Domino's Pizza, Inc. v. McDonald" ==> """
Domino's Pizza, Inc. v. McDonald, 546 U.S. 470 (2006), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving claims for racial discrimination against the right to make and enforce contracts under 42 U.S.C. § 1981, a key civil rights provision in U.S. law that was originally enacted as part of the Civil Rights Act of 1866.  The Court ruled unanimously, in an opinion by Justice Antonin Scalia, that because agents of parties to contracts do not personally have rights under those contracts, they cannot state a claim under section 1981.
 Background 
John McDonald, an African American entrepreneur, was the sole shareholder and president of JWM Investments, Inc. (JWM), a company organized under Nevada law.  JWM and the restaurant chain Domino's Pizza entered into several contracts, under which JWM was to construct four restaurants in the Las Vegas area and then lease them to Domino's. McDonald claimedBecause the trial court disposed of McDonald's case for failure to state a claim, the truth of McDonald's factual allegations were never determined by a court. Instead, the court ruled that, even assuming his allegations of fact were completely true, the law did not afford him a remedy. that after the first restaurant was built, Domino's agent refused to execute documents that the contracts required to facilitate JWM's bank financing, and convinced the Las Vegas Valley Water District to change its recorded ownership of the land slated for restaurant construction from JWM to Domino's (which McDonald managed to subsequently change back).
McDonald wanted to see the contracts completed, but claimed that the agent threatened "serious consequences" if he did not back out. The agent was alleged to have said to McDonald "I don't like dealing with you people anyway," a phrase she did not explain. The contracts were never completed, and at least in part because of that JWM filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
The bankruptcy trustee for JWM initiated an adversary proceeding against Domino's for breach of contract, which was settled for a $45,000 payment to JWM and a complete release of all claims between the parties. While the bankruptcy proceedings were still ongoing, McDonald personally filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court for the District of Nevada under 42 U.S.C. § 1981 on the argument that Domino's broke its contracts with JWM because of racial animus towards McDonald.It is unknown why the trustee did not raise a § 1981 claim against Domino's on behalf of JWM. In its opinion, the Supreme Court observed that every court of appeals to consider the issue has concluded that corporations may bring such a claim.  McDonald claimed that the breach had harmed him personally by causing monetary damages, pain and suffering, emotional distress, and humiliation.
Domino's filed a motion to dismiss the complaint for failure to state a claim.This ground for dismissal is set forth under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6), and is often referred to in federal civil practice simply as a 12(b)(6) motion. It argued that because McDonald was not himself a party to a contract with Domino's, he could not bring a § 1981 claim against it. The District Court granted the motion and dismissed McDonald's suit, stating that Domino's had "relied on the basic proposition that a corporation is a separate legal entity from its stockholders and officers," which means that "a president or sole shareholder may not step into the shoes of the corporation and assert that claim personally."
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed the dismissal.McDonald v. Domino's Pizza, Inc., 107 Fed. Appx. 18 (9th Cir. 2004). Though it agreed that an "injury suffered only by the corporation" would not permit a shareholder to bring a § 1981 action, the court concluded that, based on its prior decision in Gomez v. Alexian Bros. Hospital of San Jose, 698 F.2d 1019 (9th Cir. 1983), a nonparty like McDonald may nonetheless bring suit under § 1981 when he has suffered "injuries distinct from that of the corporation." The court acknowledged that this approach set it apart from the precedents of other Circuits. The U.S. Supreme Court subsequently granted certiorari.Domino's Pizza, Inc. v. McDonald, 544 U.S. 998 (2005).
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court unanimously reversed the Ninth Circuit in a decision delivered by Justice Antonin Scalia.The decision was unanimous among the eight justices participating; because Justice Samuel Alito was not confirmed to the Court until January 31, 2006—over a month after the case had been argued, he did not take part in the decision.  The Court ruled that 42 U.S.C. § 1981 only applies to those who have enforceable rights under the contract.
Section 1981 protects the equal right of "all persons within the jurisdiction of the United States" to "make and enforce contracts" without respect to race.42 U.S.C. § 1981(a).  The statute currently defines "make and enforce contracts" to "include the making, performance, modification, and termination of contracts, and the enjoyment of all benefits, privileges, terms, and conditions of the contractual relationship."42 U.S.C. § 1981(b).
The Court rejected McDonald's argument that the statute applied to him because he had "made and enforced contracts" on behalf of JWM.  It believed that the right to "make contracts" guaranteed by the statute "was not the insignificant right to act as an agent for someone else's contracting—any more than it was the insignificant right to act as amanuensis in writing out the agreement, and thus to ‘make’ the contract in that sense."  The right protected was instead the right to give and received contractual rights on one's own behalf, which many states had denied to African Americans when the Civil Rights Act of 1866 was drafted.See Black Codes for an overview of the laws passed after the American Civil War to restrict the rights of freed slaves.  The Court further noted that at that time, it was a well accepted legal principle that "a mere agent, who has no beneficial interest in a contract which he has made on behalf of his principal, cannot support an action thereon."For this quotation, the Court cited to 1 S. Livermore, A Treatise on the Law of Principal and Agent 215 (1818).
A § 1981 claim must therefore identify an impaired "contractual relationship" under which the plaintiff personally has rights,The Court clarified in a footnote that it purposefully avoided limiting § 1981 claims to parties to contracts, to leave open the possibility that an intended third-party beneficiary of a contract may have rights under § 1981. whether to make a contract not yet formed or to enforce one already made.  The Court stated that "it can be said to be the whole purpose of corporation and agency law" that shareholders and contracting officers of corporations have no rights or liability under the corporation's contracts.  McDonald's argument that because he "negotiated, signed, performed, and sought to enforce the contract," Domino's could not insist that the contract was not his own, the Court believed "makes light of the law of corporations and of agency," and "contradicts McDonald's own experience."  It noted that during JWM's bankruptcy, Domino's filed a proof of claim against the corporation rather than McDonald personally.  His personal assets were protected by the limited liability of the corporate form and the rules of agency, which "similarly deny him rights under those contracts."
The Court  did not reject McDonald's alternative argument that § 1981 standing be extended to anyone who was the "actual target" of discrimination, and who loses some benefit that he would have received had a contract not been impaired.  The Court believed this theory ignored the "explicit statutory requirement" that the plaintiff be the person whose rights were impaired on account of race.  Past cases in which McDonald characterized the plaintiff's contractual relationship as unclear (and therefore, he argued, undermining a requirement of a contractual relationship) provided no support for his position, because those cases simply did not discuss or decide that issue.
McDonald also argued that "many discriminatory acts will go unpunished" if his interpretation of the statute was not adopted.  The Court instead believed that the parties who actually suffered a breach of contract would likely pursue available remedies.  In response to numerous hypothetical examples of unpunished discrimination described in McDonald's brief, including a scenario in which "Domino's officials had beaten up McDonald in an attempt to intimidate him," the Court simply noted that there are other laws available, particularly criminal law, to address such conduct.  "The most important response, however, is that nothing in the text of § 1981 suggests that it was meant to provide an omnibus remedy for all racial injustice. If so, it would not have been limited to situations involving contracts."  Giving it a more expansive reading would "produce satellite § 1981 litigation of immense scope," for example permitting class actions by all the minority employees of a nonbreaching party to a broken contract.
 See also 
 Corporate personhood
 Footnotes 
External links
 Transcript of oral argument in the case (.pdf)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Domino's Pizza
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Dorsey v. United States" ==> """
Dorsey v. United States, 567 U.S. 260 (2012), is a Supreme Court of the United States decision in which the Court held that reduced mandatory minimum sentences for "crack cocaine" under the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010 does apply to defendants who committed a crime before the Act went into effect but who were sentenced after that date. The Act's silence on how to apply its new rules, before the effective date or not, caused a split among the Justices on how to interpret its new lenient provisions. Specifically, the case centered on Edward Dorsey, a prior offender who had been convicted of possession before the new rules came into effect but was sentenced after the effective date.
 Background 
 Fair Sentencing Act of 2010 
Until the 2010 changes in sentencing guidelines, there existed a significant disparity in how the length of sentences for the possession of crack cocaine and powder cocaine. These changes resulted from reports by the federal Sentencing Commission that the crack-to-powder mandatory minimum ratio of 100-to-1 was too high and unjustified. Along with Congress' acceptance of these proposals in the 2010 Act, Congress also directed the federal Sentencing Commission to "promulgate the guidelines, policy statements, or amendments provided for in this Act as soon as practicable, and in any event not later than 90 days". However, the Act did not say whether it was meant to be retroactive in any respect.
 Edward Dorsey 
Edward Dorsey was convicted of unlawfully selling 5.5 grams of crack in 2008. As a prior offender under the pre-2010 sentencing rules, he would have been subject to a 10-year minimum; under the new law, he would have not been subject to any such minimum due to the small nature of his possession.§ 841(b)(1)(B)(iii) (2006 ed., Supp. IV). The sentencing judge sentenced Dorsey to the 10-year minimum, applying the old rules because the conviction occurred prior to the effective date of the new law. This was upheld by the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit.United States v. Fisher, 635 F.3d 336 (2011)
Due to a division among the appellate courts about when to apply the new sentencing guidelines, the Supreme Court granted review.
Opinion of the Court 
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the majority opinion for the Court, reversing the Seventh Circuit, holding that Dorsey should have been sentenced under the new 2010 guidelines. "[N]ot to apply the Fair Sentencing Act," Breyer wrote, "would do more than preserve a disproportionate status quo; it would make matters worse. It would create new anomalies, new sets of disproportionate sentences, not previously present." This reading of the law would be "at odds with Congress' basic efforts to achieve more uniform, more proportionate sentences." Breyer concluded by arguing that "We have no reason to believe Congress would have wanted to impose an unforeseeable, potentially complex application date."
Scalia's dissent
Justice Antonin Scalia, joined by Chief Justice John G. Roberts and Justices Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito, dissented from the decision of the Court, arguing that the new more lenient minimums don't apply to pre-2010 offenders. Scalia saw the silence of the Act on retroactivity as a reason that the Court should not apply it themselves. "The canon of constitutional avoidance [has] no application here," Scalia argued, "[for] although many observers viewed the 100-to-1 crack-to-powder ratio under the prior law as having a racially disparate impact, only intentional discrimination may violate the equal protection component of the Fifth Amendment's Due Process Clause."
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Federal Sentencing Guidelines case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:Cocaine in the United States
"""

From "Dothard v. Rawlinson" ==> """
Dothard v. Rawlinson, 433 U.S. 321 (1977), was the first United States Supreme Court case in which the bona fide occupational qualifications (BFOQ) defense was used.
Background
In 1977, there were height and weight restrictions (minimum 5’2”, 120 lbs) to be considered as an applicant for an Alabama prison guard. Such requirements ruled out Dianne Rawlinson, who brought forth a class action suit against the requirements under the disparate impact theory of Title VII. After Rawlinson filed her suit, Alabama passed a regulation requiring that guards be the same sex as the inmates. Alabama then had four all-male maximum security prisons and only one all-female prison.
The lower court sided with Rawlinson and claimed that the requirements created an arbitrary barrier to equal employment to women. The state then appealed to the Supreme Court and claimed that the sex, height, and weight requirements were valid occupational qualifications because of the nature of the job.
Judgment
The Court ruled 8-1 that the height and weight restrictions were discriminatory and that the employer had not proven that the height and weight standards were necessary for effective job performance. On the issue of whether women could fill close contact jobs in all male maximum security prisons, the Court ruled 6-3 that the BFOQ defense was legitimate in this case. The reason was that female prison guards were more vulnerable to male sexual attack than male prison guards were.Cushman, C., 2001, Supreme Court Decisions and Women's Rights. CQ Press. pp. 122-8
See also
US labor law
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:Penal system in Alabama
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:History of women in Alabama
"""

From "Douglas v. California" ==> """
Douglas v. California, 372 U.S. 353 (1963), was a case before the United States Supreme Court.
Background
Two defendants were tried and convicted in a California state court on felony charges including robbery, assault with a deadly weapon, and assault with intent to commit murder.
A single public defender had been appointed to represent them on these three charges.  The attorney's motion for continuance at the beginning of trial was denied, although he stated that he was not as prepared as he should have been.  Thereafter the defendants dismissed the defender and renewed motions for separate counsel and for a continuance. These motions were also denied.  The defendants were convicted and subsequently filed appeals.
Exercising their only right to appeal as of right, they appealed to an intermediate Court of Appeals (District court of appeal of California, second appellate district), and, being indigent, applied to it for appointment of counsel to assist them on appeal. In accordance with a state rule of criminal procedure, that Court made an ex parte examination of the record, determined that appointment of counsel for petitioners would not be "of advantage to the defendant or helpful to the appellate court" and denied appointment of counsel. Their appeal was heard without assistance of counsel and their convictions were affirmed. The District Court of Appeal affirmed their convictions after denying their request for appointment of counsel under a California rule of criminal procedure authorizing such denial where after an independent investigation of the record the appellate court determines that appointment of counsel would be helpful to neither the defendant nor the court. (187 Cal App 2d 802, 10 Cal Rptr 188.)
The California Supreme Court denied their petitions for a discretionary review/hearing.  (187 Cal App 2d 813, 10 Cal Rptr 214.)
Opinion of the court
The Supreme Court of the United States vacated the judgment of the California District Court of Appeal. In an opinion by Justice Douglas, expressing the view of six members of the Court, it was held that the denial of counsel under the California rule of procedure stated above violated the Fourteenth Amendment.
Held: Where the merits of the one and only appeal an indigent has as of right are decided without benefit of counsel, an unconstitutional line is drawn between rich and poor.Douglas, 372 U.S. at 353–58.  
The Court held that a procedure like the one used by the state appellate court in which an indigent defendant was denied counsel on appeal unless he first made a preliminary showing of merit did not comport with fair procedure. In vacating, the judgment of the state appellate court, the Court stated that where the merits of the one and only appeal an indigent had as of right were decided without benefit of counsel, an unconstitutional line had been drawn between rich and poor.
The Court vacated the judgment of the state appellate court and remanded for further proceedings consistent with the Court's opinion.
Dissent
Clark dissented on the ground that neither the equal protection clause nor the due process clause requires more than what is provided in the California rule.
Justice Harlan, joined by Justice Stewart, dissented on the grounds that the equal protection clause was not apposite, and that the due process clause was not violated. His dissenting opinion also held that the defendants were not denied effective assistance of counsel in the trial court.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment appointment of counsel case law
Category:Legal history of California
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:1963 in California
"""

From "Douglas v. City of Jeannette" ==> """
Douglas v. City of Jeannette, 319 U.S. 157 (1943), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held it does not restrain criminal prosecutions made in good faith unless there would be some "irreparable injury.".  This case is one of four cases collectively known as the "Jehovah's Witnesses Cases", because the Supreme Court handed down rulings on these four cases related to the Jehovah's Witnesses on the same day (May 3, 1943).  Although the Supreme Court ruled against the Jehovah's Witnesses in this case, it ruled in favor of them in the other three cases and those represent landmark decisions in the area of First Amendment constitutional law.
 Facts of the case 
The plaintiff in this matter was Robert L. Douglas, a Jehovah's Witness who filed suit against the Pittsburgh suburb of Jeannette, Pennsylvania in 1939.  Douglas sought to enjoin against the enforcement of ordinances that prohibited him and other colleagues from distributing religious materials door-to-door without a permit.
Decision of the Court
Chief Justice Stone delivered the opinion of the Court denying equity relief on the grounds that the Court had no jurisdiction in the matter since no irreparable injury occurred, and that it was necessary to presume good faith by the municipality in reassessing the enforcement of statutes that had been declared unconstitutional.  Justice Jackson's concurring opinion, appended to the majority opinion, also touched on the First Amendment issues raised in the case.
References
External links
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:History of Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Douglas v. Cunningham" ==> """
Douglas v. Cunningham, 294 U.S. 207 (1935), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the Copyright Act of 1909 allowed an award of $5,000 instead of a copyright infringement damages calculation based on the newspaper's circulation..
 References 
External links
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States copyright case law
"""

From "Dow Chemical Co. v. United States" ==> """
Dow Chemical Co. v. United States, 476 U.S. 227 (1986), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 1986 dealing with the right to privacy and advanced technology of aerial surveillance.
Factual background and decision
The EPA used, without a warrant, a commercial aerial photographer to get photographs of a heavily guarded Dow facility that was, according to the petitioner, protected by the State Trade Secrecy Law. 
The decision: 
For purposes of aerial surveillance, the open areas of an industrial complex are more comparable to an "open field" in which an individual may not legitimately demand privacy.Oliver v. United States, 466 U. S. 170 In the absence of a "reasonable expectation of privacy" the Fourth Amendment prohibiting unreasonable searches does not apply.
 See also 
 California v. Ciraolo, 
 California v. Greenwood, 
 Curtilage
 Expectation of privacy
 Florida v. Riley, 
 Kyllo v. United States, 
 Open-fields doctrine
 References 
Further reading
Diane Rosenwasser Skalak, Dow Chemical Co. v. United States: Aerial Surveillance and the Fourth Amendment, 3 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 277 (1986) Available at: http://digitalcommons.pace.edu/pelr/vol3/iss2/6
"AERIAL SEARCHES OF FENCED AREAS UPHELD BY COURT," The New York Times (May 20, 1986)
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Dow Chemical Company
"""

From "Dowling v. United States (1985)" ==> """
Dowling v. United States, 473 U.S. 207 (1985), was a United States Supreme Court case that discussed whether copies of copyrighted works could be regarded as stolen property for the purposes of a law which criminalized the interstate transportation of property that had been "stolen, converted or taken by fraud" and holding that they could not be so regarded under that law.
Background
Paul Edmond Dowling ran a bootleg recording business distributing Elvis Presley records through the United States Postal Service. Dowling, a zealous Presley fan, worked with William Samuel Theaker to produce records of unreleased Presley recordings such as those from concerts and television shows. The two men used the services of a record-pressing company in Burbank, Los Angeles County, California.
Dowling's trial and appeals
The federal government brought its initial case against Dowling in the United States District Court for the Central District of California, arguing his guilt on the basis that he had no legal authority to distribute the records. Dowling was convicted of one count of conspiracy to transport stolen property in interstate commerce, eight counts of interstate transportation of stolen property, nine counts of copyright infringement, and three counts of mail fraud. The charges of mail fraud arose out of his use of the United States Postal Service to distribute the records.
Dowling appealed all convictions besides those of copyright infringement and the case moved to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, where he argued that the goods he was distributing were not "stolen, converted or taken by fraud", according to the language of 18 U.S.C. 2314 - the interstate transportation statute under which he was convicted. The court disagreed, affirming the original decision and upholding the conviction. Dowling then took the case to the Supreme Court, which sided with his argument and reversed the convictions. From the Reporter of Decision's syllabus:
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 473
 United States v. LaMacchia, 871 F.Supp. 535 (D.Mass. 1994)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Elvis Presley
Category:Bootleg recordings
"""

From "Downes v. Bidwell" ==> """
Downes v. Bidwell, 182 U.S. 244 (1901), was a case in which the US Supreme Court decided whether US territories were subject to the provisions and protections of the US Constitution. The issue is sometimes stated as whether the Constitution follows the flag. The decision narrowly held that the Constitution does not necessarily apply to territories. Instead, the US Congress has jurisdiction to create law within territories in certain circumstances, particularly those dealing with revenue, which would not be allowed by the Constitution for US states. It has become known as one of the "Insular Cases".
Background
The case specifically concerned a merchant, Samuel Downes, who owned S. B. Downes & Company. His company had imported oranges into the Port of New York from the newly-acquired territory of Puerto Rico and had been forced to pay import duties on them. He sued George R. Bidwell, the US customs inspector for the port of New York.
The Supreme Court in DeLima v. Bidwell had decided that ever since Puerto Rico had been acquired by the United States from Spain in the Treaty of Paris (1898), normal customs levied on imports from foreign countries did not apply to imports from Puerto Rico since it had ceased to be a foreign country..
However, the Foraker Act now levied customs specifically on imports from Puerto Rico. Downes disputed its constitutionality on the grounds that such duties were under the jurisdiction of Article I, Section 8, of the US Constitution, which provides that "all duties, imposts, and excises shall be uniform throughout the United States." Since the duty on oranges did not exist for other parts of the United States, he argued that it should not exist for Puerto Rico.
Decision
The Supreme Court decided 5–4 that the newly-annexed territories were not properly part of the United States for purposes of the Constitution in the matter of revenues, administrative matters, and the like. However, the court was careful to note that the constitutional guarantees of a citizen's rights of liberty and property were applicable to all and "cannot be under any circumstances transcended", according to Justice Edward Douglass White's concurring opinion.Downes, 182 U.S. at 294–95 (White, J., concurring).
Territories were due the full protections of the Constitution only when Congress had incorporated them as an "integral part" of the United States.
The dissenting opinion was written by Justice John Marshall Harlan, who held that Congress was always bound to enact laws within the jurisdiction of the Constitution: "This nation is under the control of a written constitution, the supreme law of the land and the only source of the powers which our government, or any branch or officer of it, may exert at any time or at any place." He held that the Congress had no existence and thus had no authority outside the Constitution. He continued:
Aftermath
The idea of territorial incorporation is generally agreed to have arisen from Justice White's concurring decision noted above. "Incorporation", in this sense, does not refer to the legal process whereby a company takes on certain of the characteristics of a person (see incorporation). The concept of "territorial incorporation" is that the United States can be proprietor of a territory without having actually incorporated that territory into the United States.
Unincorporated territories are not due the full benefits of the US Constitution, as noted from Justice White's decision above.
The idea has been used in court cases ever since to affirm that the citizens of certain territories can be subject to laws and regulations that are not constitutionally applicable to other citizens of the United States. Many citizens of territories that have been designated unincorporated have seen the principle of territorial incorporation as a form of oppression.See, e.g., 
References
External links
Category:1901 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:Law of insular areas of the United States
Category:Legal history of Puerto Rico
Category:Oranges (fruit)
Category:1901 in Puerto Rico
"""

From "Doyle v. Mitchell Bros. Co." ==> """
Doyle v. Mitchell Bros. Co., 247 U.S. 179 (1918), was a United States Supreme Court case defining gross income.  The case held that gross income includes the gain on sale of assets, i.e., the proceeds less cost basis.  An alternative theory that gross income should be the gross proceeds, and the cost basis should be allowed as a deduction, was rejected by the Court. The Court also held that the harvesting of timber was not an income recognition event until the timber was sold.
Background
In 1909, Congress enacted a tax on net income of corporations.  Much of the language defining gross income in that law has been retained in current tax law.  Thus, court decisions interpreting the meaning of that law may have continuing relevance.
Mitchell Bros. was a timber producer organized in 1903.  Upon passage of the predecessor to current income tax law, the company became subject to tax on net income.  Mitchell Bros. held various timber lands from which it harvested timber.  After harvesting, the timber and land would be sold separately.  The Court addressed questions of when income from timber was to be included in taxable income and how taxable income from sale of the land was to be calculated.
Opinion of the Court
On the gross income question, the Court stated in paragraph 13, "In order to determine whether there has been gain or loss, and the amount of the gain if any, we must withdraw from the gross proceeds an amount sufficient to restore the capital value that existed at the commencement of the period under consideration."
On the timing question, the Court found, in paragraph 17, that the mere harvesting of timber did not give rise to income.  The Court held that income from the timber should be recognized when the timber was sold.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1918 in United States case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Doyle v. Ohio" ==> """
Doyle v. Ohio, 426 U.S. 610 (1976), is a United States Supreme Court case regarding the Due Process rights of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Holding
The Supreme Court held that the criminal defendant's silence in response to a Miranda warning cannot be used to impeach them during cross examination.
In 1980 a similar case, Jenkins v. Anderson, reached the Supreme Court, its ruling distinguishing it from Doyle. The Court ruled that the prosecution is permitted to exploit as inculpatory evidence a defendant's failure to disclose an exculpatory testimony eventually presented in trial as defense, to government officials such as police in a prompt manner before the arrest. The petitioner in this case had committed murder and, weeks later, confessed to the crime but, in the process, embroidered the narrative by claiming self-defense as the justification.
The prosecution mooted this during trial as evidence of guilt and perjury. After habeas corpus relief, the Supreme Court upheld the conviction, recognizing no breach of the Fourteenth Amendment..
Salinas v. Texas (2013), a plurality opinion, held that mere silence during prearrest interrogations is inadequate to establish invocation of the right to remain silent, if the defendant has already chosen to speak. Specifically, if the defendant has elected to speak to police and then suddenly stops when confronted with inculpatory evidence, the defendant must explicitly invoke his right to remain silent in order for the silence not to be held against him.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 426
Jenkins v. Anderson, 
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Miranda warning case law
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Ohio
"""

From "Dr. Miles Medical Co. v. John D. Park & Sons Co." ==> """
Dr. Miles Medical Co. v. John D. Park & Sons Co., (220 U.S. 373) (1911), was a United States Supreme Court case on anti-trust grounds that ruled that resale price maintenance, a form of vertical restraint, is illegal per se.
The Dr. Miles Medical Co. (Dr. Miles), now Miles Laboratories, was founded in 1884. In an era when most products were snake oil, Dr. Miles invented a patent medicine that had an actually useful, if somewhat toxic, active ingredient: bromides.
John D. Park & Sons Co. (Park & Sons) was a discount drug reseller that sought to profit off the advertising of Dr. Miles' remedies while selling Dr. Miles products at rock bottom prices. While lower prices drove sales for Park & Sons, it cut into the profits of Dr. Miles. To fix this, Dr. Miles made an agreement with all sellers of its products that they would be required to sell the products at a minimum price.
 References 
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:1911 in United States case law
Category:Anti-competitive practices
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Dred Scott v. Sandford" ==> """
Dred Scott v. Sandford, 60 U.S. (19 How.) 393 (1857), was a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court that held the U.S. Constitution did not extend American citizenship to people of black African descent, and thus they could not enjoy the rights and privileges the Constitution conferred upon American citizens. The decision is widely considered the worst ever rendered in the Supreme Court's history, being widely denounced for its overt racism, perceived judicial activism and poor legal reasoning, and for its crucial role in the start of the American Civil War four years later. Legal scholar Bernard Schwartz said that it "stands first in any list of the worst Supreme Court decisions". Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes called it the Court's "greatest self-inflicted wound".
The decision involved the case of Dred Scott, an enslaved black man whose owners had taken him from Missouri, a slave-holding state, into Illinois and the Wisconsin Territory, where slavery was illegal. When his owners later brought him back to Missouri, Scott sued for his freedom and claimed that because he had been taken into "free" U.S. territory, he had automatically been freed and was legally no longer a slave. Scott sued first in Missouri state court, which ruled that he was still a slave under its law. He then sued in U.S. federal court, which ruled against him by deciding that it had to apply Missouri law to the case. He then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
In March 1857, the Supreme Court issued a 7–2 decision against Scott. In an opinion written by Chief Justice Roger Taney, the Court ruled that people of African descent "are not included, and were not intended to be included, under the word 'citizens' in the Constitution, and can therefore claim none of the rights and privileges which that instrument provides for and secures to citizens of the United States". Taney supported his ruling with an extended survey of American state and local laws from the time of the Constitution's drafting in 1787 that purported to show that a "perpetual and impassable barrier was intended to be erected between the white race and the one which they had reduced to slavery". Because the Court ruled that Scott was not an American citizen, he was also not a citizen of any state and, accordingly, could never establish the "diversity of citizenship" that Article III of the U.S. Constitution requires for a U.S. federal court to be able to exercise jurisdiction over a case. After ruling on those issues surrounding Scott, Taney struck down the Missouri Compromise as a limitation on slave owners' property rights that exceeded the U.S. Congress's constitutional powers.
Although Taney and several other justices hoped the decision would settle the slavery controversy, which was increasingly dividing the American public, the decision only exacerbated interstate tension. Taney's majority opinion suited the slaveholding states, but was intensely decried in all the other states. The decision inflamed the national debate over slavery and deepened the divide that led ultimately to the American Civil War. In 1865, after the Union's victory, the Court's ruling in Dred Scott was superseded by the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which abolished slavery, and the Fourteenth Amendment, whose first section guaranteed citizenship for "[a]ll persons born or naturalized in the United States and subject to the jurisdiction thereof".
Historians agree that the Court decision was a major disaster for the nation as it dramatically inflamed tensions leading to the Civil War.Gregory J. Wallance, "The Lawsuit That Started the Civil War." Civil War Times 45: 46–52. Roberta Alexander, "Dred Scott: The decision that sparked a civil war." Northern Kentucky Law Review 34 (2007): 643+ excerpt.  According to historian David W. Blight, 1857 was "the great pivot on the road to disunion...largely because of the Dred Scott case, which stoked the fear, distrust and conspiratorial hatred already common in both the North and the South to new levels of intensity."David W, Blight, "Was the Civil War Inevitable?"  The New York Times Dec. 22, 2022 The ruling is widely considered a blatant act of judicial activism with the intent of bringing finality to the territorial crisis resulting from the Louisiana Purchase by creating a constitutional right to own slaves anywhere in the country while permanently disenfranchising all people of African descent. The court's decision to overturn the Missouri Compromise, which had already been replaced with the Kansas–Nebraska Act and thus was a legally moot issue, is cited as proof of this because the latter act was determined by the due process of popular sovereignty, and thus could not be overturned the same way the court did the Missouri compromise. During the United States election of 1860, abolitionists formed the Republican Party that rejected the ruling as being corrupted by partisanship and non-binding because the court had no jurisdiction. Their Presidential nominee, Abraham Lincoln, stated he would not permit slavery anywhere in the country except where it already existed, which directly contradicted the court's ruling. His election is considered the final event that led the Southern states to secede from the Union, igniting the American Civil War.
Background
Political setting
thumb|upright=1.75|The Missouri Compromise created the slave-holding state Missouri (Mo., yellow) but prohibited slavery in the rest of the former Louisiana Territory (here, marked Missouri Territory 1812, green) north of the 36°30' North parallel.
In the late 1810s, a major political dispute arose over the creation of new American states from the vast territory the United States had acquired from France in 1803 through the Louisiana Purchase. The dispute centered on whether the new states would be "free" states, like the Northern states, in which slavery would be illegal, or whether they would be "slave" states, like the Southern states, in which slavery would be legal. The Southern states wanted the new states to be slave states in order to enhance their own political and economic power. The Northern states wanted the new states to be free states for their own political and economic reasons, as well as their moral concerns over allowing the institution of slavery to expand.
In 1820, the U.S. Congress passed legislation known as the "Missouri Compromise" that was intended to resolve the dispute. The Compromise first admitted Maine into the Union as a free state, then created Missouri out of a portion of the Louisiana Purchase territory and admitted it as a slave state; at the same time it prohibited slavery in the area north of the Parallel 36°30′ north, where most of the territory lay. The legal effects of a slaveowner taking his slaves from Missouri into the free territory north of the 36°30′ north parallel, as well as the constitutionality of the Missouri Compromise itself, eventually came to a head in the Dred Scott case.
Dred Scott and John Emerson
thumb|Dred Scott
Dred Scott was born a slave in Virginia around 1799. Little is known of his early years.Earl M. Maltz, Dred Scott and the Politics of Slavery (2007) His owner, Peter Blow, moved to Alabama in 1818, taking his six slaves along to work a farm near Huntsville. In 1830, Blow gave up farming and settled in St. Louis, Missouri, where he sold Scott to U.S. Army surgeon Dr. John Emerson. After purchasing Scott, Emerson took him to Fort Armstrong in Illinois. A free state, Illinois had been free as a territory under the Northwest Ordinance of 1787, and had prohibited slavery in its constitution in 1819 when it was admitted as a state.
In 1836, Emerson moved with Scott from Illinois to Fort Snelling in the Wisconsin territory in what has become the state of Minnesota. Slavery in the Wisconsin Territory (some of which, including Fort Snelling, was part of the Louisiana Purchase) was prohibited by the U.S. Congress under the Missouri Compromise. During his stay at Fort Snelling, Scott married Harriet Robinson in a civil ceremony by Harriet's owner, Major Lawrence Taliaferro, a justice of the peace who was also an Indian agent. The ceremony would have been unnecessary had Dred Scott been a slave, as slave marriages had no recognition in the law.
In 1837, the army ordered Emerson to Jefferson Barracks Military Post, south of St. Louis. Emerson left Scott and his wife at Fort Snelling, where he leased their services out for profit. By hiring Scott out in a free state, Emerson was effectively bringing the institution of slavery into a free state, which was a direct violation of the Missouri Compromise, the Northwest Ordinance, and the Wisconsin Enabling Act.
 Irene Sanford Emerson 
Before the end of the year, the army reassigned Emerson to Fort Jesup in Louisiana, where Emerson married Eliza Irene Sanford in February 1838. Emerson sent for Scott and Harriet, who proceeded to Louisiana to serve their master and his wife. Within months, Emerson was transferred back to Fort Snelling. While en route to Fort Snelling, Scott's daughter Eliza was born on a steamboat under way on the Mississippi River between Illinois and what would become Iowa. Because Eliza was born in free territory, she was technically born as a free person under both federal and state laws. Upon entering Louisiana, the Scotts could have sued for their freedom, but did not. One scholar suggests that, in all likelihood, the Scotts would have been granted their freedom by a Louisiana court, as it had respected laws of free states that slaveholders forfeited their right to slaves if they brought them in for extended periods. This had been the holding in Louisiana state courts for more than 20 years.
Toward the end of 1838, the army reassigned Emerson back to Fort Snelling. By 1840, Emerson's wife Irene returned to St. Louis with their slaves, while Dr. Emerson served in the Seminole War. While in St. Louis, she hired them out. In 1842, Emerson left the army. After he died in the Iowa Territory in 1843, his widow Irene inherited his estate, including the Scotts. For three years after John Emerson's death, she continued to lease out the Scotts as hired slaves. In 1846, Scott attempted to purchase his and his family's freedom, but Irene Emerson refused, prompting Scott to resort to legal recourse.Don E. Fehrenbacher, The Dred Scott Case: Its Significance in American Law and Politics (2001)
Procedural history
 Scott v. Emerson 
 First state circuit court trial 
Having been unsuccessful in his attempt to purchase his freedom, Dred Scott, with the help of his legal advisers, sued Emerson for his freedom in the Circuit Court of St. Louis County on April 6, 1846. A separate petition was filed for his wife Harriet, making them the first married couple to file freedom suits in tandem in its 50-year history. They received financial assistance from the family of Dred's previous owner, Peter Blow. Blow's daughter Charlotte was married to Joseph Charless, an officer at the Bank of Missouri. Charless signed legal documents as security for the Scotts and later secured the services of the bank's attorney, Samuel Mansfield Bay, for the trial.
It was expected that the Scotts would win their freedom with relative ease. By 1846, dozens of freedom suits had been won in Missouri by former slaves. Most had claimed their legal right to freedom on the basis that they, or their mothers, had previously lived in free states or territories. Among the most important legal precedents were Winny v. Whitesides1 Mo. 472, 475 (Mo. 1824). and Rachel v. Walker.4 Mo. 350 (Mo. 1836). In Winny v. Whitesides, the Missouri Supreme Court had ruled in 1824 that a person who had been held as a slave in Illinois, where slavery was illegal, and then brought to Missouri, was free by virtue of residence in a free state. In Rachel v. Walker, the state supreme court had ruled that a U.S. Army officer who took a slave to a military post in a territory where slavery was prohibited and retained her there for several years, had thereby "forfeit[ed] his property". Rachel, like Dred Scott, had accompanied her enslaver to Fort Snelling.
Scott was represented by three different lawyers from the filing of the original petition to the time of the actual trial, over one year later. The first was Francis B. Murdoch, a prolific freedom suit attorney who abruptly left St. Louis. Murdoch was replaced by Charles D. Drake, an in-law of the Blow family. When Drake also left the state, Samuel M. Bay took over as the Scotts' lawyer. Irene Emerson was represented by George W. Goode, a proslavery lawyer from Virginia. By the time the case went to trial, it had been reassigned from Judge John M. Krum, who was proslavery, to Judge Alexander Hamilton, who was known to be sympathetic to freedom suits.
Dred Scott v. Irene Emerson finally went to trial for the first time on June 30, 1847. Henry Peter Blow testified in court that his father had owned Dred and sold him to John Emerson. The fact that Scott had been taken to live on free soil was clearly established through depositions from witnesses who had known Scott and Dr. Emerson at Fort Armstrong and Fort Snelling. Grocer Samuel Russell testified that he had hired the Scotts from Irene Emerson and paid her father, Alexander Sanford, for their services. Upon cross examination, however, Russell admitted that the leasing arrangements had actually been made by his wife, Adeline.
Thus, Russell's testimony was ruled hearsay, and the jury returned a verdict for Emerson. This created a seemingly contradictory outcome in which Scott was ordered by the court to remain Irene Emerson's slave, because he had been unable to prove that he was previously Irene Emerson's slave.
 First state supreme court appeal 
Bay moved immediately for a new trial on the basis that Scott's case had been lost due to a technicality which could be rectified, rather than the facts. Judge Hamilton finally issued the order for a new trial on December 2, 1847. Two days later, Emerson's lawyer objected to a new trial by filing a bill of exceptions. The case was then taken on writ of error to the Supreme Court of Missouri. Scott's new lawyers, Alexander P. Field and David N. Hall, argued that the writ of error was inappropriate because the lower court had not yet issued a final judgment. The state supreme court agreed unanimously with their position and dismissed Emerson's appeal on June 30, 1848. The main issue before the court at this stage was procedural and no substantive issues were discussed.
 Second state circuit court trial 
Before the state supreme court had convened, Goode had presented a motion on behalf of Emerson to have Scott taken into custody and hired out. On March 17, 1848, Judge Hamilton issued the order to the St. Louis County sheriff. Anyone hiring Scott had to post a bond of six-hundred dollars. Wages he earned during that time were placed in escrow, to be paid to the party that prevailed in the lawsuit. Scott would remain in the sheriff's custody or hired out by him until March 18, 1857. One of Scott's lawyers, David N. Hall, hired him starting March 17, 1849.
The St. Louis Fire of 1849, a cholera epidemic, and two continuances delayed the retrial in the St. Louis Circuit Court until January 12, 1850. Irene Emerson was now defended by Hugh A. Garland and Lyman D. Norris, while Scott was represented by Field and Hall. Judge Alexander Hamilton was presiding. The proceedings were similar to the first trial. The same depositions from Catherine A. Anderson and Miles H. Clark were used to establish that Dr. Emerson had taken Scott to free territory.
This time, the hearsay problem was surmounted by a deposition from Adeline Russell stating that she had hired the Scotts from Irene Emerson, thereby proving that Emerson claimed them as her slaves. Samuel Russell testified in court once again that he had paid for their services. The defense then changed strategy and argued in their summation that Mrs. Emerson had every right to hire out Dred Scott, because he had lived with Dr. Emerson at Fort Armstrong and Fort Snelling under military jurisdiction, not under civil law. In doing so, the defense ignored the precedent set by Rachel v. Walker. In his rebuttal, Hall stated that the fact that they were military posts did not matter, and pointed out that Dr. Emerson had left Scott behind at Fort Snelling, hired out to others, after being reassigned to a new post.
The jury quickly returned a verdict in favor of Dred Scott, nominally making him a free man. Judge Hamilton declared Harriet, Eliza and Lizzie Scott to be free as well. Garland moved immediately for a new trial, and was overruled. On February 13, 1850, Emerson's defense filed a bill of exceptions, which was certified by Judge Hamilton, setting into motion another appeal to the Missouri Supreme Court. Counsel for the opposing sides signed an agreement that moving forward, only Dred Scott v. Irene Emerson would be advanced, and that any decision made by the high court would apply to Harriet's suit, also. In 1849 or 1850, Irene Emerson left St. Louis and moved to Springfield, Massachusetts. Her brother, John F. A. Sanford, continued looking after her business interests when she left, and her departure had no impact on the case.
 Second state supreme court appeal 
Both parties filed briefs with the Supreme Court of Missouri on March 8, 1850. A busy docket delayed consideration of the case until the October term. By then, the issue of slavery had become politically charged, even within the judiciary. Although the Missouri Supreme Court had not yet overturned precedent in freedom suits, in the 1840s, the court's proslavery justices had explicitly stated their opposition to freeing slaves. After the court convened on October 25, 1850, the two justices who were proslavery anti-Benton Democrats – William Barclay Napton and James Harvey Birch – persuaded John Ferguson Ryland, a Benton Democrat, to join them in a unanimous decision that Dred Scott remained a slave under Missouri law. However, Judge Napton delayed writing the court's opinion for months. Then in August 1851, both Napton and Birch lost their seats in the Missouri Supreme Court, following the state's first supreme court election, with only Ryland remaining as an incumbent. The case thus needed to be considered again by the newly elected court. The reorganized Missouri Supreme Court now included two moderates – Hamilton Gamble and John Ryland – and one staunch proslavery justice, William Scott.
David N. Hall had prepared the brief for Dred Scott, but died in March 1851. Alexander P. Field continued alone as counsel for Dred Scott, and resubmitted the same briefs from 1850 for both sides. On November 29, 1851, the case was taken under consideration, on written briefs alone, and a decision was reached. However, before Judge Scott could write the court's opinion, Lyman Norris, co-counsel for Irene Emerson, obtained permission to submit a new brief he had been preparing, to replace the original one submitted by Garland.
Norris's brief has been characterized as "a sweeping denunciation of the authority of both the [Northwest] Ordinance of 1787 and the Missouri Compromise." Although he stopped short of questioning their constitutionality, Norris questioned their applicability and criticized the early Missouri Supreme Court, ridiculing former Justice George Tompkins as "the great apostle of freedom at that day." 
Reviewing the court's past decisions on freedom suits, Norris acknowledged that if Rachel v. Walker was allowed to stand, his client would lose. Norris then challenged the concept of "once free, always free", and asserted that the court under Tompkins had been wrong to rule that the Ordinance of 1787 remained in force after the ratification of the U.S. Constitution in 1788. Finally, he argued that the Missouri Compromise should be disregarded whenever it interfered with Missouri law, and that the laws of other states should not be enforced, if their enforcement would cause Missouri citizens to lose their property. In support of his argument, he cited Chief Justice Roger B. Taney's opinion in the United States Supreme Court case Strader v. Graham, which argued that the status of a slave returning from a free state must be determined by the slave state itself. According to historian Walter Ehrlich, the closing of Norris's brief was "a racist harangue that not only revealed the prejudices of its author, but also indicated how the Dred Scott case had become a vehicle for the expression of such views". Noting that Norris's proslavery "doctrines" were later incorporated into the court's final decision, Ehrlich writes (emphasis his):From this point on, the Dred Scott case clearly changed from a genuine freedom suit to the controversial political issue for which it became infamous in American history.On March 22, 1852, Judge William Scott announced the decision of the Missouri Supreme Court that Dred Scott remained a slave, and ordered the trial court's judgment to be reversed. Judge Ryland concurred, while Chief Justice Hamilton Gamble dissented. The majority opinion written by Judge Scott focused on the issue of comity or conflict of laws, and relied on states' rights rhetoric:Every State has the right of determining how far, in a spirit of comity, it will respect the laws of other States. Those laws have no intrinsic right to be enforced beyond the limits of the State for which they were enacted. The respect allowed them will depend altogether on their conformity to the policy of our institutions. No State is bound to carry into effect enactments conceived in a spirit hostile to that which pervades her own laws.Judge Scott did not deny the constitutionality of the Missouri Compromise, and acknowledged that its prohibition of slavery was "absolute", but only within the specified territory. Thus, a slave crossing the border could obtain his freedom, but only within the court of the free state. Rejecting the court's own precedent, Scott argued that Once free' did not necessarily mean 'always free. He cited the Kentucky Court of Appeals decision in Graham v. Strader, which had held that a Kentucky slaveowner who permitted a slave to go to Ohio temporarily, did not forfeit ownership of the slave. To justify overturning three decades of precedent, Judge Scott argued that circumstances had changed:Times now are not as they were when the former decisions on this subject were made. Since then not only individuals but States have been possessed with a dark and fell spirit in relation to slavery, whose gratification is sought in the pursuit of measures, whose inevitable consequence must be the overthrow and destruction of our government. Under such circumstances it does not behoove the State of Missouri to show the least countenance to any measure which might gratify this spirit. She is willing to assume her full responsibility for the existence of slavery within her limits, nor does she seek to share or divide it with others.On March 23, 1852, the day after the Missouri Supreme Court decision had been announced, Irene Emerson's lawyers filed an order in the St. Louis Circuit Court for the bonds signed by the Blow family to cover the Scotts' court costs; return of the slaves themselves; and transfer of their wages earned over four years, plus 6 percent interest. On June 29, 1852, Judge Hamilton overruled the order.
Scott v. Sanford 
The case looked hopeless, and the Blow family could no longer pay for Scott's legal costs. Scott also lost both of his lawyers when Alexander Field moved to Louisiana and David Hall died. The case was undertaken pro bono by Roswell Field, who employed Scott as a janitor. Field also discussed the case with LaBeaume, who had taken over the lease on the Scotts in 1851. After the Missouri Supreme Court decision, Judge Hamilton turned down a request by Emerson's lawyers to release the rent payments from escrow and to deliver the slaves into their owner's custody.
In 1853, Dred Scott again sued his current owner John Sanford, but this time in federal court. Sanford returned to New York and the federal courts had diversity jurisdiction under Article III, Section 2 of the U.S. Constitution. In addition to the existing complaints, Scott alleged that Sanford had assaulted his family and held them captive for six hours on January 1, 1853.
At trial in 1854, Judge Robert William Wells directed the jury to rely on Missouri law on the question of Scott's freedom. Since the Missouri Supreme Court had held that Scott remained a slave, the jury found in favor of Sanford. Scott then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, where the clerk misspelled the defendant's name, and the case was recorded as Dred Scott v. Sandford, with an ever-erroneous title. Scott was represented before the Supreme Court by Montgomery Blair and George Ticknor Curtis, whose brother Benjamin was a Supreme Court Justice. Sanford was represented by Reverdy Johnson and Henry S. Geyer.
Sanford as defendant
When the case was filed, the two sides agreed on a statement of facts that claimed Scott had been sold by Dr. Emerson to John Sanford, though this was a legal fiction. Dr. Emerson had died in 1843, and Dred Scott had filed his 1847 suit against Irene Emerson. There is no record of Dred Scott's transfer to Sanford or of his transfer back to Irene. John Sanford died shortly before Scott's manumission, and Scott was not listed in the probate records of Sanford's estate. Also, Sanford was not acting as Dr. Emerson's executor, as he was never appointed by a probate court, and the Emerson estate had been settled when the federal case was filed.
The murky circumstances of ownership led many to conclude the parties to Dred Scott v. Sandford contrived to create a test case. Mrs. Emerson's remarriage to abolitionist U.S. Representative Calvin C. Chaffee seemed suspicious to contemporaries, and Sanford was thought to be a front and to have allowed himself to be sued, despite not actually being Scott's owner. Nevertheless, Sanford had been involved in the case since 1847, before his sister married Chaffee. He had secured counsel for his sister in the state case, and he engaged the same lawyer for his own defense in the federal case. Sanford also consented to be represented by genuine pro-slavery advocates before the Supreme Court, rather than to put up a token defense.
Influence of President Buchanan
Historians discovered that after the Supreme Court heard arguments in the case but before it issued a ruling, President-elect James Buchanan wrote to his friend, Supreme Court Associate Justice John Catron, to ask whether the case would be decided by the Court before his inauguration in March 1857. Buchanan hoped that the decision would quell unrest in the country over the slavery issue by issuing a ruling to take it out of political debate. He later successfully pressured Associate Justice Robert Cooper Grier, a Northerner, to join the Southern majority in Dred Scott to prevent the appearance that the decision was made along sectional lines.  According to historian Paul Finkelman: Buchanan already knew what the Court was going to decide. In a major breach of Court etiquette, Justice Grier, who, like Buchanan, was from Pennsylvania, had kept the President-elect fully informed about the progress of the case and the internal debates within the Court. When Buchanan urged the nation to support the decision, he already knew what Taney would say. Republican suspicions of impropriety turned out to be fully justified. Paul Finkelman, "Scott v. Sandford: The Court's most dreadful case and how it changed history." Chicago-Kent Law Review 82 (2007):  pp. 3–48 at p. 46.
Biographer Jean H. Baker argues that Buchanan's use of political pressure on a member of a sitting court was regarded then, as now, to be highly improper. Republicans fueled speculation as to Buchanan's influence by publicizing that Taney had secretly informed Buchanan of the decision. Buchanan declared in his inaugural address that the slavery question would "be speedily and finally settled" by the Supreme Court.
Supreme Court decision
On March 6, 1857, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled against Dred Scott in a 7–2 decision that fills over 200 pages in the United States Reports. The decision contains opinions from all nine justices, but the "majority opinion" has always been the focus of the controversy.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|upright=.95|Chief justice Roger Taney, the author of the majority opinion in the Supreme Court's Dred Scott decision
Seven justices formed the majority and joined an opinion written by Chief Justice Roger Taney. Taney began the Court's opinion with what he saw as the core issue in the case: whether or not black people could possess federal citizenship under the U.S. Constitution.
In answer, the Court ruled that they could not. It held that black people could not be American citizens, and therefore a lawsuit to which they were a party could never qualify for the "diversity of citizenship" that Article III of the Constitution requires for American federal courts to have jurisdiction over cases that do not involve federal questions.
The primary rationale for the Court's ruling was Taney's assertion that black African slaves and their descendants were never intended to be part of the American social and political landscape.
Taney then extensively reviewed laws from the original American states that involved the status of black Americans at the time of the Constitution's drafting in 1787. He concluded that these laws showed that a "perpetual and impassable barrier was intended to be erected between the white race and the one which they had reduced to slavery"., quoting Dred Scott, 60 U.S. at 409. Thus, he concluded, black people were not American citizens, and could not sue as citizens in federal courts. This meant that U.S. states lacked the power to alter the legal status of black people by granting them state citizenship.
This holding normally would have ended the decision, since it disposed of Dred Scott's case, but Taney did not conclude the matter before the Court in the normal manner. He went on to assess the constitutionality of the Missouri Compromise itself, writing that the Compromise's legal provisions intended to free slaves who were living north of the 36°N latitude line in the western territories. In the Court's judgment, this would constitute the government depriving slaveowners of their propertysince slaves were legally the property of their ownerswithout due process of law, which is forbidden under the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution. Taney also reasoned that the Constitution and the Bill of Rights implicitly precluded any possibility of constitutional rights for black African slaves and their descendants. Thus, Taney concluded:
Taney held that the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional, marking the first time since the 1803 case Marbury v. Madison that the Supreme Court had struck down a federal law, although the Missouri Compromise had already been effectively overridden by the Kansas–Nebraska Act. Taney made this argument on a narrow definition of the Property Clause of Section 3 of Article 4 of the Constitution. The Property Clause states, "The Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory or other Property belonging to the United States..." Taney made the argument that the Property Clause "applied only to the property which the States held in common at that time, and has no reference whatever to any territory or other property which the new sovereignty might afterwards itself acquire."() Taney asserted that because the Northwest Territory was not part of the United States at the time of the Constitution's ratification, Congress did not have the authority to ban slavery in the territory. According to Taney, the Missouri Compromise exceeded the scope of Congress powers and was unconstitutional, and thus Dred Scott was still a slave regardless of his time spent in the parts of the Northwest Territory that were north of 36°N, and he was still a slave under Missouri law, and the Court had to follow Missouri law in the matter. For all these reasons, the Court concluded that Scott could not bring suit in U.S. federal court.
Dissents
Justices Benjamin Robbins Curtis and John McLean were the only two dissenters from the Court's decision, and both filed dissenting opinions.
Curtis's 67-page dissent argued that the Court's conclusion that black people could not possess federal U.S. citizenship was legally and historically baseless. Curtis pointed out that at the time of the Constitution's adoption in 1789, black men could vote in five of the 13 states. Legally, that made them citizens of both their individual states and the United States federally. Curtis cited many state statutes and state court decisions supporting his position. His dissent was "extremely persuasive", and it prompted Taney to add 18 additional pages to his opinion in an attempt to rebut Curtis's arguments.
McLean's dissent deemed the argument that black people could not be citizens "more a matter of taste than of law". He attacked much of the Court's decision as obiter dicta that was not legally authoritative on the ground that once the court determined that it did not have jurisdiction to hear Scott's case, it should have simply dismissed the action, rather than passing judgment on the merits of the claims.
Curtis and McLean both attacked the Court's overturning of the Missouri Compromise on its merits. They noted that it was not necessary to decide the question and that none of the authors of the Constitution had ever objected on constitutional grounds to the Congress's adoption of the antislavery provisions of the Northwest Ordinance passed by the Continental Congress or the subsequent acts that barred slavery north of 36°30' N, or the prohibition on importing slaves from overseas passed in 1808.  Curtis said slavery was not listed in the constitution as a "natural right", but rather a creation of municipal law.  He pointed out the constitution said "The Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory or other Property belonging to the United States; and nothing in this Constitution shall be so construed as to Prejudice any Claims of the United States, or of any particular State."  Since slavery was not mentioned as an exception, he felt a prohibition of it fell within the scope of needed rules and regulations Congress was free to pass.
Reactions
The Supreme Court's decision in Dred Scott was "greeted with unmitigated wrath from every segment of the United States except the slave holding states." The American political historian Robert G. McCloskey described:
Many Republicans, including Abraham Lincoln, who was rapidly becoming the leading Republican in Illinois, regarded the decision as part of a plot to expand and eventually impose the legalization of slavery throughout all of the states. Some southern extremists wanted all states to recognize slavery as a constitutional right.  Lincoln rejected the court's majority opinion that "the right of property in a slave is distinctly and expressly affirmed in the Constitution," pointing out that the constitution did not ever mention property in reference to slaves and in fact explicitly referred to them as "persons". Southern Democrats considered Republicans to be lawless rebels who were provoking disunion by their refusal to accept the Supreme Court's decision as the law of the land. Many northern opponents of slavery offered a legal argument for refusing to recognize the Dred Scott decision on the Missouri Compromise as binding. They argued that the Court's determination that the federal courts had no jurisdiction to hear the case rendered the remainder of the decision obiter dicta—non binding passing remarks rather than an authoritative interpretation of the law. Douglas attacked that position in the Lincoln-Douglas debates:
In a speech at Springfield, Illinois, Lincoln responded that the Republican Party was not seeking to defy the Supreme Court, but he hoped they could convince it to reverse its ruling.
Democrats had refused to accept the court's interpretation of the U.S. Constitution as permanently binding. During the Andrew Jackson administration, Taney, then Attorney General, had written: 
Frederick Douglass, a prominent black abolitionist who considered the decision to be unconstitutional and Taney's reasoning contrary to the Founding Fathers' vision, predicted that political conflict could not be avoided:
According to Jefferson Davis, then a U.S. Senator from Mississippi, and future President of the Confederate States of America, the case merely "presented the question whether Cuffee [a derogatory term for a black person] should be kept in his normal condition or not . . . [and] whether the Congress of the United States could decide what might or might not be property in a Territory–the case being that of an officer of the army sent into a Territory to perform his public duty, having taken with him his negro slave".Address to the United States Senate on May 7, 1860, reprinted as Appendix F to Davis, Rise and Fall of the Confederate Government (1880).
Impact on both parties
Irene Emerson moved to Massachusetts in 1850 and married Calvin C. Chaffee, a doctor and abolitionist who was elected to Congress on the Know Nothing and Republican tickets. Following the Supreme Court ruling, pro-slavery newspapers attacked Chaffee as a hypocrite. Chaffee protested that Dred Scott belonged to his brother-in-law and that he had nothing to do with Scott's enslavement. Nevertheless, the Chaffees executed a deed transferring the Scott family to Henry Taylor Blow, the son of Scott's former owner, Peter Blow. Chaffee’s lawyer suggested the transfer as the most convenient way of freeing Scott since Missouri law required manumitters to appear in person before the court.
Taylor Blow filed the manumission papers with Judge Hamilton on May 26, 1857. The emancipation of Dred Scott and his family was national news and was celebrated in northern cities. Scott worked as a porter in a hotel in St. Louis, where he was a minor celebrity. His wife took in laundry. Dred Scott died of tuberculosis on November 7, 1858. Harriet died on June 17, 1876.
Aftermath
Economic
Economist Charles Calomiris and historian Larry Schweikart discovered that uncertainty about whether the entire West would suddenly become slave territory or engulfed in combat like
"Bleeding Kansas" gripped the markets immediately. The east–west railroads collapsed immediately (although north–south lines were unaffected), causing, in turn, the near-collapse of several large banks and the runs that ensued. What followed the runs has been called the Panic of 1857.
The Panic of 1857, unlike the Panic of 1837, almost exclusively impacted the North, a fact that Calomiris and Schweikart attribute to the South's system of branch banking, as opposed to the North's system of unit banking.  In the South's branch banking system, information moved reliably among the branch banks and transmission of the panic was minor.  Northern unit banks, in contrast, were competitors and seldom shared such vital information.Charles Calomiris and Larry Schweikart, "The Panic of 1857: Origins, Transmission, Containment", Journal of Economic History, LI, December 1990, pp. 807–34.
Political
Southerners, who had grown uncomfortable with the Kansas-Nebraska Act, argued that they had a constitutional right to bring slaves into the territories, regardless of any decision by a territorial legislature on the subject. The Dred Scott decision seemed to endorse that view.
Although Taney believed that the decision represented a compromise that would be a final settlement of the slavery question by transforming a contested political issue into a matter of settled law, the decision produced the opposite result. It strengthened Northern opposition to slavery, divided the Democratic Party on sectional lines, encouraged secessionist elements among Southern supporters of slavery to make bolder demands, and strengthened the Republican Party.
In 1860, the Republican Party explicitly rejected the Dred Scott verdict in their official platform, stating "the new dogma that the Constitution, of its own force, carries slavery into any or all of the territories of the United States, is a dangerous political heresy, at variance with the explicit provisions of that instrument itself, with contemporaneous exposition, and with legislative and judicial precedent; is revolutionary in its tendency, and subversive of the peace and harmony of the country."
Later references
In 1859, when defending John Anthony Copeland and Shields Green from the charge of treason, following their participation in John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry, their attorney, George Sennott, cited the Dred Scott decision in arguing successfully that since they were not citizens according to that Supreme Court ruling, they could not commit treason. The charge of treason was dropped, but they were found guilty and executed on other charges.
Justice John Marshall Harlan was the lone dissenting vote in Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), which declared racial segregation constitutional and created the concept of "separate but equal". In his dissent, Harlan wrote that the majority's opinion would "prove to be quite as pernicious as the decision made by this tribunal in the Dred Scott case".Fehrenbacher, p. 580.
Charles Evans Hughes, writing in 1927 on the Supreme Court's history, described Dred Scott v. Sandford as a "self-inflicted wound" from which the court would not recover for many years.
In a memo to Justice Robert H. Jackson in 1952, for whom he was clerking, on the subject of Brown v. Board of Education, the future Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote that "Scott v. Sandford was the result of Taney's effort to protect slaveholders from legislative interference."Rehnquist, William. "A Random Thought on the Segregation Cases" 
Justice Antonin Scalia made the comparison between Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992) and Dred Scott in an effort to see Roe v. Wade overturned:
Dred Scott ... rested upon the concept of "substantive due process" that the Court praises and employs today. Indeed, Dred Scott was very possibly the first application of substantive due process in the Supreme Court, the original precedent for... Roe v. Wade.Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833 (1992). FindLaw.
Scalia noted that the Dred Scott decision had been written and championed by Taney and left the justice's reputation irrevocably tarnished. Taney, who was attempting to end the disruptive question of the future of slavery, wrote a decision that "inflamed the national debate over slavery and deepened the divide that led ultimately to the American Civil War".
Chief Justice John Roberts compared Obergefell v. Hodges (2015) to Dred Scott, as another example of trying to settle a contentious issue through a ruling that went beyond the scope of the Constitution.Obergefell v. Hodges, 576 U.S. 644 (2015).
Legacy
 1977: The Scotts' great-grandson John A. Madison, Jr., an attorney, gave the invocation at the ceremony at the Old Courthouse in St. Louis, a National Historic Landmark, for the dedication of a National Historic Marker commemorating the Scotts' case tried there.
 2000: Harriet and Dred Scott's petition papers in their freedom suit were displayed at the main branch of the St. Louis Public Library, following the discovery of more than 300 freedom suits in the archives of the U.S. circuit court.Arenson (2010), p. 38
 2006: A new historic plaque was erected at the Old Courthouse to honor the active roles of both Dred and Harriet Scott in their freedom suit and the case's significance in U.S. history.Arenson (2010), p. 39
 2012: A monument depicting Dred and Harriet Scott was erected at the Old Courthouse's east entrance facing the St. Louis Gateway Arch.
See also
 Anticanon
 American slave court cases
 Origins of the American Civil War
 Timeline of the civil rights movement
Notes
References
Citations
Works cited
Further reading
 Allen, Austin. Origins of the Dred Scott Case: Jacksonian Jurisprudence and the Supreme Court 1837-1857. Athens, Georgia: University of Georgia Press, 2006.
 Dennis-Jonathan Mann & Kai P. Purnhagen: The Nature of Union Citizenship between Autonomy and Dependency on (Member) State Citizenship – A Comparative Analysis of the Rottmann Ruling, or: How to Avoid a European Dred Scott Decision?, in: 29:3 Wisconsin International Law Journal (WILJ), (Fall 2011), pp. 484–533 (PDF).
 Fehrenbacher, Don E., The Dred Scott Case: Its Significance in American Law and Politics. New York:  Oxford (1978) [winner of Pulitzer Prize for History].
 Fehrenbacher, Don E. Slavery, Law, and Politics: The Dred Scott Case in Historical Perspective (1981) [abridged version of The Dred Scott Case].
 Finkelman, Paul. Supreme Injustice: Slavery in the Nation's Highest Court. Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England: Harvard University Press, 2018. Review
 Konig, David Thomas, Paul Finkelman, and Christopher Alan Bracey, eds. The Dred Scott Case: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives on Race and Law (Ohio University Press; 2010) 272 pages; essays by scholars on the history of the case and its afterlife in American law and society.
 Potter, David M. The Impending Crisis, 1848–1861 (1976) pp. 267–96.
 VanderVelde, Lea.  Mrs. Dred Scott: A Life on Slavery's Frontier (Oxford University Press, 2009) 480 pp.
 Listen to: American Pendulum II – 🔊 Listen Now: American Pendulum II
 External links 
 Primary documents and bibliography about the Dred Scott case, from the Library of Congress
 "Dred Scott decision", Encyclopædia Britannica 2006. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 17 December 2006. www.yowebsite.com
 Gregory J. Wallance, "Dred Scott Decision: The Lawsuit That Started The Civil War", History.net, originally in Civil War Times Magazine, March/April 2006
 Jefferson National Expansion Memorial, National Park Service
 Infography about the Dred Scott Case
 The Dred Scott Case Collection, Washington University in St. Louis
 Report of the Brown University Steering Committee on Slavery and Justice
 Dred Scott case articles from William Lloyd Garrison's abolitionist newspaper The Liberator
 "Supreme Court Landmark Case Dred Scott v. Sandford" from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
 Report of the Decision of the Supreme Court of the United States and the Opinions of the Judges Thereof, in the Case of Dred Scott Versus John F.A. Sandford. December Term, 1856 via Google Books
Category:1857 in United States case law
Category:Abrogated United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:Freedom suits in the United States
Category:History of St. Louis
Category:Pre-emancipation African-American history
Category:Presidency of James Buchanan
Category:United States slavery case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:Missouri in the American Civil War
Category:Origins of the American Civil War
Category:Legal history of Missouri
Category:Race-related case law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States nationality law
"""

From "Drennen v. London Assurance Co." ==> """
Drennen v. London Assurance Co., 113 U.S. 51 (1885), was a fire insurance case regarding two policies of fire insurance, issued March 10, 1883, by the London Assurance Corporation, of London for the property of the firm of Drennen, Starr & Everett, a business in the city of Minneapolis, Minnesota. The loss occurred on July 29, 1883..  
At the ensuing trial, the amount was not disputed, but since each policy contained a provision that it should be void if the property insured "be sold or transferred, or any change takes place in title or possession, (except by succession by reason of the death of the insured,) whether by legal process, or judicial decree, or voluntary transfer or conveyance," all interest or liability on the part of the issuer would immediately terminate.' 
The defendant disputed its liability on the ground that Drennen, Starr & Everett, on May 24, 1883, before the loss, admitted one Arndt as a partner in their firm, and that thereby, without its knowledge or consent, and by the voluntary act of the plaintiffs, the title, interest, and possession of the insured in the property was changed, and the policies became void. 
The plaintiffs denied that Arndt became a member of their firm, and substantial proof was given that Arndt resided in Sandusky, Ohio. He visited Minneapolis in May 1883, and first became acquainted with plaintiffs Drennen and Starr on or about May 20. Negotiations then commenced with Drennen and Starr, who acted for their firm.
In the court's judgment of the agreement as a whole, the parties did not contemplate or establish a partnership. The agreement was for a corporation with all the payments and other specified items for preparation for its formation and no change in the title or possession of the property. This was sufficient to dispose of the case, reversing the decision and setting a new trial.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Property insurance
Category:Building and structure fires in the United States
"""

From "Drope v. Missouri" ==> """
Drope v. Missouri, 420 U.S. 162 (1975), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held a Missouri trial court deprived a defendant of due process by failing to order a competency examination after he was hospitalized following an attempted suicide and as a result missed a portion of his trial for a capital offense.
Circumstances
After Drope was indicted in 1969 for the rape of his wife, he filed a motion for a continuance requesting psychiatric evaluation and treatment. Attached to his motion was a psychiatric report recommending psychiatric treatment. This motion was denied and the case went to trial. Drope's wife testimony  confirmed Drope's strange behavior described in the psychiatric report. She also testified that Drope had tried to kill her  prior to trial. On day two of the trial, Drope shot himself in an attempted suicide and was hospitalized. Although he was absent in court, the trial court denied a motion for a mistrial on the grounds that his absence was voluntary and therefore the trial should continue. The jury found Drope guilty and sentenced him to life imprisonment. Drope filed a  motion for a new trial on the grounds the trial court erred in continuing the trial when no evidence was offered to support that his absence was voluntary. This motion was denied based on the finding that his absence was voluntary.. 
The Missouri Supreme Court affirmed the decision. It also held that the trial court's denial of the motion for a continuance was not an abuse of judicial discretion. Drope's  subsequent motion to vacate the conviction and sentence, alleging, among other things, that his constitutional rights had been violated both  by the court's failure to order a pretrial psychiatric evaluation  and by the trial court's continuing the trial to its completion  in his absence, was denied. 
The Missouri Court of Appeals also affirmed, holding that neither the psychiatric evaluation attached to Drope's motion for a continuance nor his wife's testimony raised  reasonable doubt as to his competence to proceed to trial. It further held that Drope's suicide attempt failed to create a reasonable doubt as to his competence and that he had not demonstrated any inadequacy in  the legal procedures protecting his rights. The court also affirmed the trial court's finding that his absence from the trial was  voluntary. 
Drope petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court on a writ of  certiorari which the court granted based on Drope's claims that he was deprived of due process of law by the failure of the trial court to order a competency examination to evaluate his competence to stand trial and also regarding the continuation in the defendant's  absence  of his trial for a capital offense.
Decision
In a unanimous decision, the Supreme Court reversed and remanded. In the decision delivered by Chief Justice Burger, four factors were considered in deciding the reversal. 
 The Missouri courts failed to give proper weight to the evidence suggesting petitioner's incompetence.
 Regardless of  the relationship between mental illness and incompetence to stand trial, in light of the evidence presented  of petitioner's behavior, including his suicide attempt, there was no opportunity  to evaluate this relationship without his presence at trial. Therefore,  the trial should have been suspended until such an evaluation could be made.
 Even if the  petitioner's right to be present at the trial is a right  that could be waived, there was an insufficient inquiry to provide a basis for deciding the merits of the  issue of such a waiver.
 The petitioner's due process rights would not be adequately protected by remanding the case for a psychiatric examination to determine whether he was, in fact, competent to stand trial in 1969. However,  the State is free to retry him if he is competent to be tried at the time of another trial.
Significance
The issue of competency to stand trial is concerned with the defendant's present level of functioning; the finding of a current mental illness is not necessarily relevant to a finding of Incompetence to Stand Trial. In the current case, the Supreme Court clearly takes the position that in weighing whether any doubt exists as to the defendant's competency, the trial court must consider any evidence suggestive of mental illness, even one factor alone in some circumstances, may be sufficient to warrant an evaluation. Therefore, the threshold for obtaining a competency evaluation is not very high. The court takes the position that when the issues is raised, regardless of who raises it, the motion should be granted. Further, the court suggests that it would be unconstitutional for a court to take the position that the defendant must bear all the burden for raising the issue. This has come to mean that in practice that rarely will a court refuse a request for a competency evaluation, if only to avoid a reversal by a higher court after a conviction on the grounds of a due process violation.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 420
Footnotes
External links
Category:Legal history of Missouri
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:Adjudicative competence case law
"""

From "Duckworth v. Eagan" ==> """
Duckworth v. Eagan, 492 U.S. 195 (1989), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with police behavior when issuing the Miranda warning. The Court's decision was seen as weakening Miranda's protections.
 Background 
After being questioned in regards to the stabbing of a woman, Gary Eagan was improperly read his Miranda Rights when police told him that he would be provided a lawyer "if and when you go to court." During the police investigation, Eagan did not make any incriminating statements, and waived his Miranda rights. The next day, Eagan was questioned again by police, and signed a waiver with the correct Miranda language. During the interrogation, Eagan confessed to the stabbing of the woman and revealed physical evidence of the crime committed.  Later, Eagan claimed that the difference between the language in the first waiver he signed, and the second waiver he signed, made his confession inadmissible in a court of law.
 Opinion of the Court 
Chief Justice Rehnquist wrote the opinion for the Court..
The Supreme Court held that it was not necessary that the warnings be given in the exact form described in the Miranda decision,. provided the warnings as a whole fully informed the suspect of his or her rights.(Chapter 5, page 141 of Criminal Investigation "Suspect's Response: Waiver And Alternatives; #4)
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
 Duckworth v. Eagan: A semantical debate or the continuing debasement of Miranda?
Category:History of law enforcement in the United States
Category:Miranda warning case law
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental Study Group" ==> """
Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental Study Group, 438 U.S. 59 (1978), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court overturned the United States District Court for the Western District of North Carolina's decision that the Price Anderson Act violated equal protection by treating victims of nuclear accidents differently from the victims of other industrial accidents..
Background
Several groups filed suit in the United States District Court for the Western District of North Carolina against the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, regarding the Price Anderson Act. The suit challenged it on two grounds; it violated the Fifth Amendment because it did not ensure adequate compensation for victims of accidents, and it violated the Fourteenth Amendment because it treated nuclear accidents differently from other accidents.
Decision
The Court found that the differential treatments of industrial victims did not constitute a violation of equal protection, based on the reasons Congress gave for liability limitations: "There is no equal protection violation, since the general rationality of the Act's liability limitation, particularly with reference to the congressional purpose of encouraging private participation in the exploitation of nuclear energy, is ample justification for the difference in treatment between those injured in nuclear accidents and those whose injuries are derived from other causes."
The court summarised the circumstances leading up to the act:
"Private industry responded to the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 with the development of an experimental power plant constructed under the auspices of a consortium of interested companies. It soon became apparent that profits from the private exploitation of atomic energy were uncertain and the accompanying risks substantial. Although the AEC offered incentives to encourage investment, there remained in the path of the private nuclear power industry various problems - the risk of potentially vast liability in the event of a nuclear accident of a sizable magnitude being the major obstacle. Notwithstanding comprehensive testing and study, the uniqueness of this form of energy production made it impossible totally to rule out the risk of a major nuclear accident resulting in extensive damage. Private industry and the AEC were confident that such a disaster would not occur, but the very uniqueness of nuclear power meant that the possibility remained, and the potential liability dwarfed the ability of the industry and private insurance companies to absorb the risk. Thus, while repeatedly stressing that the risk of a major nuclear accident was extremely remote, spokesmen for the private sector informed Congress that they would be forced to withdraw from the field if their liability were not limited by appropriate legislation."Duke Power Co., 438 U.S. at 63-64.
The court also concluded:
"...it is clear that Congress' purpose was to remove the economic impediments in order to stimulate the private development of electric energy by nuclear power while simultaneously providing the public compensation in the event of a catastrophic nuclear incident."Duke Power Co., 438 U.S. at 83.
"The record supports the need for the imposition of a statutory limit on liability to encourage private industry participation and hence bears a rational relationship to Congress' concern for stimulating private industry's involvement in the production of nuclear electric energy.Duke Power Co., 438 U.S. at 84.
the Price-Anderson Act does, in our view, provide a reasonably just substitute for the common-law or state tort law remedies it replaces.Duke Power Co., 438 U.S. at 88.
"The District Court's finding that the Act tends to encourage irresponsibility in matters of safety and environmental protection cannot withstand careful scrutiny, since nothing in the liability-limitation provision undermines or alters the rigor and integrity of the process involved in the review of applications for a license to construct or operate a nuclear power plant, and since, in the event of a nuclear accident the utility itself would probably suffer the largest damages."Duke Power Co., 438 U.S. at 87.
"We view the congressional assurance of a [then] $560 million fund for recovery, accompanied by an express statutory commitment, to 'take whatever action is deemed necessary [438 U.S. 59, 91] and appropriate to protect the public from the consequences of' a nuclear accident, 42 U.S.C. 2210(e) (1970 ed., Supp. V), to be a fair and reasonable substitute for the uncertain recovery of damages of this magnitude from a utility or component manufacturer, whose resources might well be exhausted at an early stage."Duke Power Co., 438 U.S. at 90-91.
"There is no equal protection violation, since the general rationality of the Act's liability limitation, particularly with reference to the congressional purpose of encouraging private participation in the exploitation of nuclear energy, is ample justification for the difference in treatment between those injured in nuclear accidents and those whose injuries are derived from other causes."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 438
References
External links
Category:1978 in the environment
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:Duke Energy
Category:United States energy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc." ==> """
Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc., 472 U.S. 749 (1985), was a Supreme Court case which held that a credit reporting agency could be liable in defamation if it carelessly relayed (i.e. published) false information that a business had declared bankruptcy when in fact it had not.
Facts
Dun & Bradstreet, a credit rating agency, sent a report to five subscribers indicating that Greenmoss Builders, a construction contractor, had filed a voluntary petition for bankruptcy.  The report was false and grossly misrepresented the contractor's financial health.  Thereafter, Dun & Bradstreet issued a corrective notice, but the contractor had already been harmed.
Procedural history
The contractor brought a defamation action in Vermont state court, alleging that the false report had injured its reputation and seeking damages.  After trial, the judge submitted the case to the jury without specific instructions as to the level of fault (negligence, actual malice, or strict liability) the jury was required to find before awarding damages against Dun & Bradstreet for defamation.  The jury returned a verdict against Dun & Bradstreet in the contractor's favor and awarded both compensatory and punitive damages.  Dun & Bradstreet, however, moved for a new trial, and the trial court granted the motion.  The Vermont Supreme Court reversed the grant of the motion, holding that the First Amendment allowed an award of damages against a nonmedia defendant such as Dun & Bradstreet, even without a showing of special fault.
Result
The United States Supreme Court affirmed the Vermont Supreme Court's judgment.  The court balanced the state's interest in protecting and compensating private individuals for injury to their reputation against the First Amendment right to free speech.  The court found that First Amendment interests were less controlling in matters of a purely private concern than matters which are a public interest.  The Supreme Court did not overturn Vermont state law allowing awards of presumed and punitive damages absent a showing of "actual malice".
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 472
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States defamation case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Dun & Bradstreet
"""

From "Dun v. Lumbermen's Credit Ass'n" ==> """
Dun v. Lumbermen's Credit Ass'n, 209 U.S. 20 (1908), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the existence of some copyright-infringing information in a rote reference work does not entitle the original author to seek an injunction against the printing the later article when the later article's contents demonstrate significant original work..
 References 
External links
Category:1908 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Dunaway v. New York" ==> """
Dunaway v. New York, 442 U.S. 200 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court case that held a subsequent Miranda warning is not sufficient to cure the taint of an unlawful arrest, when the unlawful arrest led to a coerced confession.
 Background 
Dunaway was picked up by Rochester police and taken to the police station for questioning in regards to an attempted robbery and homicide at a pizza parlor. The police did not have probable cause to arrest Dunaway, but had he tried to leave, they would have used force to prevent it. Dunaway was read his rights under Miranda and subsequently confessed.Dunaway v. New York, .
 Supreme Court 
Justice Brennan delivered the opinion of the Court. He stated that the police violated the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments when they arrested Dunaway without probable cause and took him to the police station for interrogation. This type of detention was determined to intrude on interests protected by the Fourth Amendment. It is therefore necessary to safeguard against illegal arrest. Proper Miranda warnings did not attenuate the misconduct of the police and the confession should have been suppressed.
 References 
External links
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal investigation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Duncan v. Kahanamoku" ==> """
Duncan v. Kahanamoku, 327 U.S. 304 (1946), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court. It is often associated with the Japanese exclusion cases (Hirabayashi v. United States, Korematsu v. United States and Ex parte Endo) because it involved wartime curtailment of fundamental civil liberties under the aegis of military authority, though in this case neither the plaintiff nor the nominal defendant were Japanese.
While Duke Kahanamoku was a military police officer during World War II, he arrested Lloyd C. Duncan, a civilian shipfitter on February 24, 1944, after Duncan's brawl with two armed Marine sentries at the yard. At the time, Hawaii was not yet a state and was administered under the Hawaiian Organic Act, which effectively instituted martial law on the island and was tightened after the attack on Pearl Harbor.
Duncan was tried and convicted by a military tribunal for assault on military or naval personnel with intent to resist or hinder them in the discharge of their duty. However, civilian courts had restarted summoning jurors and witnesses and conducting criminal trials on the island.
Duncan appealed to the Supreme Court, which ruled that his trial by military tribunal was unconstitutional.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 327
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Legal history of Hawaii
Category:1946 in United States case law
"""

From "Duncan v. Louisiana" ==> """
Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U.S. 145 (1968), was a significant United States Supreme Court decision which incorporated the Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial and applied it to the states.
Background
In October 1966, Gary Duncan, a 19-year-old African-American, was driving down a Louisiana highway when he noticed his nephew Bert Grant and cousin Bernard St. Ann with a group of four white teenagers, including Herman Landry, on the side of the road. He became concerned because his cousins had reported occurrences of "racial incidents" at the recently desegregated school. He pulled over the car, stepped out, and asked his cousins to get in the car. Landry insulted Duncan, calling him a racial slur. According to historian Matthew Van Meter, Duncan told Landry to go home, "reaching out to the boy's arm in a gesture that was both conciliatory and final." The white youths testified that Duncan slapped Landry at this point, but Duncan and his relatives denied it. Duncan was arrested and ultimately charged with simple battery. As it was punishable by no more than two years, simple battery is a misdemeanor under Louisiana law and so he was not subject to trial by jury. Duncan was convicted and received a 60-day prison sentence and a fine of $150. He appealed on the grounds that the state had violated the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments guaranteeing his right to a jury trial. The Court accepted the case, under its appellate jurisdiction from the Louisiana State Supreme Court.
Issue
Do the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments guarantee the right to jury trial in state prosecutions where sentences as long as two years may be imposed?
Majority opinion
Justice White noted that the right to a jury trial for criminal offenses is a deeply enshrined value in the British and American legal traditions. Thus, right to a jury trial in criminal cases is within the 14th Amendment and so is applicable to the states.
The question for the court was whether an offense subject to two years' imprisonment is a "serious offense." The majority noted that at the time of ratification, crimes punishable by more than six months imprisonment were typically subject to jury trial. Furthermore, both federal law and 49 states recognized that a crime carrying a sentence of over one year necessitated a jury trial. The Court found that the Louisiana law was out of sync with both the historical and current standards of the justice system and so was ruled unconstitutional.
Concurring opinions
Justice Black, concurring, argues for total incorporation, holding that all amendments in the Bill of Rights are made applicable to the states by the Fourteenth Amendment. He cites Congressional records from the ratification of the amendment to support his position. He holds that anything less than total incorporation would leave the enforcement of these rights to the whims of the judiciary.
Justice Fortas, concurring, believed that the right to jury trial is fundamental for serious offences, but it is not the court's role to dictate to the states what specific form such a jury trial should take. The states should be free to develop their own rules regarding the exercise of a jury trial and not to be held accountable to some historical or federal standard.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Harlan, dissenting, wrote that states could devise their own systems, subject to the Constitution:
The States have always borne primary responsibility for operating the machinery of criminal justice within their borders, and adapting it to their particular circumstances. In exercising this responsibility, each State is compelled to conform its procedures to the requirements of the Federal Constitution. The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment requires that those procedures be fundamentally fair in all respects. It does not, in my view, impose or encourage nationwide uniformity for its own sake; it does not command adherence to forms that happen to be old; and it does not impose on the States the rules that may be in force in the federal courts except where such rules are also found to be essential to basic fairness.
Decision
The Supreme Court ruled 7–2 in favor of Duncan by arguing that the right to a jury trial in criminal cases was fundamental and central to the American conception of justice. As such the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment requires states to honor requests for jury trials. The Court maintained the common-law exception for "petty crimes," which are defined as those punishable by a maximum of a $500 fine and six months in prison. In such cases, states are not obligated to provide jury trials.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 391
 The Duncan cases
References
External links
Category:Louisiana law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:1968 in Louisiana
"""

From "Dunlop v. Bachowski" ==> """
Dunlop v. Bachowski, 421 U.S. 560 (1975), is a unanimous decision of the Supreme Court of the United States which held that the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 gives federal courts jurisdiction to review decisions of the United States Department of Labor to proceed (or not) with prosecutions under the Act.  In this case, there was a disputed election within the United Steelworkers. The Court declined to authorize a jury-type trial into the reasons for the department's decisions, and instead held that court may only review the department's rationales under the "arbitrary and capricious" test.Beerman, Jack M. Administrative Law. New York, N.Y.: Aspen Publishers, 2006, p. 37.
 References 
 External links 
 Oyez: Dunlop v Bachowaski 421 US 560 (1975)
 Justia: Dunlop v Bachowaski 421 US 560 91975)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:United Steelworkers litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States labor case law
"""

From "Dunn v. Louisiana" ==> """
redirectWilliams v. Florida#Subsequent developments
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1970 in United States case law
"""

From "Dunn v. Ray" ==> """
Dunn v. Ray, 586 U.S. ___ (2019), was a February 2019 United States Supreme Court case related to religious freedom. The case attracted media attention in early February 2019. Defendant Domineque Hakim Marcelle Ray (May 31, 1976 – February 7, 2019), an Alabama death row inmate scheduled for execution on February 7, 2019, argued that he had the right to have a Muslim imam present in the execution chamber, instead of the Christian chaplain mandated by Alabama's execution protocol. Ray received a stay from the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals the day before his execution, but Alabama moved for the Supreme Court to vacate the stay of execution. The Supreme Court vacated the stay and Ray was executed on his scheduled date. He was one of 22 people executed in the United States in 2019.
The ruling was criticized by many commentators.
Background
Ray had been sentenced to death for the rape and murder of a 15-year-old girl, and had been given a life sentence for the murders of two brothers.
The State's claim was that in February 1994, Ray and an accomplice, Marcus Owden, shot and killed brothers Reinhard and Ernest Mabins, after they refused to join a gang they were attempting to organize. The State claimed that on July 15, 1995, Ray and Owden kidnapped 15-year-old Tiffany Harville from her home in Selma, Alabama. Ray raped and murdered her and cut her throat with a knife according to Owden's trial testimony. Harville's body was found abandoned in a field in Dallas County a month after she disappeared.
Owden testified against Ray and he was convicted in 1999. Owden was sentenced to life in prison, while Ray received a death sentence, when jurors voted 11–1 to recommend the death penalty.
Following his arrest in 1997, Ray initially gave statements to police in which he implicated himself in the Mabins and Harville murders. Ray later denied that he had participated in either crime and claimed his police statements were fabrications.  No physical evidence connected Ray to the crimes.  In his final post-conviction appeal, Ray attempted to call attention to the fact that Marcus Owden, Ray's co-defendant and the prosecution's primary witness, suffered from schizophrenia, hallucinations and other mental health problems, and that the State was aware of Owden's mental health problems at the time of Ray's trial but failed to disclose Owden's diagnoses to Ray's attorneys as required by Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963).  The fact that the Alabama Department of Corrections had been medicating Owden for years for his mental health problems was not revealed until many years after Ray's trial.  Ray argued, supported by experts in the fields of psychology and psychiatry, that had it been revealed at trial that Owden was seriously mentally ill at the time he testified against Ray, the jury might have had doubts about Owden's veracity and reliability and might not have convicted Ray, or at least might not have recommended the death sentence.  The Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals and the Alabama Supreme Court refused to consider Ray's final post-conviction appeal.  
Supreme Court decision
The U.S. Supreme Court also refused to consider Ray's final appeal.  
Subsequent decisions
On March 28, 2019, less than two months after Ray's execution, the Supreme Court stayed the execution of Patrick Murphy in Texas over concerns that not allowing him to have a Buddhist spiritual advisor instead of the Christian chaplain or Muslim imams, only two religions' spiritual advisors permitted by Texas to be present in the execution chamber, would violate his Constitutional rights. The ruling on Murphy renewed attention to Ray's case due to the similarity and proximity of the cases. and the lack of explanation from justices Alito, Kavanaugh and Roberts for their latest positions.
In June 2020, after Texas changed its policy to prohibit the presence of all spiritual advisors in execution chambers, the Supreme Court also stayed the execution of Ruben Gutierrez, a Catholic convicted murderer, and ordered consideration of his request to have a spiritual advisor present in the execution chamber at the time of his execution.
In February 2021, the Supreme Court again ruled that excluding spiritual counselors from the execution chamber was not allowed, by intervening in the execution of Willie B. Smith III, a murderer in Alabama. Writing for the court, Justice Elena Kagan said "Alabama has not carried its burden of showing that the exclusion of all clergy members from the execution chamber is necessary to ensure prison security. So the State cannot now execute Smith without his pastor present, to ease what Smith calls the 'transition between the worlds of the living and the dead'."
Similar issues arose again in September 2021 when the Supreme Court stayed the execution of John Henry Ramirez, who requested to have a minister of his choice present and allowed to lay hands on his body and audibly pray during his execution in Texas. In March 2022, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of Ramirez's request.
See also
 Bucklew v. Precythe
 List of people executed in Alabama
 List of people executed in the United States in 2019
References
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Islam-related controversies in North America
Category:February 2019 events in the United States
Category:Capital punishment in Alabama
Category:United States death penalty case law
"""

From "Duplex Printing Press Co. v. Deering" ==> """
Duplex Printing Press Co. v. Deering, 254 U.S. 443 (1921), is a United States Supreme Court case which examined the labor provisions of the Clayton Antitrust Act and reaffirmed the prior ruling in Loewe v. Lawlor that a secondary boycott was an illegal restraint on trade. The decision authorized courts to issue injunctions to block this practice, and any other tactics used by labor unions that were deemed unlawful restraints on trade. 
Background
In response to growing public pressure to control the unprecedented concentrations of economic power that developed after the American Civil War, Congress enacted the Sherman Antitrust Act (1890). It proscribed "unlawful restraints and monopolies" in interstate commerce as well as conspiracies to erect them. Soon thereafter federal judges began to employ the measure to combat efforts to unionize workers and to deny labor its traditional self-help weapons. To counteract this "government by injunction," the United States Congress included in the Clayton Act (1914) provisions that sought to preclude application of antitrust legislation against organized labor.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court reached the issue in Deering, a six-judge majority holding that the Clayton Act did not insulate labor unions engaged in illegal activities, such as the conduct of a secondary boycott. Justice Mahlon Pitney asserted that the machinist union's coercive action constituted an unlawful conspiracy to "obstruct and destroy" (p. 460) the interstate trade of complainant, a company with which they were not "proximately or substantially concerned" (p. 472).
Dissent
Writing for the three dissenters, Justice Louis D. Brandeis charged the majority with ignoring law and reality: the injunction imposed by the Court deprived labor of forms of a collective action Congress had tried "expressly" to legalize (p. 486).
Subsequent history
For more than a decade, the majority's narrow interpretation of the nation's antitrust legislation sanctioned judicial application of injunctions against workers seeking to organize to advance their interests. With the dramatic transformation of opinion brought about by the Great Depression, Congress included in the Norris‐LaGuardia Act (1932) provisions to exempt organized labor from antitrust injunctions, and the Supreme Court legitimated this fundamental New Deal legislation.
See also
 Machinists v. Street
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 254
References
External links
Category:1921 in United States case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Boycotts
Category:International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Dura Pharmaceuticals, Inc. v. Broudo" ==> """
Dura Pharmaceuticals, Inc. v. Broudo, 544 U.S. 336 (2005), is a securities fraud decision by the Supreme Court of the United States, holding that an inflated purchase price will not by itself constitute or proximately cause the relevant economic loss needed to allege and prove "loss causation."
Background
Facts
Respondents are individuals who bought stock in Dura Pharmaceuticals, on the public securities market between April 15, 1997, and February 24, 1998.
Procedural history
The District Court dismissed the complaint. In respect to the plaintiffs' drug-profitability claim, it held that the complaint failed adequately to allege an appropriate state of mind, i.e., that defendants had acted knowingly, or
the like. In respect to the plaintiffs' spray device claim, it held that the complaint failed adequately to allege "loss causation."
The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed. In the portion of the court's decision now before us--the portion that concerns the spray device claim--the Circuit held that the complaint adequately alleged "loss causation." The Circuit wrote that "plaintiffs establish loss causation if they have shown that the price on the date of purchase was inflated because of the misrepresentation." 339 F. 3d, at 938 (emphasis in original; internal quotation marks omitted). It added that "the injury occurs at the time of the transaction." Ibid. Since the complaint pleaded "that the price at the time of purchase was overstated," and it sufficiently identified the cause, its allegations were legally sufficient. Ibid.
Because the Ninth Circuit's views about loss causation differ from those of other Circuits that have considered this issue, we granted Dura's petition for certiorari.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States securities case law
"""

From "Duren v. Missouri" ==> """
Duren v. Missouri, 439 U.S. 357 (1979), was a United States Supreme Court case related to the Sixth Amendment. It challenged Missouri's law allowing gender-based exemption from jury service.
Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who later became a Supreme Court Justice, and Lee Nation argued for Duren in what became Ginsburg's last case before the Supreme Court as an attorney. Part of her argument was that making jury duty optional for women should be struck down because it treated women's service on juries as less valuable than men's, and also discriminated against men who enjoyed no such exemption.
 Background 
Duren was indicted in 1975 for first-degree murder and first-degree robbery. In a pretrial motion to quash his jury panel, and again in a post-conviction motion for a new trial, he claimed that his right to trial by a jury chosen from a fair cross section of his community was denied by provisions of Missouri law granting women who so request an automatic exemption from jury service. He claimed that this Missouri law violated his sixth amendment rights to an impartial jury.
 Issues 
Missouri state law at that time permitted women (and those over age 65) to be exempted from jury duty upon request.at pages 361–362 Furthermore, women who failed to show up for jury duty were automatically exempted.footnote 14 on page 362 noted that the practice of allowing women to simply not show up was itself not authorized by any law or regulation, and that if men failed to show up for jury duty, they could be subjected to penalties for contempt of court In Taylor v. Louisiana, the Supreme Court held that systematic exclusion of women from the jury pool resulted in jury pools that were not representative of the general population.
 Decision 
The conviction was overturned and remanded back to trial court. Five other cases before the Supreme Court were also decided in the same way: Harlin v. Missouri, (439 U.S. 459), Lee v. Missouri, (439 U.S. 461), Arrington v. Missouri, Burnfin v. Missouri, Combs v. Missouri and Minor v. Missouri. The decision was held to be retroactive.
 References 
External links
Category:United States equal protection and criminal procedure case law
Category:United States jury case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1979 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Missouri
"""

From "Durham v. United States (1971)" ==> """
Durham v. United States, 401 U.S. 481 (1971), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the death of a defendant pending a petition for certiorari before the Supreme Court on direct review of the criminal conviction will cause the Court to vacate the conviction. In a per curiam opinion, the Court wrote that "[t]he unanimity of the lower federal courts" in vacating criminal convictions when the defendant dies during direct review was "impressive" and accordingly vacated the original conviction.Durham v. United States, .
In a one-sentence dissent, Justice Marshall, joined by Chief Justice Burger and Justice Stewart, wrote that the Court should dismiss only the petition for writ of certiorari rather than the entire conviction, writing:
MR. JUSTICE MARSHALL, whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and MR. JUSTICE STEWART join, believes that the case should be disposed of as follows:  The petitioner having died while his petition for certiorari was pending before this Court, we dismiss the petition as moot and direct the Court of Appeals to note this action on its records.Durham v. United States,  (Marshall, J., dissenting).
Justice Blackmun wrote a separate dissenting opinion, noting that the petitioner had filed his petition out of time and that the Court should not dismiss a criminal conviction "which was unsuccessfully appealed throughout the entire appeal process to which the petitioner was entitled as of right".Durham v. United States,  (Blackmun, J., dissenting).
The Court's decision in this case and other abatement cases has been criticized for allowing convicted criminal defendants to escape the collateral consequences of their convictions, including restitution orders.
The Court's decision in Durham was later overruled in Dove v. United States. ("To the extent that Durham v. United States, 401 U.S. 481 (1971), may be inconsistent with this ruling, Durham is overruled.").
References
External links
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Duro v. Reina" ==> """
Duro v. Reina, 495 U.S. 676 (1990), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court concluded that Indian tribes could not prosecute Indians who were members of other tribes for crimes committed by those nonmember Indians on their reservations. The decision was not well received by the tribes, because it defanged their criminal codes by depriving them of the power to enforce them against anyone except their own members. In response, Congress amended a section of the Indian Civil Rights Act, , to include the power to "exercise criminal jurisdiction over all Indians" as one of the powers of self-government.
 Background 
left|thumb|alt=Map of Maricopa County showing Salt River Indian Reservation in red|Map of Maricopa County showing Salt River Indian Reservation in red
 Reservation 
The Salt River Indian Reservation, located to the east of Scottsdale, Arizona, is home to the Salt River Pima Maricopa Indian Community.  The reservation was established in 1879 by executive order to recognize the occupation of the land by Pima and Maricopa Indians.,   33 (1999); 3  806-07 (Charles J. Kappler ed. 1904).  The Indians moved from the Gila River Indian Reservation due to white settlers upstream diverting water from the Gila River to the point that the Indians could no longer farm there. at 33; Report in the Matter of the Investigation of the Salt and Gila Rivers: Reservations and Reclamation Service, Before the H. Comm. on the Interior, 62d Cong. 4 (1913).  Although the Indians had complained at the Gila River reservation, nothing was done to stop the theft of their water, where at the Salt River, the tribes were upstream of the settlers and did not have the same problem.H. Comm. on the Interior Report at 4-5.  In 1926, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) created a Pima Advisory Council and in 1934 the two tribes adopted a constitution for the reservation.,  61-63 (2000). The current constitution dates from 1940. at 61-63.
 Facts 
Albert Duro was not a member of the Salt River Pima Maricopa Indian Community. He was from California and was a member of the Torres-Martinez Desert Cahuilla Indians;,  108 (2009). thus, he was not eligible for membership in the Salt River Pima Maricopa Indian Community, and could not vote in tribal elections, hold tribal office, or serve on tribal juries.
Duro lived on the Salt River Indian Reservation at 108. with a "woman friend" and worked for the tribe's construction company, PiCopa Construction. In 1984, he was accused of killing a 14-year-old boy inside the boundaries of the reservation. Initially, Duro was charged with murder and aiding and abetting murder in federal court, but the prosecution dismissed those charges without prejudice. Duro was handed over to Salt River tribal authorities, who charged Duro with illegally firing a weapon because under federal law, Indian tribes are limited to prosecuting misdemeanor crimes. The tribal courts denied Duro's motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction, and then Duro filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in the United States District Court for the District of Arizona.
The district court granted the writ and ordered Duro released. Under Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe, , the tribal court had no jurisdiction over non-Indians. If the district court were to find that the tribal court had jurisdiction over Indians who were not members of the tribe, it reasoned that would violate the equal protection guarantee of freedom from discrimination based on race. The Ninth Circuit reversed. It read the Supreme Court's decision in United States v. Wheeler, , which stated that tribal courts do not have jurisdiction over nonmembers, as supported by an "equivocal" history, and concluded that federal statutory law allowed tribal jurisdiction over all Indians, not simply members. Finally, it concluded that holding that tribes lacked criminal jurisdiction over nonmembers would create a "jurisdictional void," since only the state might have the power to prosecute the nonmember, and the state may lack the power or resources to do so. The U.S. Supreme Court agreed to review the Ninth Circuit's decision.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion by Justice Kennedy, the Court described this case as falling at the "intersection" of its prior decisions in Oliphant and Wheeler. In Oliphant, the Court held that the inherent sovereignty of Indian tribes did not allow them to have criminal jurisdiction over non-Indians who commit crimes on the reservation. And in Wheeler, the Court held that tribes retain their jurisdiction to prosecute their members for crimes committed on the reservation. The question this case posed was whether "the sovereignty retained by the tribes in their dependent status within our scheme of government includes the power of criminal jurisdiction over nonmembers." The Court reasoned that the decisions in Oliphant and Wheeler compelled a negative answer to this question.
The sovereignty retained by the Indian tribes is "of a unique and limited character." A fully sovereign government would have the power to prosecute all crimes that take place within its territorial boundaries, but the Indian tribes are no longer sovereign in that sense. The sovereignty retained by the tribes to prosecute their own members stems from their power to govern themselves in order to maintain "their own unique customs and social order." When the tribes were relegated to dependents of the federal government, they did not lose this inherent power. Rather, the tribes were divested only of the power to regulate relations between themselves and nonmembers.
The distinction between members and nonmembers is the critical distinction in this case, not the distinction between Indian and non-Indians. Thus, states may not impose taxes on transactions between members that take place on reservations, because this would interfere with the sovereignty of tribes vis-à-vis their own members. Tribes also retain the power to regulate hunting on lands they own or lands held in trust for them by the United States, but not on lands held in fee. And although other decisions of the Court had recognized broader retained powers in the civil context, criminal powers of Indian tribes were strictly limited to members because "the exercise of criminal jurisdiction subjects a person not only to the adjudicatory power of the tribunal, but also to the prosecuting power of the tribe, and involves a far more direct intrusion on personal liberties." Thus, Indian tribes may only prosecute members for crimes committed on their reservations. Because Duro was not a member of the Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community, that tribe did not have the power to prosecute him for the crime of illegally firing a weapon.
The tribes argued that, historically, tribes had jurisdiction over all Indians regardless of membership. For example, federal statutes used the word "Indian" without regard to membership, to refer to the "family of Indians." Courts of "Indian offenses," established by the Department of the Interior for tribes without their own functioning court systems, historically exercised jurisdiction over all Indians without regard to membership, and continue to do so. But the Court responded that federal statutes had always referred to federal programs, and never to the power of tribes with respect to individual Indians. "The historical record prior to the creation of modern tribal courts shows little federal attention to the individual tribes' powers as between themselves or over one another's members. Scholars who do find treaties or other sources illuminating have only divided in their conclusions." After the federal government allowed the tribes to "express [their] retained tribal sovereignty" by creating their own tribal courts, the Secretary of the Interior still had to approve the legal codes the tribes created before the courts of Indian offenses would yield to the tribes own courts. Written opinions of the Solicitor General of the Department of the Interior consistently affirmed the power of the tribes over their own members, but went no further. In light of the historical record, the Court was not "persuaded that external criminal jurisdiction is an accepted part of the courts' function."
The Court could not ignore the fact that Duro was also a citizen of the United States, entitled to all the privileges and immunities that attach to that status. One right a citizen of the United States enjoys is the right to due process of law, which protects them from "unwarranted intrusions on their personal liberty. Criminal trial and punishment is so serious and intrusion on personal liberty that its exercise over non-Indian citizens was a power necessarily surrendered by the tribes in their submission to the overriding sovereignty of the United States." Tribal courts do not necessarily afford defendants the full range of protections afforded defendants in federal courts by the Bill of Rights. Because tribal members may participate in tribal governance, the Court approves of tribal members being subject to the criminal jurisdiction of their own tribes. Because nonmembers do not participate in tribal governance, the Court felt it was too great an intrusion to allow tribes to prosecute nonmembers.
Finally, the Court rejected the argument that not allowing tribes to prosecute nonmembers, those nonmembers would escape prosecution altogether for criminal activity engaged in within tribal boundaries. The federal government retains the power to prosecute felonies that take place on reservations. Tribes retain the power to expel undesirable persons. Tribal authorities may still arrest the nonmember and detain him until he can be handed over to authorities who do have the power to prosecute the nonmember. The tribe pointed out that state authorities can lack the power to prosecute crimes committed by nonmembers on reservations; Arizona, for instance, expressly disclaims this prosecutorial authority. But Congress has allowed states to assume this power, and Arizona is free to take up Congress's invitation. Finally, if the tribes still believed that there remained a "jurisdictional void," despite these options, they could persuade Congress to give it to them.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Brennan disagreed that the Court's holding did not create a jurisdictional void. "The existence of a jurisdictional gap is not an independent justification for finding tribal jurisdiction, but rather is relevant to determining congressional intent. The unlikelihood that Congress intended to create a jurisdictional void in which no sovereign has the power to prosecute an entire class of crimes should inform our understanding of the assumptions about tribal power upon which Congress legislated." Accordingly, Justice Brennan believed the Court should have read the historical evidence in such a way that supported Congress's intent to allow Indian tribes to exert jurisdiction over nonmembers. Furthermore, Justice Brennan did not accept the Court's argument that the fact that nonmembers were citizens of the United States counseled against allowing tribes to exert jurisdiction over nonmembers. If that was true, he said, it would also be true that tribes could not exert jurisdiction over their own members either. Nor had the Court ever held that participation in the political process was a prerequisite to exercising criminal jurisdiction over a citizen. If this were true, then states could never prosecute nonresidents or aliens.
Aftermath
Congress quickly addressed the jurisdictional gap that emerged from the Court's ruling by amending the Indian Civil Rights Act in 1990 as part of the Department of Defense Appropriations Act of 1991, which was signed into law on November 5, 1990.Pub. L. 101-511 § 8077(b)Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968, Apr. 11, 1968,  (codified as amended at ). Nearly fourteen years later, the Supreme Court ruled on the constitutionality of this amendment to 25 U.S.C. § 1301(2) in United States v. Lara (2004), upholding the amendment to the Indian Civil Rights Act and effectively overturning Duro v. Reina.
See also
 Tribal sovereignty in the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 495
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 References 
External links
  Commentary from the National Conference of State Legislatures
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Native American criminal jurisdiction case law
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Native American history of Arizona
"""

From "Dusky v. United States" ==> """
Dusky v. United States, 362 U.S. 402 (1960), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case in which the Court affirmed a defendant's right to have a competency evaluation before proceeding to trial..  The Court outlined the basic standards for determining competency.
Background
Milton Dusky, a 33-year-old man, was charged with assisting in the kidnapping and rape of an underage female. He clearly had schizophrenia but was found competent to stand trial and received a sentence of 45 years. 
On petition of writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court, the petitioner requested for his conviction to be reversed on the grounds that he was not competent to stand trial at the time of the proceeding.
Decision
Upon reviewing the evidence, the court decided to grant the writ of certiorari. The court ruled that to be competent to stand trial the defendant must have a "sufficient present ability to consult with his lawyer with a reasonable degree of rational understanding" and a "rational as well as factual understanding of the proceedings against him." The court made clear that a brief mental status exam was insufficient. His case was remanded for retrial, at which time his sentence was reduced to 20 years.
Significance
This case set the current standard for adjudicative competence in the United States. Although the statutes addressing competency vary from state to state in the United States, the two elements outlined in the decision are held in common:
The defendant must understand the charges against him or her
The defendant must have the ability to aid his or her attorney in his or her own defense.
Subsequently, in Godinez v. Moran (1993), the Supreme Court held that the competency standard for pleading guilty or waiving the right to counsel is the same as the competency standard for standing trial established in Dusky.. In Indiana v. Edwards (2008), however, the Supreme Court made a distinction between competence to waive counsel (CTWC), which was the subject of Godinez, and competence to represent oneself (CTRO). The majority opinion, authored by Breyer, noted, "In certain instances an individual may well be able to satisfy Dusky'''s mental competence standard, for he will be able to work with counsel at trial, yet at the same time he may be unable to carry out the basic tasks needed to present his own defense without the help of counsel." However, the court did not actually provide a CTRO standard, opting instead to leave this to legislatures and lower courts.
Felhous (2011) argues that many state statutes and the federal statute do not incorporate the rationality standard enunciated in Dusky, and that various post-Dusky court decisions had not consistently affirmed the rationality standard.Felthous, A. R. (2011). Competence to stand trial should require rational understanding. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 39(1), 19-30. http://www.jaapl.org/content/39/1/19.full
See also
List of criminal competencies
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 362Faretta v. California, 422 U.S. 806 (1975)Ford v. Wainwright, 477 U.S. 399 (1986)United States v. Binion'', 900 S.W.2d 702 (2005)
References
External links
Category:Adjudicative competence case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1960 in United States case law
Category:Forensic psychology
"""

From "Easley v. Cromartie" ==> """
Easley v. Cromartie, 532 U.S. 234 (2001), is an appeal of the United States Supreme Court case Hunt v Cromartie. The case defendant is Mike Easley, who became North Carolina governor following Jim Hunt. The court's ruling on April 18, 2001, stated that redistricting for political reasons did not violate Federal Civil Rights Law banning race-based gerrymandering. (Case No. 99-1864).
The issue facing this Supreme Court case was Constitutional validity of the Congressional Districts in North Carolina.  Specifically, the 12th district which cut through the southwestern portion of the state.  The complaint of the plaintiff and North Carolina citizens was that the drawing of the district violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Constitution as the district was drawn primarily amongst racial considerations.
The justification of the court stated that in North Carolina, race and politics are strongly correlated.  The district may be majority African American, however, Southern Blacks have strong tendencies to vote Democrat. Voter registrations were used as evidence to prove to the court that the redistricting which drew the 12th district were arguably based on political reasons. In the majority opinion, Stephen G Breyer says "the party attacking the legislatively drawn boundaries must show at the least that the legislature could have achieved its legitimate political objectives in alternative ways that are comparably consistent with traditional districting principles", and in this case, the plaintiffs were not able to make this argument compelling.
Justice O'Connor previously sided with the district courts in Hunt v Cromartie, however, this instance ruled with the North Carolina legislature, acting as the all important swing vote to overturn the previous decision 5–4.  The allegedly odd-shaped district was allowed to stand.
See also
 Shaw v. Reno, 
 Hunt v. Cromartie, 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 532
References 
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Congressional districts of North Carolina
Category:Legal history of North Carolina
Category:2001 in North Carolina
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Eastern Associated Coal Corp. v. United Mine Workers of America" ==> """
Eastern Associated Coal Corp. v. Mine Workers, 531 U.S. 57 (2000), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that public policy considerations do not require courts to refuse to enforce an arbitration award ordering an employer to reinstate an employee truck driver who twice tested positive for marijuana.. 
 Background 
Eastern Associated Coal and the United Mine Workers were parties to a collective bargaining agreement which contained provisions requiring arbitration.  One such provision, key to the case, was that in any arbitration hearing where Eastern sought to discharge an employee, Eastern had to prove "just cause" for the discharge; otherwise, the arbitrator would order the employee to be reinstated.  The arbitrator's decision in any such case was final.
James Smith, a truck driver for Eastern, was subject to random drug testing as his position was deemed "safety sensitive".  In March 1996 Smith tested positive for marijuana.  Eastern sought to discharge Smith, but the arbitrator ruled that Smith's positive drug test was not "just cause" and ordered Smith reinstated, subject to certain conditions including future drug testing.
Smith would be tested four times between April 1996 and January 1997; each time, no drugs were found.  But in July 1997 Smith again tested positive for marijuana, and again Eastern sought discharge.  Once again, however, the arbitrator ruled that Smith should be reinstated with conditions, one of which was that he was to provide a signed, undated letter of resignation, to take effect should Smith test positive within the next five years.
This time, Eastern filed suit in District Court, seeking to have the arbitrator's decision vacated on grounds that it "contravened a public policy against the operation of dangerous machinery by workers who test positive for drugs."  Although the District Court recognized the "strong regulation-based public policy" against workers in "safety sensitive" positions, it ruled that Smith's conditional reinstatement did not violate that policy, and ordered the enforcement of the arbitrator's decision.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed the District Court's decision.  The Supreme Court granted certiorari on the basis that the Circuit Courts disagreed on whether the mandatory reinstatement of employees using illegal drugs was against public policy.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 531
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United Mine Workers of America litigation
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:Cannabis in Kentucky
Category:Drug testing
"""

From "Eastern Enterprises v. Apfel" ==> """
Eastern Enterprises v. Apfel, 524 U.S. 498 (1998), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit Act (Coal Act) constituted an unconstitutional regulatory taking of property which required the Act to be invalidated..   The import of this decision is that it was made in the context of a purely economic regulation.  The plurality examines the statute and its resultant harm as an ad hoc factual inquiry based on factors delineated in Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City,. such as the economic impact of the regulation, its interference with reasonable investment backed expectations, and the character of the governmental action. The decision thereby moved beyond the traditional notions of equal protection which had been applied to economic regulation since the time of Lochner v. New York,. requiring extreme deference to Congress, and applied a regulatory takings analysis to the problem resulting in a much less deferential result.  While the plurality recognizes that this is not a traditional takings case where the government appropriates private property for public use, they also state this is the type of case where the "Armstrong Principle" of preventing the government from forcing some people alone to bear public burdens which, in all fairness and justice, should be borne by the public as a whole.. However, while the plurality seems to invalidate this particular law on takings grounds, the concurrences and the dissents warn of such an analysis as this should actually be examined under substantive due process or ex post facto theories.
Parties
 Plaintiff/Petitioner  Eastern Enterprises, former coal company that had been assessed the responsibility to fund pensions of many former employees as a function of the Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit Act of 1992
 Defendant/Respondent  Kenneth S. Apfel, Commissioner of Social Security
 Amici Curiae  BITUMINOUS COAL OPERATORS' ASSOCIATION, INC., UMWA COMBINED BENEFIT FUND AND ITS TRUSTEES, and the representatives of other extensive interests.
Background
State of law
There are actually several different legal doctrines at work in this case.  First, the case was decided under United States Supreme Court takings jurisprudence.  The plurality looked to the factors enunciated in Penn Central to determine if the enacted legislation functioned to deprive Eastern Enterprises of property without just compensation.  Since Penn Central, the factors enunciated by Justice Brennan therein have been used to determine when a regulation rises to the level of a taking thereby requiring just compensation under the Fifth Amendment.  Second, since Lochner v. New York the Court has been reluctant to find on due process grounds that economic regulation was beyond the power of Congress.  Third, the Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit Act of 1992 was passed to remedy the insolvent pension plans of the coal mining labors which had been in place since the 1950s.  Fourth, and perhaps not independent, the Court examined the ex post facto nature of the effect of the Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit Act of 1992 on Eastern.  The majority examined such under its Penn Central analysis while the concurrence and the dissents actually looked at it as a distinct basis to hold the Congressional Act unconstitutional.
Facts of case
In 1950 and 1974, the Coal Mining industry established a pension plan for its workers.  Under the plans, workers and their families believed they were to receive a pension and future healthcare.  The healthcare aspects of the plan however, were disputed and the Coal Companies did not provide the health care as expected.  As time wore on, the pensions slowly sank into depression as more and more coal operators withdrew from plan.  Eastern Enterprises was a signatory to the pension plans since 1950 until it sold off its holdings in coal operations in 1987.  In 1992 Congress passed the Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit Act of 1992 which required former Coal Operators to pay into the pension in certain situations when the former employee had worked for the company.  Such requirement was in place even when the operator no longer was in the Coal Industry.  Here, Eastern Enterprises was required to pay into the pension plans for some 100 past employees even though it had sold off its holdings in coal operations.
Prior history
Eastern Enterprises filed suit against the Commissioner of Social Security in the District Court of Massachusetts.  The District Court granted Summary Judgment for the Respondent and upheld the Commissioner's interpretation of the statute.  Eastern Enterprises then appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit which affirmed the lower court's holding.  The Supreme Court granted Certiorari.
Procedural posture
Eastern Enterprises seeks reversal of the order granting summary judgment.
Legal analysis
Issue
The Plurality considered the issue of (1) whether the Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit Act of 1992 as applied to Eastern Enterprises constitutes a taking for which just compensation is required
Arguments/theories
Plurality: The statute violates the Penn Central factors and is thus a compensable taking.  Specifically, Eastern Enterprises' (1) economic impact is substantial, (2) the Act interferes substantially with distinct investment backed expectations, and (3) the nature of the government action is unusual as it requires certain individuals to bear a substantial burden, and it does so retroactively.
Concurrence: The statute is unconstitutional because it is an ex post facto law that retroactively imposes liability.
Dissent: Takings jurisprudence should not be employed to decide if an economic regulation is proper.  Traditional notions of due process are to be employed in such instances requiring an examination under rational basis scrutiny.
Rule of law
The plurality ruled that the Penn Central factors applied in cases of economic regulation as a way to find a statute unconstitutional when it effects a taking of property for public use without just compensation.  (Rule is limited by the fact that this is a plurality)
Holding
The Court held that (1) the Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit Act of 1992 as applied to Eastern Enterprises constitutes an unconstitutional taking, requiring the statute to be enjoined;
Reasoning
The Plurality argued as follows: (1) The economic impact of the Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit Act of 1992 resulted was substantial as to Petitioner in that it forced Eastern Enterprises to contribute millions of dollars to a pension fund for employees is employed in the 1950s and 1960s solely because those payments could not be allocated to other Coal Companies that were currently operating in the coal industry.  The Plurality said that the retroactive effect of the statute worked a substantial economic injury on Eastern that could not have been anticipated (2) The statute interferes with distinct investment backed expectations of Eastern Enterprises for much the same reason.  In 1987 Eastern Enterprises sold off its remaining holdings in Coal operations and as such completely removed itself from the industry.  The statute's requirement that Eastern Enterprises now undertake the obligation at issue clearly interfered with expectations of Eastern when it sold off its interest in coal operations. (3) The nature of the government action was such that it retroactively applied a substantial economic burden on Eastern Enterprises and such is unusual.  The character of the government action is substantial and invasive.  The balance of the factors lead towards a finding of an unconstitutional taking requiring just compensation.
Notable concurring and dissenting opinions
 Kennedy, J., concurring.  Justice Kennedy concurs in judgment, but feels that the takings analysis employed by the Plurality is unnecessary.  Justice Kennedy explained that the retroactive nature of the law results in its unconstitutionality without having to resort to a takings analysis.  Justice Kennedy goes even further to state that the takings analysis of the Plurality is not supported by the prevailing case law as no specific property interest was taken as a function of the statute.
 Stevens, J., dissenting.  Regardless of how the statute is analyzed, the Petitioner has not met the required burden to overcome the presumption of constitutionality that accompanies a Congressional Act.
 Breyer, J., dissenting.  There is no need to torture the takings clause to fit this case.  The matter should be evaluated under the due process clause and traditional notions of fundamental fairness.  The law imposes upon Eastern the burden of showing that the statute, because of its retroactive effect, is fundamentally unfair or unjust.  Eastern has failed to show that the law unfairly upset its legitimately settled expectations.
Result
Judgment/disposition
Court of Appeals First Circuit judgment reversed and matter remanded.
Subsequent history
The holding of this case has been continually called into question.  Most recently Empress Casino Joliet Corp. v. Giannoulias, 231 Ill.2d 62, 896 N.E.2d 277, 324 Ill.Dec. 491 (Ill. Jun 05, 2008) specifically relied on Justice Breyer's interpretation and determined that in cases of economic regulation the Petitioner must overcome the presumption of Constitutionality with a showing of fundamental unfairness.  While the case has not been overruled, it is continually questioned in many State Supreme Courts and Courts of Appeal.  Currently a writ of certiorari is pending in the Empress Casino Joliet Corp. v. Giannoulias case which has not yet been decided upon.  Additionally, the Court's ruling did not provide relief to coal companies similarly situated to Eastern who had settled their constitutional claims prior to the Court's ruling rather than pursuing appellate litigation.See 
Selected articles
Michael Allen Wolf, "TAKING REGULATORY TAKINGS PERSONALLY: THE PERILS OF (MIS)REASONING BY ANALOGY," 51 Ala. L. Rev. 1355 (2000)
A coalition of corporations and individuals formerly in the coal industry and severely diminished by imposition of the so-called Reachback Tax resisted this illegal taking for over six years through a coalition. The Eastern Enterprises v. Apfel case brought some partial and desperately needed relief from the Reachback Tax to dozens of corporations, mom and pop companies and even individuals economically ravaged by the mandate to pay for healthcare benefits for individuals who had virtually no association with those being taxed or assessed the obligations of the Coal Industry Retiree Health Benefit Act of 1992. That act provided for arguably the most generous fully paid healthcare benefits in the nation, including pregnancy termination for family members of those designated as beneficiaries of the Reachback Tax. The anti-Reachback Tax Coalition toiled at local, state and national levels to effect relief. The efforts of the coalition included numerous Federal district court cases and appeals prior to the Supreme Court's landmark Eastern v. Apfel ruling. Those efforts included a series of paid media op-eds addressed to former U.S. Senator Jay Rockefeller (D-W.Va.), an original sponsor of the act and tax, which appeared on Page 3 of The Washington Post. Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue's Washington office coordinated that coalition through its long-time Congressional consultant Sam Richardson.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 524
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
External links
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:Coal mining in the United States
Category:Social Security lawsuits
Category:Retirement in the United States
Category:Health law in the United States
"""

From "Eastland v. United States Servicemen's Fund" ==> """
Eastland v. United States Servicemen's Fund, 421 U.S. 491 (1975), was a United States Supreme Court case that defined the limits of Congress's authority to issues subpoenas. In an 8–1 decision, the court found that Congress was within its constitutional authority to issue a subpoena for the banking records of the United States Servicemen's Fund.. The U.S. Constitution's Speech or Debate Clause barred the court from questioning the good faith of the committee's investigation.
Background
left|150px|James Eastland
James Eastland was a Democratic senator from Mississippi, who supported American involvement in the Vietnam War and chaired the Senate Subcommittee on Internal Security. The United States Servicemen's Fund (USSF) was a non-profit organization that was outspoken in its opposition to the war.
Eastland's committee subpoenaed the USSF's banking records.
Consequences
Eastland v. United States Servicemen's Fund was cited in court cases involving the Tax returns of Donald Trump. Trump claimed that Congress had exceeded its authority in subpoenaing the returns.
References
External links
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Eastman Kodak Co. v. Image Technical Services, Inc." ==> """
Eastman Kodak Co. v. Image Technical Servs., Inc., 504 U.S. 451 (1992), is a 1992 Supreme Court decision in which the Court held that even though an equipment manufacturer lacked significant market power in the primary market for its equipment—copier-duplicators and other imaging equipment—nonetheless, it could have sufficient market power in the secondary aftermarket for repair parts to be liable under the antitrust laws for its exclusionary conduct in the aftermarket.. The reason was that it was possible that, once customers were committed to the particular brand by having purchased a unit, they were "locked in" and no longer had any realistic alternative to turn to for repair parts.
Background
Since 1975, Kodak had followed a policy of selling patented and unpatented repair parts only to direct purchasers of its equipment. The 18 plaintiff in this case are Independent Service Organizations ("ISOs") engaged in repairing and servicing Kodak's copiers and other equipment, and in buying, reconditioning and selling used Kodak copiers and equipment. The effect of these practices is to bar sales of parts required to repair and maintain Kodak copiers and imaging equipment to the ISOs. In addition, Kodak refuses to sell maintenance service contracts on used equipment unless it is first inspected and brought up to standard by Kodak. Therefore, purchasers of used equipment from ISOs  who want to purchase a maintenance agreement for the equipment from Kodak must first submit the equipment to Kodak for inspection and any necessary repair and upgrading. Image Technical Servs., Inc. v. Eastman Kodak Co., No. C-87-1686-WWS, 1988 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 17218, at *2–3 (N.D. Cal. Apr. 15, 1988).
In addition, Kodak has allegedly entered into agreements with original equipment manufacturers to prevent them from providing parts for Kodak equipment to the ISOs, with owners of Kodak equipment to prevent them from selling parts to the ISOs, with organizations that repair Kodak equipment to refuse to deal with the ISOs, and with entities providing financing for the purchase of Kodak equipment to cause them to require Kodak repair and service as a condition of financing.
The ISOs sued Kodak, alleging that it violated Sections 1 and 2 of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1, 2, and Section 3 of the Clayton Act, 15 U.S.C. § 14.
District court summary judgment ruling
The district court granted Kodak's motion for summary judgment and dismissed the complaint. It said:
 The fact that Kodak refused to sell parts to plaintiffs and other ISOs does not violate Section 1. The right of a manufacturer unilaterally to select its customers and to refuse to sell to others is well-established, regardless of the possible adverse effect on would-be customers.1988 U.S. Dist. LEXIS at *6.
The court turned to the section 2 monopolization claim. The ISOs contended that Kodak monopolized by leveraging monopoly power in one market to gain competitive advantage in another. The court rejected this argument as lacking any factual support. Kodak competes as an OEM with Xerox, IBM, Bell and Howell, 3M, and various Japanese manufacturers and has no significant market share as an OEM. The ISOs contended that Kodak "has a dominant share of a purported market for servicing Kodak copiers and micrographic equipment." But the conduct alleged does not "suggest that Kodak has attempted to leverage power in that market to gain competitive advantage in another market." To be sure, Kodak has "a natural monopoly over the market for parts it sells under its name but that imposes no duty on it to sell to plaintiffs." Therefore, "Kodak's unilateral refusal to sell its parts to plaintiffs does not violate Section 2."1988 U.S. Dist. LEXIS at *8-9.
The district court dismissed the complaint and the ISOs appealed to the Ninth Circuit.
Ninth Circuit reversal of summary judgment
The Ninth Circuit reversed the summary judgment, 2-1. Preliminarily, the Ninth Circuit characterized at least one of the issues somewhat differently from the district court—as involving concerted rather than unilateral action. The Ninth Circuit said there were two  main issues: "First, Kodak will not sell replacement parts for its equipment to Kodak equipment owners unless they agree not to use ISOs. Second, Kodak will not knowingly sell replacement parts to ISOs." The court added, "Kodak admits that the purpose of these policies is to prevent ISOs from competing with Kodak's own service organization for the repair of Kodak equipment."903 F.2d at 614.
The Ninth Circuit also emphasized some facts to which the district court had not referred. After 1982 ISOs began to compete significantly against Kodak in the repair of Kodak equipment. ISOs offered service for as little as half of Kodak's price. To better compete, Kodak in some cases cut its price for service. Some customers found ISO service superior to Kodak service. Kodak then developed its present policies of not selling replacement parts to ISOs or to customers who use ISOs.
As to the Section 1 issue, Kodak and the district court misconceived the statute. Kodak argued that it does not force owners to buy service in order to receive parts; Kodak only requires owners not to buy ISO service to receive parts. Kodak will sell parts to owners who agree to self-service their machines. The Ninth Circuit said that an unlawful tie-in violation occurs not only when a seller conditions a sale of one thing on the purchase of another thing too. It is also a violation to get the purchaser to agree not to purchase things from another seller.903 F.2d at 615. Thus § 3 of the Clayton Act, 15 U.S.C. § 14, makes it unlawful to sell goods "on the condition, agreement, or understanding that the [buyer] shall not use or deal in the goods . . . of a competitor or competitors of the . . . seller, where the effect . , , may be to substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly in any line of commerce."
That raised the question whether, if there was a tie-in, did Kodak have the market power necessary to make the tie unlawful. The ISOs argued that Kodak does have power in the parts market for two interdependent reasons. First, many Kodak parts are unique and available only from Kodak. Second, owners of Kodak machinery cannot readily switch to other companies' machinery (thereby obviating the need for Kodak parts). Once one owns Kodak's expensive machinery, he is locked in to it. Kodak countered that it had no power in the primary market, because its market share relative to IBM, Xerox, 3M, and the others was small. If equipment buyers find Kodak charging too much for parts and services, they will buy from IBM, Xerox, 3M, etc. instead of from Kodak. But once a purchaser has bought a Kodak copier, he cannot turn to IBM or Xerox for parts to fix his broken Kodak copier. But this is all theory, not fact,  the court continued, and "market imperfections can keep economic theories about how consumers will act from mirroring reality." The court pointed to evidence that Kodak charged up to twice as much as the ISOs for service that is of lower quality than the ISOs's service. A price differential is evidence of market power. This indicates that there is a material issue of fact over market power, and therefore summary judgment on the issue was improvident.903 F.2d at 616–18.
Kodak argued that it acted unilaterally in refusing to deal with the ISOs. But the Ninth Circuit responded that Kodak entered into agreements with its equipment owners, which expressly set out in its "Terms of Sale," that Kodak will sell parts only to users "who service only their own Kodak equipment." That was sufficient to make the conduct concerted rather than unilateral.903 F.2d at 618–19.
Turning to the monopolization claim, the Ninth Circuit concluded that there were material issues of fact concerning whether Kodak fell within one of the exceptions to the principle that a firm generally has no duty to deal with competitors. On the factual record before the court, it was not possible to determine that summary judgment was proper. Therefore, the issue would have to be tried in the district court.903 F.2d at 620-21.
The dissent accepted Kodak's argument that Kodak was justified in imposing its restrictions to guard against inadequate service, because it had "submitted extensive and undisputed evidence of a marketing strategy based on high-quality service."903 F.2d at 623. The dissent also agreed with Kodak that that evidence of competition in the primary equipment market "necessarily precludes power in the derivative [parts] market."903 F.2d at 622. With respect to the § 2 monopolization claim, the dissent concluded that, entirely apart from market power considerations, Kodak was entitled to summary judgment on the basis of its first business justification because it had "submitted extensive and undisputed evidence of a marketing strategy based on high-quality service."
Opinion of the Court
Justice Blackmun delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices White, Stevens, Kennedy and Souter joined. Justice Scalia filed a dissenting opinion, in which Justices O'Connor and Thomas joined.
thumb|right|150px|Justice Harry Blackmun delivered the opinion of the Court
Majority opinion
The Supreme Court affirmed the Ninth Circuit's denial of Kodak's summary judgment motion reversing the district court. Justice Blackmun began by emphasizing some additional facts from the record that neither court below had relied on. Kodak did not make all of the parts that went into its equipment. It purchased parts from parts manufacturers. As part of Kodak's policy to limit sales of replacement parts for micrographic and copying machines only to buyers of Kodak equipment who use Kodak service or repair their own machines, Kodak sought to limit ISOs' access to other sources of Kodak parts besides Kodak itself, Kodak got manufacturers of its parts to agree with it that they would not sell parts that fit Kodak equipment to anyone other than Kodak. Kodak also pressured Kodak equipment owners and independent parts distributors not to sell Kodak parts to ISOs. In addition, Kodak took steps to restrict the availability to ISOs of used machines.Eastman Kodak Co., 504 U.S. at 458.
Kodak intended to and was successful, through these policies, in making it more difficult for ISOs to sell service for Kodak machines. ISOs were unable to obtain parts from reliable sources, and many were forced out of business, while others lost substantial revenue. Customers were forced to switch to Kodak service even though they preferred ISO service.
Kodak argued that it could not have the power to raise prices of service and parts above the level that would be charged in a competitive market, because any increase in profits from a higher price in the aftermarkets at least would necessarily be offset by a corresponding loss in profits from lower equipment sales as consumers began purchasing equipment with more attractive service costs from other sellers. It urged the Court to  adopt an irrebuttable presumption or substantive legal rule that "equipment competition precludes any finding of monopoly power in derivative aftermarkets."504 U.S. at 465–66.
The Court refused to do that. It insisted that this was a fact issue, not something to be decided by theory. Kodak was equally insistent that the existence of market power in the service and parts markets, absent power in the equipment market, "simply makes no economic sense," and the absence of a legal presumption would deter procompetitive behavior.504 U.S. at 467.
The Court refused to accept Kodak's economic theories and responded that they were flawed:
Kodak's proposed rule rests on a factual assumption about the cross-elasticity of demand in the equipment and aftermarkets: "If Kodak raised its parts or service prices above competitive levels, potential customers would simply stop buying Kodak equipment. Perhaps Kodak would be able to increase short term profits through such a strategy, but at a devastating cost to its long term interests."Kodak argues that the Court should accept, as a matter of law, this "basic economic realit[y]" that competition in the equipment market necessarily prevents market power in the aftermarkets.Even if Kodak could not raise the price of service and parts one cent without losing equipment sales, that fact would not disprove market power in the aftermarkets. The sales of even a monopolist are reduced when it sells goods at a monopoly price, but the higher price more than compensates for the loss in sales. Kodak's claim that charging more for service and parts would be "a short-run game" is based on the false dichotomy that there are only two prices that can be charged—a competitive price or a ruinous one.But there could easily be a middle, optimum price at which the increased revenues from the higher priced sales of service and parts would more than compensate for the lower revenues from lost equipment sales. The fact that the equipment market imposes a restraint on prices in the aftermarkets by no means disproves the existence of power in those markets. Thus, contrary to Kodak's assertion, there is no immutable physical law—no "basic economic reality"—insisting that competition in the equipment market cannot coexist with market power in the aftermarkets.504 U.S. at 470–71,
The real underlying problem with Kodak's theories, echoed by the United States (Antitrust Division) as amicus curiae, is that it unrealistically postulates an all-knowing equipment purchaser:
[Copier equipment] consumers must inform themselves of the total cost of the "package"—equipment, service, and parts—at the time of purchase; that is, consumers must engage in accurate life-cycle pricing. Life-cycle pricing of complex, durable equipment is difficult and costly. In order to arrive at an accurate price, a consumer must acquire a substantial amount of raw data and undertake sophisticated analysis. The necessary information would include data on price, quality, and availability of products needed to operate, upgrade, or enhance the initial equipment, as well as service and repair costs, including estimates of breakdown frequency, nature of repairs, price of service and parts, length of "downtime," and losses incurred from downtime.Much of this information is difficult—some of it impossible—to acquire at the time of purchase. During the life of a product, companies may change the service and parts prices, and develop products with more advanced features, a decreased need for repair, or new warranties. In addition, the information is likely to be customer specific; lifecycle costs will vary from customer to customer with the type of equipment, degrees of equipment use, and costs of downtime.504 U.S. at 473–74.
Furthermore, the Court explained, there is the issue of lock–in:
If the cost of switching is high, consumers who already have purchased the equipment, and are thus "locked in," will tolerate some level of service-price increases before changing equipment brands. Under this scenario, a seller profitably could maintain supracompetitive prices in the aftermarket if the switching costs were high relative to the increase in service prices, and the number of locked-in customers were high relative to the number of new purchasers.504 U.S. at 466.
The Court explained that it was unpersuaded by Kodak's theories:
In sum, there is a question of fact whether information costs and switching costs foil the simple assumption that the equipment and service markets act as pure complements to one another. We conclude, then, that Kodak has failed to demonstrate that respondents' inference of market power in the service and parts markets is unreasonable, and that, consequently, Kodak is entitled to summary judgment. It is clearly reasonable to infer that Kodak has market power to raise prices and drive out competition in the aftermarkets, since respondents offer direct evidence that Kodak did so.504 U.S. at 477.
The Court then turned to the final issue: whether there were genuine issues for trial as to whether Kodak has monopolized, or attempted to monopolize, the Kodak equipment service and parts markets, in violation of § 2 of the Sherman Act. The Court said that the evidence that Kodak controls nearly 100% of the parts market and 80% to 95% of the service market, with no readily available substitutes, was sufficient to survive summary judgment under the stringent monopoly standard of § 2. Kodak contended, however, that as a matter of law a single brand of a product or service can never be a relevant market under the Sherman Act. The Court disagreed: "Because service and parts for Kodak equipment are not interchangeable with other manufacturers' service and parts, the relevant market from the Kodak equipment owner's perspective is composed of only those companies that service Kodak machines." This is, the Court continued, a fact issue.504 U.S. at 480–82. Summary judgment is therefore inappropriate.
Dissent
thumb|150px|Justice Scalia filed a dissenting opinion
Justice Scalia dissented and denied that this was just another case on the proper standard for summary judgment, as the majority had said. Justice Scalia insisted that "the case presents a very narrow—but extremely important—question of substantive antitrust law: whether, . . . for purposes of applying our exacting rules governing the behavior of would-be monopolists, a manufacturer's conceded lack of power in the interbrand market for its equipment is somehow consistent with its possession of market, or even monopoly, power in wholly derivative aftermarkets for that equipment."504 U.S. at 486.
He complained: "The Court today finds in the typical manufacturer's inherent power over its own brand of equipment—over the sale of distinctive repair parts for that equipment, for example— the sort of 'monopoly power' sufficient to bring the sledgehammer of § 2 into play."504 U.S. at 489. He argued that the rationality of equipment buyers would lead them to "simply turn to Kodak's competitors for photocopying and micrographic systems," if Kodak engaged in price gouging on parts. A "rational consumer considering the purchase of Kodak equipment will inevitably factor into his purchasing decision the expected cost of aftermarket support." Therefore, Kodak could not logically have market power in a supposed relevant market for unique Kodak parts. To be sure, there are some irrational consumers, such as the U.S. Government, "[b]ut we have never before premised the application of antitrust doctrine on the lowest common denominator of consumer.504 U.S. at 495–96.
Scalia dismissed lock–in as a material factor for "it is of no concern to the antitrust laws." He explained, "Though that power can plainly work to the injury of certain consumers, it produces only a brief perturbation in competitive conditions—not the sort of thing the antitrust laws do or should worry about."504 U.S. at 497–98. The Court should not condemn out of hand "such potentially procompetitive arrangements simply because of the antitrust defendant's inherent power over the unique parts for its own brand."504 U.S. at 502.
As for monopolization under § 2, it should be reserved as "a specialized mechanism for responding to extraordinary agglomerations (or threatened agglomerations) of economic power," not mere power over one's one brand of product where there exists a vibrant interbrand market.504 U.S. at 503.
Remand decision
In August 1997 the Ninth Circuit considered the case another time on remand. The court affirmed a jury verdict that awarded the ISOs $72 million in treble damages on section 2 of the Sherman Act. It also allowed a 10-year injunction that requiring Kodak to sell the parts for its machines at reasonable, non-monopoly and nondiscriminatory prices.
The ISOs contended that Kodak had used its monopoly in the parts market to monopolize, or attempt to monopolize, the service market. Kodak now asserted that its intellectual property rights provided a defense against the claim. The court held that rights under patents and copyrights are a rebuttably presumed legitimate business justification for refusing to deal with competitors. However, the ISOs rebutted the presumption.
Kodak easily met the market share requirements of a § 2 case because "Kodak controls nearly 100% of the parts market and 80% to 90% of the service market, with no readily available substitutes." In addition, significant barriers to entry existed in the parts and service markets, and "Kodak has 220 patents and controls its designs and tools, brand name power and manufacturing ability[,] . . . controls original equipment manufacturers through contracts," and operates on an economy of scale.125 F.3d at 1206-08. In addition to possessing its market share, Kodak engaged in exclusionary conduct.
That left the main issue whether the patent ownership justified what would otherwise be monopolization. Kodak argued that the district court had erroneously instructed the jury that "the fact that some of the replacement parts are patented or copyrighted does not provide Kodak with a defense against any of those antitrust claims" if Kodak misused its parts monopoly to monopolize or attempt to monopolize.See 125 F.3d at 1214. The Ninth Circuit said the case presented a question of first impression. "At the border of intellectual property monopolies and antitrust markets lies a field of dissonance yet to be harmonized by statute or the Supreme Court." Some weight, but not decisive weight, must be given to the intellectual property rights of a monopolist.125 F.3d at 1218. The court concluded it should use this test to resolve the question of whether one in Kodak's position should be held liable: "while exclusionary conduct can include a monopolist's unilateral refusal to license a [patent or] copyright," or to sell its patented or copyrighted work, a monopolist's "desire to exclude others from its [protected] work is a presumptively valid business justification for any immediate harm to consumers." The court said that using such a "presumption should act to focus the factfinder on the primary interest of both intellectual property and antitrust laws: public interest."
This presumption could be rebutted if the justifications for invoking intellectual property rights were merely pretextual and just an excuse for exclusionary conduct. After reviewing the evidence, the court said that "it is more probable than not that the jury would have found Kodak's presumptively valid business justification rebutted on grounds of pretext."125 F.3d at 1219-20.
The injunction requiring part sales originally applied to all parts. The Ninth Circuit limited the injunction to parts made by Kodak, since the ISOs could now buy such parts from their independent manufacturers. Kodak argued that on parts for which it had a copyright or patent monopoly, it should be allowed to charge monopoly prices rather than merely "reasonable" prices. The Ninth Circuit said when compulsory sales relief was ordered in patent-antitrust cases, the courts ordered the sales to be a "reasonable" prices.125 F.3d at 1225 (citing United States v. Glaxo Group Ltd., 410 U.S. 52 (1973)). In this case, however, it would be sufficient that the prices be nondiscriminatory and therefore the Ninth Circuit modified the district court's injunction order to eliminate the reasonableness requirement.
Commentary
On main opinion
 Herbert Hovenkamp 
Herbert Hovenkamp has been highly critical of the decision. In his 2006 book The Antitrust Enterprise, he strongly disagreed that a single-brand aftermarket could ever constitute a separate relevant market., ch. 5 (2006). In his 2015 book Federal Antitrust Policy, The Law of Competition and Its Practice, he said:
Twenty years of litigation under Kodak had expended millions of dollars in legal fees and not produced a single defensible decision finding market power on the basis of lock–in. Academic commentary has been overwhelmingly negative as well. Kodak seems to be one of those ill conceived expansionist antitrust doctrines that the Supreme Court would do well to overrule. 544 (5th ed. 2015).
 Mark Patterson 
Mark Patterson argues in the North Carolina Law Review that the Kodak decision is rational and economically sound, incorporating into antitrust law previously neglected but important economic learning about the cost and value of product information and its relevance to creating market power. He points to other cases in the past where market power was created by making information expensive to obtain. For example, in National Society of Professional Engineers v. United States,. the Supreme Court held illegal an engineering society's rule that forbade members from providing price information to buyers until the buyers had tentatively agreed to purchase the members' services. Patterson gives as another example FTC v. Indiana Federation of Dentists, in which the Supreme Court held it illegal for a dentists' organization to establish a policy requiring its members to withhold x-rays from dental insurers in connection with evaluating claims for benefits.. In both cases the Court found that the organizations were tampering with price mechanisms by using the unavailability of information to prevent "the functioning of markets." Patterson sees Kodak as an extension  of these decisions and "thus a step toward providing a more economically supportable and judicially consistent antitrust treatment of information."Mark Patterson, Product Definition, Product Information, and Market Power: Kodak in Perspective, 73 N.C.L.  185, 188–89 (1994).
 Eleanor Fox 
Eleanor Fox perceives Kodak as "essentially a case about abusing competitors; it is not essentially a case about lack of consumer information," as many other analysts perceive it. "Abuse and bullying by one firm with power over another is the oldest antitrust violation extant and has not lost its place in the antitrust firmament." She continues:
The information-failure analysts see Kodak and U.S. antitrust law from the wrong end of the telescope. Peeling away the economics-of-information technicalities of Kodak, one might conclude: Kodak teaches that price theory economics has not read competitors or dynamics out of the law.Eleanor M. Documents, Eastman Kodak Company v. Image Technical Services, Inc. – Information Failure as Soul or Hook?, 62  L.J. 759, 766–57 (1994).
 Antitrust article 
In an article in Antitrust, two of the lawyers representing the ISOs in the Kodak case describe the decision as turning back a growing trend of "Chicago School" revanchism against protection of consumers against wealth transfers to monopolists:
The Kodak case would have been much more significant had the dissenters prevailed. Their explicit goal was judicial economy through the rejection, as a matter of law, of the position that consumer welfare can be harmed if manufacturers of complex durable  equipment are allowed to recover monopoly profits in aftermarkets (like service or software) of their products.Ronald S. Katz and Douglas Rosenthal, The Benefits and Burdens of Kodak from a Litigant's Perspective, 7  8 (1992).
If Kodak had prevailed in making its economic theories the law, these authors maintain, the consequence would have been to exempt "a vast and growing sector of the economy from the antitrust laws."See Kodak, 504 U.S. at 479 n.29.
 Borenstein et al. paper 
A paper by three economists—Borenstein, MacKie-Mason, and Netz—agrees with the Kodak Court that "market imperfections can keep economic theories about how consumers will react from mirroring reality." But they argue that the Court did not go far enough in rejecting the defense economic arguments. They insist that "strong primary market competition will [not] discipline aftermarket behavior, even without market imperfections," and that:
In fact, firms will rationally engage in above-cost aftermarket pricing even if the equipment market is very competitive, all parties are well informed, and demand in the market is
stable. Supracompetitive prices for proprietary aftermarket goods and services will occur so long as there is an inability to contract for these goods and services at the time of purchase.Severin Borenstein, Jeffrey K. MacKie-Mason, and Janet S. Netz,
Antitrust Policy in Aftermarkets, 63  L.J. 355 (1995).
The authors describe a continuous "balancing between high aftermarket prices that reap profits from customers who have already purchased the equipment and low aftermarket prices that tend to increase future equipment sales." In this process, future profits from enhanced futures sales as a result of creating a reputation for not gouging customers on aftermarket sales must be discounted to the present value of the future equipment sales,Present value is the value of an expected income stream determined as of the date of valuation. The present value is always less than or equal to the future value because money has interest-earning potential, a characteristic referred to as the time value of money. David R. Henderson,    (2d ed. 2008). but present profits from current aftermarket sales do not need to be discounted. In a declining market for original equipment, which many antitrust cases have involved, there is a great incentive to charge high aftermarket prices at the expense of incumbent equipment owners.Henderson, supra at 465–66. Even if equipment demand is expected to remain constant, the writers argue, profits in the future are of less value due to discounting. Accordingly:
Only if expected profits from equipment are growing at a faster rate than the discount rate will a firm have the incentive to price the aftermarket product at (or below) the competitive level. While such rapid growth does occur at times, it is generally short-lived and is then followed by a period of slowly growing or declining equipment sales. If slower growth or declines in sales are forecast in the near future, then the incentive to raise aftermarket prices is likely to be present even if current growth is quite rapid.Henderson, supra at 466.
The authors then address other information costs. They explain that, even if there were no switching costs to adopting a new brand, high aftermarket prices would still be rational. The reason is that a manufacturer's aftermarket pricing policies can raise the cost of switching by lowering the market value of a customer's used equipment. When a customer switches it pays the net cost of the new brand of equipment minus the used value of its old brand of equipment. A manufacturer's increase in service or parts prices will correspondingly lower the market value of used equipment. Thus, "a $2000 increase in the present value of lifetime service costs will reduce used equipment prices by $2000 and thus will raise the cost of switching to another brand by $2000." The result is that the customer "is unable to avoid the costs of supracompetitive aftermarket pricing, and the possibility of switching to another equipment brand does not solve the problem, as defendants argue." Accordingly: "Even under the most favorable assumptions-perfect competition in the equipment market and perfect information on the part of consumers-firms have the ability and incentive to price aftermarket products above cost."Henderson, supra at 467–68.
 Jill Protos 
A Comment by Jill Protos in the Case Western Reserve Law Review perceives the decision of the Supreme Court as a setback for the Chicago Law School's form of antitrust analysis. The Comment explained Kodak's "Chicago School" that persuaded the district court but which the court of appeals and Supreme Court rejected:
 Kodak alleged that if it raised the price of its parts and service above competitive levels, consumers would simply purchase an alternative photocopier equipment brand with more attractive parts and service costs. Kodak further argued that it lacked the market power to engage in monopoly practices in the parts and services markets because such an action would jeopardize sales volume in the primary photocopier equipment market. In other words, any gains realized by anti-competitive practices in the parts and service market would be offset by losses in the photocopier equipment market. Based on this economic reasoning, Kodak urged the adoption of a substantive legal rule that competition in primary markets precludes the finding of market power in derivative aftermarkets.Jill Dickey Protos, Kodak v. Image Technical Services: A Setback for the Chicago School of Antitrust Analysis, 43  1199, 1201 (1993).
As a result of the existence of market imperfections such as imperfect information and information costs, the Supreme Court believed that "many consumers would be incapable of
making total package price computations, or alternatively would simply choose not to make such calculations." and therefore not act in accordance with the Chicago School's model. In addition, the model does not consider switching costs and resulting lock-in. Therefore:
[T]he majority found that the possibility of market imperfections created a material issue of fact as to. whether Kodak's theory was an accurate description of reality Thus, according to the majority the use of economic theory to grant summary judgment was inappropriate in this case. Instead, Kodak is required to withstand trial, and prove that its economic theory is indeed representative of reality in order to successfully defend its replacement parts policy.Protos, supra at 1212–13.
The Comment sees Kodak as "clearly a setback for Chicago School adherents who seek to fully integrate their economic theory into antitrust law," and instead a coming era in which "parties will be forced to factually demonstrate the effect on competition caused by the challenged conduct" and where "reliance on economic theory alone will not suffice."Protos, supra at 1215. The writer contrasts Kodak with Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., in which the Court had said that "if the [antitrust plaintiffs'] claim is one that simply makes no economic sense - [the plaintiffs] must come forward with more persuasive evidence to support their claim than would otherwise be necessary" in order to survive a motion for summary judgment.. The writer does not address the possible interpretation that the Kodak Court thought that the proffered Chicago analysis made sufficient economic sense. The Kodak Court had said, "The [Matsushita] Court did not hold that if the moving party enunciates any economic theory supporting its behavior, regardless of its accuracy in reflecting the actual market, it is entitled to summary judgment." 504 U.S. at 468.
The writer deplores the Court's unwillingness to allow defendants to rest on an assertion of economic theory:
Antitrust law, prior to Kodak was developing into a body of law based on economic theory. Matsushita suggested that the Court had reached the point of complete acceptance of "Chicago School" theory by indicating that parties could defend against antitrust allegations merely by asserting that the allegation is contrary to economic theory In Kodak, however, the Court retreats from its embracement of economic theory Now, defendants must introduce evidence to prove that its economic theory does in fact reflect commercial realities. Alternatively, plaintiffs can now challenge certain conduct merely by attacking the assumptions on which the defendant's economic theory is based.Comment, at 1219–20.
The writer sees this as ominous and concludes that the decision may signal an unfortunate reversion to 19th century populism:
Kodak signals that fewer cases will be dismissed on summary judgment, since parties will have to factually prove their economic theories. . . . Kodak may, however, signal more than just an increased antitrust docket for the District Courts. The Court's refusal to decide antitrust claims based solely on economic theory may implicate more than just a setback for "Chicago School" adherents, who would readily decide such claims by reference to economic theory alone. Threads of populism may underly the Court's refusal to accept Kodak's economic theory on its face. If Kodak signals that populism is creeping into antitrust law, the decision may have adverse implications for competition. Antitrust policy based on populism, as opposed to economic theory, may result in the protection of individual competitors, but not overall competition. As a result, antitrust law may once again be subject to Justice Holmes's criticism of being "humbug based on economic ignorance and incompetence."Protos, supra at 1220. The quotation of Justice Holmes is from 1  163 (Howe ed. 1941).
 Lawrence Fesca  
In a Comment in the Notre Dame Law Review, Lawrence Fesca also sees the Kodak decision as a setback for the Chicago School, but finds it less distressing, and also he considers seeing the decision as an announcement of Chicago demise to be an exaggeration. He points first to the Court['s insistence on the supremacy of facts over theories:
Kodak did little to help the cause of Chicago proponents . . . with respect to economic analysis in general. In language that may signal a watershed in antitrust jurisprudence, the Court questioned implicitly the norms accepted by the Chicago School. "Legal presumptions that rest on formalistic distinctions rather than actual market realities are generally disfavored in antitrust law. This Court has preferred to resolve antitrust claims on a case-by-case basis, focusing on the "particular facts disclosed by record [evidence]."
Fesca says that from this language some "commentators have deduced that we are witnessing the end of the Chicago School era" and been led "to claim that we will be returning to the economic populism that prevailed before the rise of the Chicago School." But he concludes that "reports of the Chicago School's demise are greatly exaggerated." He points out that the Supreme Court's grounds for reversing the summary judgment merely used one set of "theoretical arguments (information defects exacerbated by price discrimination and switching costs) to defeat another theoretical argument describing the [supposed] effect competition in the foremarket has on aftermarkets."Fesca, supra at 670–71. He sees the populist barbarians at the gate as having a long way to go before demolishing the Chicago Empire.Fesca, supra at 672.
On the remand opinion
● A Note in the Berkeley Technology Law Journal agreed with the Ninth Circuit's legal standard on remand that it would "allow the presumption that IP rights constitute a legitimate business justification for exclusionary conduct and allow the antitrust plaintiff to rebut it." The writer concluded that the polar options (1) "of not allowing IP rights to play any role in an antitrust defense" would "undermine the public interest in the patent and copyright statutes"; and (2) patents should "always be allowed to trump antitrust law"—would equally be mistakes.Jennifer E. Gully, Note, 13  L.J. 339, 349 (1998). But the Note faults the Ninth Circuit's analysis because it "does not harmonize this 'field of dissonance' directly."That is, the court did not decide whether the scope of the patent rights should have extended to the use of parts to provide service and maintenance. Reliance on pretext to condemn the restraints is too case–specific. It fails to "offer much insight or guidance as to how this court will, or any other court should, review firms' actions" in future cases. Gully, supra at 350–51.
To answer the question of proper scope of patent rights, the Note says, the court should have explored further issues:
 If there were no way for Kodak to recoup its investment in developing parts and machines other than to effectuate its patent and copyright monopoly in the service market, there would be strong reasons for allowing it to do so. It might be the case that the short-term harm to consumers of allowing Kodak to monopolize the parts and the service markets is less than the long-term harm of not providing firms like Kodak with adequate incentive to enter a competitive market and develop new products. It is not entirely clear, however, that the patent and copyright systems should be used to subsidize Kodak's inability to compete in the service market against the ISOs, who might provide better service to consumers for less money.Gully, supra at 352.
● A Comment in the Temple Law Review by Sharon McCullen addresses a conflict between the Federal Circuit's decision in In re Independent Service Organization Antitrust Litigation, which "correctly held that a patent holder who unilaterally refuses to license or sell a patented item in any product market does not violate antitrust laws without evidence of illegal tying, fraud in the patent procurement process or sham litigation," and the Ninth Circuit's remand decision in the Kodak case, which instead "adopted a rebuttable presumption that a patent holder's refusal to license or sell a patented work constitutes a presumptively valid business justification to exclude others," but also held that the presumption is vulnerable to evidence that "the patent holder's refusal was not based on a motivation to protect the patented item but rather was a pretext to hide anti-competitive activity."Eastman Kodak Co., 125 F.3d at 1218–19. The writer criticizes the Ninth Circuit's rejection of Kodak's proffered legitimate business justification "by evaluating Kodak's subjective motivation in refusing to license or sell the patented invention and labeling Kodak's justification as a 'pretext.' "Sharon Brawner McCullen, Comment, The Federal Circuit and Ninth Circuit Faceoff: Does a Patent Holder Violate the Sherman Act by Unilaterally Excluding Others From a Patented Invention in More Than One Relevant Market?, 74  469, 470, 487, 504–05 (2001).
Relying on the Supreme Court's 1908 decision in Continental Paper Bag Co. v. Eastern Paper Bag Co.,. in which the Court stated that arbitrary "exclusion may be said to have been of the very essence of the right conferred by the patent, as it is the privilege of any owner of property to use or not use it, without question of motive,"Continental Paper Bag Co., 210 U.S. at 429. McCullen argues that the Federal Circuit correctly concluded that subjective motivation for the refusal to license is irrelevant and should not be inquired into. "To hold otherwise," she insists, "would diminish the patent holder's statutory right to exclude others, defeating the primary objective of the patent law: to encourage innovation and to bring forth new knowledge for the benefit of society."210 U.S. at 504–05.
● Seungwoo Son, in an article in the University of Illinois Journal of Law, Technology & Policy,Seungwoo Son, Selective Refusals to Sell Patented Goods: The Relationship between Patent Rights and Antitrust Law, 2002 U.  109 (2002). expands on the comparison between the Kodak remand and the Federal Circuit's Intergraph decisions to include the FTC's proceeding against Intel over use of monopoly power in the microprocessor market to force customers to grant Intel royalty-free licenses to their own microprocessor technologyIn re Intel Corp., Dkt. No. 9288 (1998) (consent order). and the Federal Circuit's decision in the Independent Service Organizations (or Xerox) case.
The author builds his analysis on the exhaustion doctrine and the repair and reconstruction doctrine, which hold respectively that the owner of patented property such as a machine has a right to use and dispose of it without being subject to post-sale restrictions by the patentee and a right to repair it to keep it in good order. The general theory is that once a manufacturer such as Kodak sells a copier to a customer, the customer acquires a property interest in the copier that includes a right to use it without restrictions and keep it in good repair, but refusals to sell repair parts to ISOs (at least absent a sound business justification) unreasonably derogates from the customer's property rights.
The author considers high-tech industries that evolve and change rapidly and are complicated. That may call for different rules than used in the past. The author states, "This paper proposes a plausible alternative approach for the Kodak-Xerox contexts, based upon an idea for redefining the scope of a patent holder's rights by means of expanding the definitions of the [exhaustion] doctrine and doctrine of repair to conform with patent policy goals." The author excludes from his discussion "pure" refusals to deal, by which he means those refusals to deal without an ulterior purpose, such as one to divide markets illegally or restrict competition in markets outside the scope of the patent. His focus is on selective refusals to deal used to require adherence to a restrictive practice.Son, supra at 147. He asserts that the exhaustion doctrine should be expanded so that an equipment seller such as Kodak or Xerox "should neither indirectly limit the existing choices of a buyer nor constrain a buyer's right to use, repair, and resell the product, without reasonable business interests or justifications." He further asserts:
When a consumer purchases the product, maintaining the purchased product through repair service should be one of the consumer's freedoms, whether or not the components of the product are patented. Once it is sold, some parts of the product will eventually need to be repaired or replaced in most cases. Thus, the product composed of patented parts must be treated as primary. After a seller sells a product and the patented repair parts, a patentee should not be able to restrict the buyers' right to repair some components of the purchased product through repair service, or to refuse to sell to any other buyer on similar terms, without a business justification.Son, supra at 150.
The author argues that to maximize consumer welfare;
The definition of the first-sale doctrine must be broadened to limit a patent holder's rights, when those rights which restrict a consumer's choices or freedom of trade and result in a consumer becoming locked into a patent by the patent holder's indirect and socially undesirable business strategy. This approach based on consumer perspectives strikes a better balance between a patentee's legitimate profits and a consumer's benefits than the approach based on the patent holder's perspective.Son, supra at 151.
Applying these standards to the Kodak remand case and the Xerox cases, which had similar facts (both equipment manufacturers refused to sell parts to ISOs or to equipment purchasers who used ISOs to repair their equipment) but opposite results, leads to an approval of Kodak and disapproval of Xerox. The main difference between the Ninth Circuit in Kodak and the Federal Circuit in  Xerox was that the Ninth Circuit considered that pretext undermined the proffered business justification while the Federal Circuit  considered motivation and pretext irrelevant:
The Federal Circuit focused on incentives for the creation of IP by allowing the IP holder to reap profits wherever they were available. However, it only emphasized one side of IP policy—namely, that giving more benefits to a patentee creates more innovations. The other aspect is the limitation of patent rights to prevent overreaching. In this respect, the proposed
standard strikes a better balance between the legitimate interests of patent holders and their customers.Son, supra at 168.
The author then turned to the two cases involving Intel. As in Xerox, the Federal Circuit in Intergraph found IP rights dominant, and it simply rejected the Ninth Circuit's view in the Kodak remand case. The FTC acted against Intel, however, because it saw unlawful monopolization in Intel's refusal to deal (provide technical information on purchased microprocessor chips or sell chips) unless customers were willing to make their patents available to Intel. The FTC alleged "that 'Intel has entrenched and threatens to continue entrenching its monopoly power in the relevant lines of commerce' by coercing other customers into licensing their innovations to Intel."Son, supra at 168–69. This would assure Intel "access to any new technology and prevent threats to its alleged microprocessor monopoly from ever developing."Son, supra at 171.
The author concludes from his analysis that selective refusals to deal in intellectual property rights should be held violative of § 2 of the Sherman Act if:
the intellectual property confers market power;
the conduct "excludes or substantially impairs the competitive capacity of a competitor or brings about anti-competitive effects in a related market"; and
"constrains customer choices directly or indirectly"—
unless the patentee proffers a valid reason to justify its refusal.Son, supra at 191.
● In a Note in the Washington Law Review critical of the Image Technical remand decision,Brian F. Ladenburg, Note: Unilateral Refusals To Deal In Intellectual Property After Image Technical Services, Inc. v. Eastman Kodak Co., 73  1079, 1100 & n,142 (1998).  the author comments that, perhaps, "the Ninth Circuit has certainly come a long way from Westinghouse and its rejection of the notion that "an antitrust violation may be found where a patent holder does precisely that which the patent laws authorize."Citing 
References
External links
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:Kodak
"""

From "EBay Inc. v. MercExchange, L.L.C." ==> """
eBay Inc. v. MercExchange, L.L.C., 547 U.S. 388 (2006), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States unanimously determined that an injunction should not be automatically issued based on a finding of patent infringement, but also that an injunction should not be denied simply on the basis that the plaintiff does not practice the patented invention.eBay Inc. v. MercExchange, L.L.C., .  Instead, a federal court must still weigh what the Court described as the four-factor test traditionally used to determine if an injunction should issue.
Background
Online auction site eBay uses practices in its online auction technology for which MercExchange owns patents, including , which covers eBay's "Buy it Now" function – over 30 percent of the company's business.  In 2000, eBay initiated negotiations to outright purchase MercExchange's online auction patent portfolio. When eBay abandoned its effort, MercExchange sued eBay for patent infringement and prevailed in a 2003 Virginia jury trial, which found eBay had willfully infringed the MercExchange's patents and ordered a payment of nearly $30 million in damages. Following the verdict, MercExchange sought an injunction to prevent eBay's continued use of its intellectual property, but the District Court denied the request. The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit reversed the District Court in 2005, stating that there was a "general rule that courts will issue permanent injunctions against patent infringement absent exceptional circumstances." Following the reversal, eBay took its case to the Supreme Court, where it prevailed. In the majority opinion the Supreme Court concluded that a permanent injunction in patent infringement cases can be issued only if the plaintiff can show that the issue satisfies a four-factor test (see below).
As the legal battle dragged on, MercExchange cut its workforce from more than 40 employees to just three. MercExchange also was derided as a "patent troll" – inventors who use the threat of injunctions to extract hefty legal settlements for violating patents of dubious value.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court overturned the Federal Circuit's approval of the injunction, holding that nothing in the Patent Act eliminated the traditional reliance on weighing the equitable factors considered in determining whether an injunction should issue.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 332 (2006). But it also ruled that District Court erred in denying an injunction on the basis that MercExchange does not itself practice the patented invention.
That test requires a plaintiff to demonstrate: (1) that it has suffered an irreparable injury; (2) that remedies available at law are inadequate to compensate for that injury; (3) that considering the balance of hardships between the plaintiff and defendant, a remedy in equity is warranted; and (4) that the public interest would not be disserved by a permanent injunction.  The decision to grant or deny such relief is an act of equitable discretion by the district court, reviewable on appeal for abuse of discretion. (...) Neither the District Court nor the Court of Appeals below fairly applied these principles.
Although the District Court recited the traditional four-factor test, 275 F.Supp.2d, at 711, it appeared to adopt certain expansive principles suggesting that injunctive relief could not issue in a broad swath of cases. Most notably, it concluded that a “plaintiff's willingness to license its patents” and “its lack of commercial activity in practicing the patents” would be sufficient to establish that the patent holder would not suffer irreparable harm if an injunction did not issue. Id., at 712. But traditional equitable principles do not permit such broad classifications. For example, some patent holders, such as university researchers or self-made inventors, might reasonably prefer to license their patents, rather than undertake efforts to secure the financing necessary to bring their works to market themselves. Such patent holders may be able to satisfy the traditional four-factor test, and we see no basis for categorically denying them the opportunity to do so.
The court noted that it had consistently rejected invitations to replace traditional equitable considerations with a rule allowing automatic injunctions in its copyright law cases such as New York Times Co. v. Tasini, 533 U.S. 483 (2001).
Concurring opinions
While all eight justices (Justice Alito did not participate) joined the majority opinion penned by Justice Thomas which stated that there should be no general rule as to when an injunction should issue in a patent case, there were two concurring opinions with three and four justices respectively, setting out suggested guidelines for granting injunctions.
Chief Justice Roberts wrote a concurring opinion, joined by Justices Scalia and Ginsburg, pointing out that from "at least the early 19th century, courts have granted injunctive relief upon a finding of infringement in the vast majority of patent cases," by applying the four-factor test.
On the other hand, Justice Kennedy, joined by Justices Stevens, Souter, and Breyer, wrote in a separate concurring opinion:
In cases now arising trial courts should bear in mind that in many instances the nature of the patent being enforced and the economic function of the patent holder present considerations quite unlike earlier cases. An industry has developed in which firms use patents not as a basis for producing and selling goods but, instead, primarily for obtaining licensing fees. ... For these firms, an injunction, and the potentially serious sanctions arising from its violation, can be employed as a bargaining tool to charge exorbitant fees to companies that seek to buy licenses to practice the patent. ... When the patented invention is but a small component of the product the companies seek to produce and the threat of an injunction is employed simply for undue leverage in negotiations, legal damages may well be sufficient to compensate for the infringement and an injunction may not serve the public interest. In addition injunctive relief may have different consequences for the burgeoning number of patents over business methods, which were not of much economic and legal significance in earlier times. The potential vagueness and suspect validity of some of these patents may affect the calculus under the four-factor test. 
Thus, the Roberts opinion leaned more heavily in favor of granting injunctions in eBay and similar cases, while the Kennedy opinion expressed skepticism, particularly where the validity of the patent has also been challenged and remains unsettled.  Neither of these concurring opinions carries the force of law, since neither was supported by a majority of the Court.
Subsequent developments
On July 30, 2007, the District Court once again issued an order denying the injunction, ruling that, based on MercExchange's history of licensing or attempting to license the patent, monetary damages of $30 million was a sufficient remedy."eBay Wins Round"Mylene Mangalindan, WSJ Dec 13 2007 B4, "EBay is Ordered to Pay $30 Million in Patent Rift"  On February 28, 2008, the parties announced that they had reached a settlement after six years of litigation.  Under the settlement, MercExchange was to assign the patents to eBay; the terms of the settlement were otherwise confidential.eBay Inc. and MercExchange, L.L.C. Reach Settlement Agreement, eBay press release, February 28, 2008
See also
 Patent troll
References
Further reading
External links
 Steven J. Frank, Patent Injunctions: Is There Life After eBay v. MercExchange?, Corporate Dealmaker Forum blog, May 24, 2006
 J. Matthew Buchanan, Is eBay a Gauntlet?, Promote the Progress patent law and policy blog, June 9, 2006.  Excerpt:   Did the Supreme Court throw down the gauntlet, i.e., issue a challenge, to Congress in its eBay v. MercExchange decision?  Did the Court, in essence, challenge Congress to clarify its exercise of the Patent Power?
 J. Matthew Buchanan, eBay v. MercExchange - from an infringer's perspective, Promote the Progress patent law and policy blog, June 20, 2006 (a tongue-in-cheek look at the case from the viewpoint of a manufacturer who might be infringing a patent or two).
 Wiki Legal Comment, E-commerce After eBay v. MercExchange, When Should the Courts Enjoin Infringement of Internet Business Method Patents?, Wiki Legal Journal This article is part of a study to determine if a wiki community can produce high quality legal research, Nov. 18, 2006 (this article suggests a solution for the confusion caused by the Supreme Court's splintered opinion).
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:EBay litigation
"""

From "Edelman v. Jordan" ==> """
Edelman v. Jordan, 415 U.S. 651 (1974), was a United States Supreme Court case that held that the sovereign immunity recognized in the Eleventh Amendment prevented a federal court from ordering a state from paying back funds that had been unconstitutionally withheld from parties to whom they had been due..
Background
The plaintiff, John Jordan, in a class action suit, sued Illinois officials who administered federal-state of Aid to the Aged, Blind, or Disabled (AABD). He alleged that the program's money had been administered in a way that violated both federal laws and the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. Specifically, Jordan claimed that the Illinois administrators were applying their own guidelines, which ignored federally-mandated time limits and so did not get aid to applicants fast enough. The federal law required that applicants who qualify receive aid within 30 or 45 days, depending on their condition, but the Illinois agency was taking up to four months to disburse aid, and when such aid was distributed, it was not paid retroactively to the time when the state should have started paying it, according to the federal guidelines. 
Jordan sought relief including a positive injunction to require the state to award him and others in his position the aid that they had missed because of the lateness in processing the applications. The United States District Court found the Illinois guidelines to be inconsistent with the federal statute and ordered Illinois both to follow the federal guidelines and to release to the aid applicants all funds "wrongfully withheld." The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit affirmed, and the case was taken to the Supreme Court, with Agency Director Joel Edelmen named as the party representing the State of Illinois.
Issue
Since the 1890 case Hans v. Louisiana, the Eleventh Amendment had been held to recognize the sovereign immunity of states from suits by their citizens. However, the 1908 case Ex parte Young had allowed an exception: citizens could seek injunctive relief against state officials to stop them from carrying out unconstitutional state policies.
In this case, the Supreme Court examined whether a federal court can require a state to restore funds that had wrongfully been withheld from citizens by the state if the order to restore the funds is an injunction, requiring the state to stop its wrongful possession of the funds.
Decision
The Court, in an opinion by Justice Rehnquist, concluded that private litigants could not avoid the bar of state sovereign immunity by manipulating the doctrine of Ex parte Young. No case examining state sovereign immunity had held that states could be required to repay funds that had wrongfully been withheld. In almost all the cases that had permitted retrospective recovery against the states, the state had not raised the issue of state sovereign immunity. The Supreme Court also overruled any cases in which the state had raised the issue and lost.
It distinguished the payment that had been ordered in this case from expenses that a state might incidentally incur after an injunction is issued to comply with it. The costs of post-judgment compliance are ancillary, but the costs of making up for pre-judgment non-compliance were more like an award of damages to the plaintiff. Noting that there were no precedents squarely on this point, the court expressed disapproval of those precedents that hinted at allowing restoration of funds that had been previously withheld.
The Supreme Court also brushed aside an alternative theory raised by the Court of Appeals that Illinois had waived its immunity by participating in the federal program. Previous cases finding such a waiver had involved express language in the Congressional statute conditioning program funds on such a waiver, but in the statute, there was no such language. The Court refused to find that participation in the program constituted "constructive consent." It instead declared that consent to waive immunity from suit could be found only "by the most express language or by such overwhelming implications from the text as will leave no room for any other reasonable construction."
The majority also rejected Justice Marshall's suggestion that plaintiffs could recover under the civil rights statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1983.. It noted had nothing in that statute suggested that Congress had intended to abrogate state sovereign immunity by its passage.
Finally, the Court found that it was not improper to consider the state sovereign immunity issue even though the state had not raised it in the trial court since the state sovereign immunity is a jurisdictional bar, which may be raised at any time.
Justice Douglas, Justice Brennan, and Justice Marshall each dissented from the opinion of the Court.
Dissent of Justice Douglas
Justice Douglas asserted that there should be no distinction made between prospective relief and retrospective relief, as the drain on the state's treasury is the same in either case. He also strongly contended that Illinois had waived its immunity by entering the federal program since the Supreme Court had recently found other states to have waived immunity by joining similar programs. Therefore, Douglas reasoned that Illinois had to have been aware of the possibility that entering the program would waive its own immunity, and its decision to participate in light of that danger showed a willingness to be held liable.
Dissent of Justice Marshall
Justice Marshall argued that 42 U.S.C. § 1983, which permits parties to sue state actors to recover for civil rights violations, also abrogated the immunity of the states and permitted a recovery from the state treasury if the rights of a citizen were violated by an official of the state.
Dissent of Justice Brennan
Justice Brennan's opinion did not reach any of the questions on the limitations of sovereign immunity or waiver thereof that were considered by both the Court and the other dissents. Instead, Brennan argued that the Eleventh Amendment does not immunize states from being sued by their citizens at all. He stated there is no question of what the purported immunity covers or whether it can be waived it does not exist. He noted that the Eleventh Amendment's language bars only suits against a state by citizens of other states. That leaves common law sovereign immunity, which he asserted to have been surrendered by the states when they agreed to join into the United States.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 415
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Edmond v. United States" ==> """
Edmond v. United States, 520 U.S. 651 (1997), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States on the status of members of the Coast Guard Court of Criminal Appeals under the Appointments Clause.
 References 
External links
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete Co." ==> """
Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete Company, 500 U.S. 614 (1991), was a United States Supreme Court case which held that peremptory challenges may not be used to exclude jurors on the basis of race in civil trials.. Edmonson extended the court's similar decision in Batson v. Kentucky (1986), a criminal case. The Court applied the equal protection component of the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment, as determined in Bolling v. Sharpe (1954), in finding that such race-based challenges violated the Constitution.
 Background 
A construction worker, Thaddeus Donald Edmonson, was injured during work on federal property. He sued Leesville Concrete Company for negligence leading to his injuries. During jury selection, Leesville used two of their three peremptory challenges on black jurors, leaving a panel of twelve with one African-American. Edmonson, citing Batson, requested that the trial court require Leesville give a race-neutral reason for the peremptory challenges to black jurors, but the court refused. The jury found that Leesville was responsible for 20% of Edmonson's injury and awarded him $18,000. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reversed the decision, holding that parties become state actors during jury selection, and so Batson requires race-neutral selection in civil cases. When the Fifth Circuit reheard the case en banc, they affirmed the original District Court decision. Recognizing a circuit split, the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote the opinion for the majority. Justice Kennedy began with a long line of cases where the court held that racial discrimination was impermissible in jury selection before a criminal trial. He then pointed out that although the Court had never indicated such discrimination was permitted in a civil trial, either, it also holds that federal law restrains the actions of government, not private actors. To decide whether to apply federal law, Justice Kennedy applied a two-part test from Lugar v. Edmondson Oil Co.. The first part of the test is whether the constitutional deprivation, in this case the right to a fair and impartial jury, resulted from a right rooted in state authority. Kennedy found, almost summarily, that peremptory challenges' intimate role in shaping a jury meant the case met the first part of the test. The second part of the test is whether the private party, Leesville and its counsel, was acting as a "state actor".
In determining whether the Leesville was acting as a state actor, Justice Kennedy considered three issues and relevant precedent. The first issue was whether the actor relies on governmental assistance, and Justice Kennedy found that the system of jury selection clearly existed within the sphere of judicial proceedings and would not be possible without the assistance of the judge and all other constituent elements of the institution. The second consideration was whether the actor is performing a traditional function of government. Justice Kennedy first found that the jury was clearly performing a traditional function of government by serving as the finder-of-fact in a civil trial. Second, he drew a parallel between jury selection and elections, indicating that constitutional constraints apply to all the machinery involved in choosing representatives and juries (such as when parties control primary elections). This is unlike any other aspect of civil litigation, none of which involve a government function like jury selection. The third consideration was whether the injury caused was aggravated in a unique way by the incidents of governmental authority. Justice Kennedy said racial discrimination inside the courtroom diminishes the integrity of the courts and "compounds the racial insult" of discrimination.Edmonson, 500 U.S. at 628.
Justice Kennedy then dealt with the question of whether litigants could raise violations of jurors' rights on their behalf. The relevant precedent in that consideration was Powers v. Ohio,. a similar case that dealt with race-based exclusion of jurors during jury selection in a criminal trial. In Powers, the Court held that litigants generally cannot make a claim due to violations of others' rights, except where the litigant has suffered an injury the courts can resolve, has a close relation with the third party, and the third party is hindered in protecting his or her own interests.Powers, 499 U.S. at 410. Justice Kennedy held that all three conditions were met in Edmonson's case, including the resolvable injury. The concrete resolvable injury arose, in Justice Kennedy's view, whenever racial discrimination took place within criminal or civil trials.
The Court did not make a holding regarding whether prima facie evidence of racial discrimination in Edmonson's case actually existed, and remanded the case to the trial court to determine that issue.
 Dissent 
Three justices dissented, arguing that there was no state action (which is required for any Fifth or Fourteenth Amendment violation) because the litigants are private parties. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote the dissent, joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justice Antonin Scalia. Justice O'Connor wrote that "the Court's final argument is that the exercise of a peremptory challenge by a private litigant is state action because it takes place in a courtroom. [But] the actions of a lawyer in a courtroom do not become those of the government by virtue of their location. This is true even if those actions are based on race." "Constitutional 'liability attaches only to those wrongdoers who carry a badge of authority of [the government] and represent it in some capacity.' Tarkanian, 488 U.S., at 191 [double-internal quotation marks omitted]." Therefore, although "[r]acism is a terrible thing ... [t]he Government is not responsible for a peremptory challenge by a private litigant."
 References 
External links
 A documentary on Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete Company
Category:Batson challenge case law
Category:Construction law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Educational Films Corp. v. Ward" ==> """
Educational Films Corp. v. Ward, 282 U.S. 379 (1931), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held a state's  corporate income tax may include royalties from copyrights in its calculation of overall income for the purposes of a franchise tax,  even though direct income from copyrights, a federal institution, is immune from state taxation.
 References 
External links
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1931 in United States case law
Category:Corporate taxation in the United States
Category:United States corporate case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
"""

From "Edwards v. Aguillard" ==> """
Edwards v. Aguillard, 482 U.S. 578 (1987), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning the constitutionality of teaching creationism. The Court considered a Louisiana law requiring that where evolutionary science was taught in public schools, creation science must also be taught. The constitutionality of the law was successfully challenged in District Court, Aguillard v. Treen, 634 F. Supp. 426 (ED La.1985), and the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed, Aguillard v. Edwards, 765 F.2d 1251 (CA5 1985). The United States Supreme Court ruled that this law violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment because the law was specifically intended to advance a particular religion. In its decision, the court opined that "teaching a variety of scientific theories about the origins of humankind to school children might be validly done with the clear secular intent of enhancing the effectiveness of science instruction."
In support of Aguillard, 72 Nobel Prize-winning scientists,Edwards v. Aguillard: Amicus Curiae Brief of 72 Nobel Laureates 17 state academies of science, and seven other scientific organizations filed amicus briefs that described creation science as being composed of religious tenets.
Background
Modern American creationism arose from the theological split over modernist higher criticism and its rejection by the fundamentalist Christian movement, which promoted Biblical literalism and, post 1920, took up the anti-evolution cause led by William Jennings Bryan. The teaching of evolution had become a common part of the public school curriculum, but his campaign was based on the idea that "Darwinism" had caused German militarism and was a threat to traditional religion and morality. Several states passed legislation to ban or restrict the teaching of evolution. The Tennessee Butler Act was tested in the Scopes Trial of 1925, and continued in effect with the result that evolution was not taught in many schools.
When the United States sought to catch up in science during the 1960s with new teaching standards, which reintroduced evolution, the creation science movement arose, presenting what was claimed to be scientific evidence supporting young Earth creationism. Attempts were made to reintroduce legal bans, but the Supreme Court ruled in 1968’s Epperson v. Arkansas that bans on teaching evolutionary biology are unconstitutional as they violate the establishment clause of the United States Constitution, which forbids the government from advancing a particular religion.
In the early 1980s, several states attempted to introduce creationism alongside the teaching of evolution, and the Louisiana legislature passed a law, authored by State Senator Bill P. Keith of Caddo Parish, entitled the "Balanced Treatment for Creation-Science and Evolution-Science Act."Justice Brennan misnamed the statute as the "Balanced Treatment for Creation-Science and Evolution-Science in Public School Instruction Act" in the majority decision. The Act did not require teaching either creationism or evolution, but did require that, if evolutionary science was taught, then "creation science" must be taught as well.RS 17:286.5 Creationists lobbied aggressively for the law. The stated purpose of the Act was to protect "academic freedom."RS 17:286.2 Counsel for the state later admitted at the Supreme Court oral argument that the "legislature may not [have] used the term 'academic freedom' in the correct legal sense. They might have [had] in mind, instead, a basic concept of fairness; teaching all the evidence." Governor David C. Treen signed the bill into law in 1981.
The District Court in Aguillard v. Treen, 634 F. Supp. 426 (ED La.1985), and the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, 765 F.2d 1251 (CA5 1985), ruled against Louisiana, finding that its actual purpose in enacting the statute was to promote the religious doctrine of "creation science". An Arkansas District Court previously held in a 1982 decision in McLean v. Arkansas that a similar "balanced treatment" statute violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. Arkansas did not appeal the loss. Creationists believed the statute at issue in Edwards v. Aguillard had a better chance of passing constitutional muster, and so Louisiana appealed its loss in the trial and appellate courts to the Supreme Court.
The case was styled Edwards v. Aguillard because by the time the case reached the Supreme Court, Edwin Edwards had succeeded David Treen as governor of Louisiana, which was being sued, and Don Aguillard, a science teacher and assistant principal at Acadiana High School in Lafayette Parish, Louisiana was the lead original plaintiff in District Court among a group of Louisiana teachers, students, parents, scientists and clergy.
Result
On June 19, 1987 the Supreme Court, in a seven-to-two majority opinion written by Justice William J. Brennan, ruled that the Act constituted an unconstitutional infringement on the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment, based on the three-pronged Lemon test, which is:
 The government's action must have a legitimate secular purpose;
 The government's action must not have the primary effect of either advancing or inhibiting religion; and
 The government's action must not result in an "excessive entanglement" of the government and religion.
The Supreme Court held that the Act is facially invalid as violative of the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment, because it lacks a clear secular purpose (first part of the above Lemon test), since (a) the Act does not further its stated secular purpose of "protecting academic freedom", and (b) the Act impermissibly endorses religion by advancing the religious belief that a supernatural being created humankind.
However, it did note that alternative scientific theories could be taught:
The Court found that, although the Louisiana legislature had stated that its purpose was to "protect academic freedom", that purpose was dubious because the Act gave Louisiana teachers no freedom they did not already possess and instead limited their ability to determine what scientific principles should be taught. Because it was unconvinced by the state's proffered secular purpose, the Court went on to find that the legislature had a "preeminent religious purpose in enacting this statute".
Dissent
Justice Antonin Scalia, joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, dissented, accepting the Act's stated purpose of "protecting academic freedom" as a sincere and legitimate secular purpose. They interpreted the term "academic freedom" to refer to "students' freedom from indoctrination", in this case their freedom "to decide for themselves how life began, based upon a fair and balanced presentation of the scientific evidence". However, they also criticized the first prong of the Lemon test, noting that "to look for the sole purpose of even a single legislator is probably to look for something that does not exist".
Consequences and aftermath
The ruling was one in a series of developments addressing issues related to the American creationist movement and the separation of church and state. The scope of the ruling affected public schools and did not include independent schools, home schools, Sunday schools and Christian schools, which remained free to teach creationism.
During the case, creationists worked on a creationist biology textbook, with the hope of a huge market if the appeal went their way. Drafts were given various titles, including Biology and Creation. After the Edwards v. Aguillard ruling, the authors changed the terms "creation" and "creationists" in the text to "intelligent design" and "design proponents", and the book was published as Of Pandas and People. This supplementary textbook for school use attacked evolutionary biology without mentioning the identity of the "intelligent designer". Promotion of intelligent design creationism by the intelligent design movement eventually led to the textbook's use in a school district being challenged in another court case. Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District went to trial on September 26, 2005, and was decided in U.S. District Court on December 20, 2005 in favor of the plaintiffs, who charged that a mandate that intelligent design be taught was an unconstitutional establishment of religion. The 139-page opinion of Kitzmiller v. Dover was hailed as a landmark decision, firmly establishing that creationism and intelligent design were religious teachings and not areas of legitimate scientific research. Because the Dover school board chose not to appeal, the case never reached a circuit court or the U.S. Supreme Court.
Wendell Bird served as a special assistant attorney general for Louisiana in the case and later became a staff attorney for the Institute for Creation Research and Association of Christian Schools International. Bird later authored books promoting creationism and teaching it in public schools.
See also
 Scopes Trial
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1987 in religion
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States creationism and evolution case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Public education in Louisiana
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Edwards v. Arizona" ==> """
Edwards v. Arizona, 451 U.S. 477 (1981), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court holding that once a defendant invokes his Fifth Amendment right to counsel, police must cease custodial interrogation. Re-interrogation is only permissible once defendant's counsel has been made available to him, or he himself initiates further communication, exchanges, or conversations with the police. Statements obtained in violation of this rule are a violation of a defendant's Fifth Amendment rights.
 Facts 
Edwards was arrested at his home on charges of robbery, burglary, and first-degree murder. Following his arrest, at the police station, he was informed of his Miranda rights. Edwards stated he understood his rights, and was willing to submit to questioning. After being told that another suspect was arrested in connection with the same crime, Edwards denied involvement and then sought to "make a deal". Edwards then proceeded to call a county attorney and shortly afterwards he said to his interrogator "I want an attorney before making a deal." Immediately, the questioning ceased and Edwards was taken to county jail. The following morning, two detectives came to see him stating that they wanted to talk to him. At first Edwards resisted, but he was told he had to talk to the detectives. The officers informed him of his Miranda rights, and obtained a confession from him. At trial, Edwards sought to suppress his confession. The lower court and the Arizona Supreme Court denied the motion.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court held that a waiver of the right to counsel, once invoked, not only must be voluntary, but also must constitute a knowing and intelligent relinquishment of a known right or privilege. The fact that Edwards confessed after being read his Miranda rights does not demonstrate that he understood right to counsel and intelligently and knowingly relinquished it. Once the right to counsel under the Fifth Amendment has been invoked, a valid waiver cannot be shown just by the accused responding to interrogations despite Miranda warnings having been read. In Rhode Island v. Innis, , the court clarifies the meaning of interrogation.
 Contrast to the Sixth Amendment right to counsel 
Under Montejo v. Louisiana (2009), the Sixth Amendment's right to counsel does not prevent police from initiation of interrogation once the right attaches. This is in contrast to the Fifth Amendment right to counsel, where the police custodial interrogation is not permitted as per Edwards.
 See also 
Maryland v. Shatzer (2010)
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 451
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:1981 in Arizona
Category:Legal history of Arizona
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
"""

From "Edwards v. California" ==> """
Edwards v. People of State of California, 314 U.S. 160 (1941), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case where a California law prohibiting the bringing of a non-resident "indigent person" into the state was struck down as unconstitutional.
The so-called anti-Okie law made it a misdemeanor to bring into California "any indigent person who is not a resident of the State, knowing him to be an indigent person." Edwards was a Californian who had driven to Texas and returned with his unemployed brother-in-law.  He was tried, convicted and given a six-month suspended sentence.  On appeal from the Superior Court of Yuba County, the Supreme Court unanimously vacated the verdict and declared the law unconstitutional, as violating the Constitution's Commerce Clause.  Justice Byrnes wrote the majority opinion. In concurring opinions, Justices Douglas joined by Justices Black and Murphy, and Justice Jackson held that the law violated the Privileges or Immunities clause of the Fourteenth Amendment..
Background
Edwards was a citizen of the United States and a Californian resident. In December 1939, he left his home in Marysville for Spur, Texas, with the intent of picking up his brother-in-law, Frank Duncan, a citizen of the US and of Texas, and returning home to California with Duncan. During the course of his trip, Edwards was made aware of the fact that Duncan was unemployed and had little money and few personal possessions. As such, Duncan was classified as an indigent individual under California state law, the transportation of which into the state was strictly prohibited under Section 2615 of the Welfare and Institutions Code of California: "Every person, firm or corporation, or officer or agent thereof that brings or assists in bringing into the State any indigent person who is not a resident of the State, knowing him to be an indigent person, is guilty of a misdemeanor." A complaint was subsequently filed against Edwards in Justice Court, where he was convicted and sentenced to six months imprisonment in the county jail. Edwards appealed to the Superior Court of Yuba County and later to the Supreme Court of the United States, on the argument that his sentence was unconstitutional on the basis that the California law violated the Commerce Clause.
Holding
The Court found that Section 2615 of the Welfare and Institutions Code of California violated Article 1, Section 8 of the Constitution.
Concurrences
It is worth noting that in writing their concurring opinions, the additional justices chose to forgo the explanation that California had violated Article 1, Section 8 of the Constitution, arguing that defining the transportation of human beings as “commerce” raises a number of troubling moral questions which undermine individual rights and devalue the original intent of the Commerce Clause.  Instead, they propose the idea that the impairment of one's ability to freely traverse interstate borders is a violation of the implied rights of US citizenship, and thereby violates the 14th Amendment and the individual's right to equal protection.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 314
 Shapiro v. Thompson (1969)
 Saenz v. Roe (1999)
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1941 in United States case law
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:Legal history of California
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:1941 in California
Category:Vagrancy laws
Category:Marysville, California
Category:Dickens County, Texas
Category:Internal migrations in the United States
"""

From "Edwards v. South Carolina" ==> """
Edwards v. South Carolina, 372 U.S. 229 (1963), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court ruling that the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution forbade state government officials to force  a crowd to disperse when they are otherwise legally marching in front of a state house.
 Background 
The 187 petitioners consisted of African-American high school and college students who peacefully assembled at the Zion Baptist Church in Columbia, South Carolina on March 2, 1961.  The students marched in separate groups of roughly 15 to South Carolina State House grounds to peacefully express their grievances regarding civil rights of African-Americans.  
The crowd of petitioners did not engage in any violent conduct and did not threaten violence in any manner, nor did crowds gathering to witness the demonstration engage in any such behavior.  Petitioners were told by police officials that they must disperse within 15 minutes or face arrest.  The petitioners failed to disperse, opting to sing religious and patriotic songs instead.  Petitioners were convicted of the common law crime of breach of the peace.
 Outcome 
The Supreme Court held that in arresting, convicting and punishing the petitioners, South Carolina infringed on the petitioners' rights of free speech, free assembly and freedom to petition for a redress of grievances.  The Court stated that these rights are guaranteed by the First Amendment and protected by the Fourteenth Amendment from invasion by the States.
The Supreme Court argued the arrests and convictions of 187 marchers were an attempt by South Carolina to "make criminal the peaceful expression of unpopular views" where the marchers' actions were an exercise of First Amendment rights "in their most pristine and classic form."  The Court described the common law crime of breach of the peace as "not susceptible of exact definition.".
 Clark's dissent 
While the majority in Edwards distinguished Feiner v. New York (1951), based on the absence of violence or threats from the petitioners' march to the state capital, Justice Clark stated that the breach of the peace convictions upheld in Feiner presented "a situation no more dangerous than that found here." Justice Clark noted that Edwards was more dangerous because Feiner involved one person and was limited to a crowd of about 80, whereas the Edwards demonstration involved around 200 demonstrators and 300 onlookers. He argued that the City Manager's action may have averted a catastrophe because of the "almost spontaneous combustion in some Southern communities in such a situation."Edwards, 372 U.S. at 244 (Clark, J., dissenting).
See also
 Brown v. Louisiana
 Adderley v. Florida
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Warren Court
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 372
References
External links
First Amendment Library entry for Edwards v. South Carolina
Category:Freedom of assembly
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of South Carolina
Category:History of Columbia, South Carolina
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Edwards v. Vannoy" ==> """
Edwards v. Vannoy, 593 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the Court's prior decision in Ramos v. Louisiana, 590 U.S. ___ (2020), which had ruled that jury verdicts in criminal trials must be unanimous under the Sixth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The Supreme Court ruled 6–3 that Ramos did not apply retroactively to earlier cases prior to their verdict in Ramos.
Background
Under the Sixth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, a person accused of criminal charges must be tried by a jury. Federal laws required the jury to come to a unanimous decision to achieve conviction, but states had been free to adapt their own requirements for conviction based on the 1972 case Apodaca v. Oregon. All but two states adopted the same unanimous jury conviction requirements as federal law; only Louisiana and Oregon allowed for majority jury votes to convict, as well as the Puerto Rico territory. In 2019, Louisiana altered its laws to require a unanimous jury conviction.
Ramos v. Louisiana was brought to the Supreme Court to challenge the Louisiana jury-majority conviction law prior to its change on the basis it was a Jim Crow law that allowed for racial discrimination. The Supreme Court ruled in a 6–3 decision in Ramos that the Sixth Amendment was an incorporated right to the states, and that the Louisiana and Oregon allowance for non-unanimous jury convictions was unconstitutional, overturning the Apodaca v. Oregon ruling. The decision had split across the typical ideological lines of the Justices, with Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Samuel Alito and Elena Kagan dissenting.
In the present case, Thedrick Edwards was an African-American that was convicted in 2007 in Louisiana on charges of rape, armed robbery, and kidnapping. The jury convictions were all non-unanimous, and Edwards had claimed that the state had manipulated jury selection to minimize the minority representation on the jury; the lone black juror had voted against any convictions. Edwards had spent the intervening years challenging his conviction on the basis that Louisiana's non-unanimous jury conviction laws were unconstitutional and had petitioned to the Supreme Court prior to their Ramos decision on the same questions that Ramos had presented. Upon the Ramos ruling in April 2020, Edwards changed his petition to the Court to ask whether the Ramos decision should apply retroactively.
Supreme Court
The Court granted certiorari to Edwards' revised petition on the retroactivity of the Ramos decision in May 2020. 
Oral arguments were heard on December 2, 2020 via teleconference due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Observers found that the Justices were split over the retroactive application of their decisions. While most Supreme Court decision do not have retroactive applications, certain decisions have involved certain "watershed" rights to require retroactive application, such as the right to an attorney decided by Gideon v. Wainwright (372 U.S. 335 (1963)); the ability to apply decisions retroactively to cases involving watershed rights had been defined in principle in Teague v. Lane (489 U.S. 288 (1989)) but the Justices were unsure if there was a practical test to determine what are watershed rights.
The Court issued its decision on May 17, 2021. In a 6–3 ruling, the Court affirmed the lower court's ruling. The majority opinion was written by Justice Brett Kavanaugh and was joined by the conservative side of the court, finding that the Ramos decision did not apply retroactively. The majority's decision determined that the requirement for a unanimous jury vote was not sufficiently "watershed" as to require Ramos to be made retroactive. Kavanaugh wrote  "Continuing to articulate a theoretical exception that never actually applies in practice offers false hope to defendants, distorts the law, misleads judges, and wastes the resources of defense counsel, prosecutors, and courts." Kavanaugh wrote that the affected states were free to consider renewed trials for those affected cases on their own. In the opinion, Kavanaugh also suggested that it would be impossible for any future change in criminal court proceedings would ever reach the "watershed" factor defined in the Teague ruling, nor had any court change prior to Edwards had met the standard set in Teague for the "watershed" requirement. As such, Kavanaugh considered that that portion of the Teague ruling was overturned.
Justice Elena Kagan wrote the dissenting opinion joined by Justices Stephen Breyer and Sonia Sotomayor. Kagan wrote that "those convicted under rules found not to produce fair and reliable verdicts will be left without recourse in federal courts."
Later events
While the Supreme Court opted to not consider the Ramos decision to be retroactive, the Oregon Supreme Court ruled in December 2022 that the Ramos decision should be applied retroactively to cases within the state.
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
"""

From "EEOC v. Wyoming" ==> """
EEOC v. Wyoming, 460 U.S. 226 (1983), is a United States Supreme Court case about forcible retirement of an employee of the Wyoming Game and Fish Department.
The EEOC was represented by Solicitor General Rex E. Lee.
 References 
Category:Ageism case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1983 in United States case law
"""

From "Egbert v. Boule" ==> """
Egbert v. Boule, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), is a United States Supreme Court case related to Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents.
 Background 
Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents was a 1971 Supreme Court case that allowed for private citizens to seek monetary damages from federal agents when their rights were violated. However, the Bivens decision was based on a limited application of the Fourth Amendment to protect from illegal search and seizure, and since Bivens was decided, the Supreme Court has generally denied extending that decision to cover other causes of actions on the basis that only Congress could otherwise establish a pathway for such remedies.
Robert Boule is the owner of "Smuggler's Inn", a bed-and-breakfast in Blaine, Washington, near the Canada–United States border. Part of Boule's property extended into Canada, which allowed for illegal crossing of the border as well as a route for contraband. That made the United States Border Patrol keep close watch on the hotel, and Boule often worked with Border Patrol agents to notify them when persons of interest were staying at his inn to allow them to be detained by the agents.
In 2014, the Border Patrol became aware of a Turkish person that had arranged travel to the inn. When the guest arrived at the inn, the agent Erik Egbert approached the inn and looked to speak with the individual. Boule stopped Egbert and asked him to leave. Boule alleged that Egbert had used a show of force and  unlawfully harassed him during the visit to the inn and later retaliated against him by reporting him to the Internal Revenue Service. The district court ruled for Egbert and found that the Supreme Court had held that under the prior Supreme Court case Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents, causes of action that would allow citizens to sue federal agents for violation of their rights could not be extended to First Amendment retaliation claims or Fourth Amendment claims touching on immigration issues. A panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed. Twelve judges dissented from the denial of rehearing en banc, in opinions authored by Judges John B. Owens, Daniel Bress, and Patrick J. Bumatay.
Boule subsequently filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on November 5, 2021, limited to the first two questions presented. The Court declined to consider the question of whether Bivens should be completely overruled.
The Court issued its decision on June 8, 2022. In a 9–0 decision, the court reversed the Ninth Circuit's ruling on the First Amendment retaliation claim. It split 6–3 on the Fourth Amendment claim. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote the majority. Justice Neil Gorsuch concurred in the judgment and called for Bivens to be overruled in its entirety. Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment in part (as to the First Amendment claim) and dissenting in part (as to the Fourth Amendment claim). Thomas wrote that under Bivens, only Congress could authorize a damage remedy for either asserted First or Fourth Amendment violations for cases against federal agents, and cautioned from allowing the court to expand beyond the limited cases that Bivens allowed for. In the partial dissent, Sotomayor agreed that the alleged First Amendment violations could not go forward under Bivens, but argued that the Fourth Amendment claim should have been considered.
 Subsequent developments 
The decision reinforces the immunity of federal officers from lawsuits related to claims of violations of constitutional rights.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "Egbert v. Lippmann" ==> """
Egbert v. Lippmann, 104 U.S. 333 (1881), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that public use of an invention bars the patenting of it.. The Court's ruling was colored by its view that the inventor had forfeited his right to patent the invention by "sleeping on his rights" while others commercialized the technology.Egbert, 104 U.S. at 337 ("The inventor slept on his rights for eleven years.").
Background
Facts
thumb|200px|right|The corset stay patented in this case
Samuel Barnes designed "corset-steels", which were vertically disposed springs to stiffen a corset. Samuel made the invention in 1855 after he had been present while two women,
his "intimate friend," Frances Willis, and her friend, Miss Cugier, were
"complaining of the breaking of their corset steels." Samuel devised a stronger device using two pieces of metal fastened together to create a
doubled, reinforced corset steel.See Egbert, 104 U.S. at 335. He then gave the springs to Frances, who would in 1863 become his wife and later the executrix of his will. In 1858 he gave her another set of steels, which she used for a long time.  In 1863, Samuel and Frances showed the invention to his friend Joseph Sturgis; and in March 1866 Samuel applied for a patent.According to the Supreme Court, by letting Francis use the steels in her corsets for an extended period before applying for a patent, Samuel "slept on his rights for eleven years." Egbert, 104 U.S. at 337. For patent attorney witticisms on this subject, see, e.g.,  522-27 (4th ed. 2007). Samuel died a month after the patent issued in July 1866. Frances remarried in 1870 and became Frances Egbert. Subsequently, Frances, as Samuel's executrix and owner of the patent, sued for patent infringement.
Proceedings in lower court
Frances Egbert sued Phillip Lippmann and August Seligmann in the Southern District of New York.Egbert v. Lippmann, 8 F. Cas. 370 (C.C.S.D.N.Y. 1878). Circuit Judge Blatchford tried the case and held the patent invalid because of public use. He ruled:
It was not a use for experiment, or a use in private or a private use. It was a practical use in public of the completed
article [despite its concealment and invisibility within the corset]. No secrecy was maintained or enjoined as to the article or its structure.Egbert, 8 F. Cas. at 371.
Frances appealed the judgment to the Supreme Court.
Ruling of Supreme Court
Majority opinion
150px|right|thumb|Justice William Burnham Woods
Justice William Burnham Woods wrote for the majority, explaining that public use of the invention by only one person is sufficient to be considered a public use, even where the usage of the invention is not visible to the general public.  Similarly, a gift to another party without regard to secrecy or restrictions on use is sufficient to bar a patent for the same reason. Whether the use of an invention is public use or private use "does not necessarily depend on the number of persons to whom its use is known."Egbert, 104 U.S. at 336.
Rather: "If an inventor, having made his device, gives or sells it to another, to be used by the donee or vendee without limitation or restriction or injunction of secrecy and it is so used, such use is public even though the use and knowledge of the use may be confined to one person." It is a public use because "[s}he might have exhibited them to any person, or made other steels of the same kind and used or sold them without violating any condition or restriction imposed on her by the inventor."Egbert, 104 U.S. at 337. Thus, the Court treated Barnes's gift of the corset steels to his "intimate friend" (not then his wife) without her first signing a confidentiality agreement as if it were a sale in the ordinary course of business.See Kara W. Swanson, Getting a Grip on the Corset: Gender, Sexuality and Patent Law, 23  57, 108 (2011) ("By considering the transfer to Frances as if it were a sale, the Court shifted not just Frances's corset, but the entire relationship between the future husband and wife, to the public, commercial realm. From this assumption, the Court considered [only] what Frances 'might have' done."). 
The majority held that the use here was different from that in City of Elizabeth v. Pavement Company because this was not a good faith effort to test or experiment with the design. Furthermore, Barnes "slept on his rights" for the eleven years between 1855 and 1866, not applying for a patent until other manufacturers had already incorporated aspects similar to Barnes' design into their own products. He did not bother applying for a patent until he came to the belated realization that he could potentially profit from his invention.  Thefore, the court held the patent invalid.
Dissent
Justice Samuel Freeman Miller was the sole dissenter in this case, disagreeing with the majority about the "public" nature of Frances' use of the corset-steels. He argued that the majority ignored the statutory word "public" in the patent law's making "public use" a bar to patenting an invention. Miller argued:
A private use with consent, which could lead to no copy or reproduction of the machine, which taught the nature of the invention to no one but the party to whom such consent was given, which left the public at large as ignorant of this as it was before the author's discovery, was no abandonment to the public, and did not defeat his claim for a patent. If the little steep spring inserted in a single pair of corsets, and used by only one woman, covered by her outer clothing, and in a position always withheld from public observation, is a public use of that piece of steel, I am at a loss to know the line between a private and a public use.Egbert, 104 U.S. at 339.
Subsequent legislation
The 2011 America Invents Act (AIA) may have completely overturned Egbert v. Lipmann.See generally Joseph A. Lingenfelter, Putting the Public back in Public Use: Interpreting the 2011 Leahy-Smith America Invents Act, 31  867 (2015). The public use provision of the statute now provides that a person is not entitled to a patent if "the claimed invention was  . . . in public use . . . or otherwise available to the public before the effective filing date of the claimed invention."35 U.S.C. § 102(a)(1). That appears to limit public use to uses available to the public and to exclude as bars to patentability any hidden, inaccessible, private uses, since it implies that public use is within the class of things otherwise available to the public.It is an accepted principle of statutory construction that when a list of items is in the form A, B, or otherwise C, it is understood that C modifies all the preceding items. A steel spring hidden within a corset would not seem to be available to the public.
The availability requirement is consistent with the AIA's legislative history. Prior to the Senate vote, Senator Jon Kyl explained to the Senate that the Judiciary Committee had added the words "otherwise available to the public" to "abrogate...the rule announced in Egbert v. Lippmann."157 Cong. Rec. Sl371 (daily ed. Mar. 8, 2011). He also asserted that Justice Miller's dissent in that case had been correct.
Commentary
Feminist commentator Kara Swanson analyzed the case as explicating the public use doctrine at "the intersections of gender and intellectual property from a feminist perspective." In her view:
Like the more celebrated technologies of the era, such as the telephone, the telegraph, and the light bulb, the corset was the product of many inventors, making and patenting improvements, and fighting about their rights in court. As American women donned their corsets, they were enacting a daily intimate relationship with a heavily patent-protected technology. The corset during these decades was deeply embedded both within the social construction of gender and sexuality, as a marker of femininity and respectability, and within the United States patent system, as a commercial good in which many claimed intellectual property rights. Getting a grip on the corset, then, offers a way to simultaneously consider gender, sexuality, and patent law.Kara W. Swanson, Getting a Grip on the Corset: Gender, Sexuality and Patent Law, 23  57 (2011).
Swanson argues that the Court's considerable expansion of the concept of "public use" from commercial exploitation to secret use without a confidentiality agreement reflected the Court nineteenth century gender biases. The Court's majority was antagonistic to Frances's failing to adhere to "the prevailing gender ideology of the time" by becoming not only a corset manufacturer but a patent enforcing litigant—"a role in
which she acted in the public sphere directly, without the mediation of a man, and in unspoken defiance of the separate spheres ideology" according to which women did not publicly act as men. Swanson scoffs at the majority's demand that Barnes should have got Frances to sign a confidentiality agreement in order to avoid abandonment of his right to a patent: 
A man need not get his lover to sign an agreement that she would not show her undergarments to anyone else; his exclusive right
to view those undergarments was an assumption of their private relationship. And if the relationship was private, then was the use of the steel not also private, and therefore unable to trigger the statutory bar?
Brian J. Love explains the ruling as an example of "bad facts ushering the creation of bad law."Brian J. Love, Bad Actors and the Evolution of Patent Law, 101  1 (2015). He finds it "hard to imagine a decision that deems 'public' the interior of a romantic partner's underwear." The case makes more sense, he argues, to view the case as one of a "submarine" invention. He points to the facts: "first, that the inventor waited eleven years before filing a patent application; and second, that the corset spring industry independently and innocently adopted the same design in the meantime." Love therefore castigates the Egbert Court for distorting patent law to reach its judgment in this case:
Rather than enunciating an equitable rule to protect settled expectations, and conversely to punish those who sit on their rights only to spring forth later and disrupt those expectations, the Court
chose instead to stretch the meaning of "publicly used" to an arguably tortured and, at the very least, quite counter-intuitive extent. Members of the Court, it seems quite possible, spotted a bad actor and made a deliberate decision not to reward his sharp behavior. But, rather than doing so forthrightly and in a manner directed solely at the inventor involved in this case, the Court did so sub silentio and in a manner that created a perennial trap for unsophisticated inventors that continues to destroy the nascent patent rights of small inventors to this day, more than a century later.
References 
Further reading
Kara W. Swanson, Getting a Grip on the Corset: Gender, Sexuality and Patent Law, 23  57 (2011)  – feminist and sociological analysis of case, providing a "feminist analysis of the public use doctrine as defined in Egbert"
Swanson, Kara W. (April 18, 2019). "The Corset. A History of Intellectual Property in 50 Objects, Claudy Op Den Camp and Dan Hunter (eds)., Cambridge University Press". Northeastern University School of Law Research Paper No 307-2017 – via SSRN.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1881 in United States case law
Category:Corsetry
"""

From "Egelhoff v. Egelhoff" ==> """
Egelhoff v. Egelhoff, 532 U.S. 141 (2001), is a major decision of the Supreme Court of the United States on federalism, specifically with regards to the preemption powers of federal law over state laws. It sets the precedent that any state statutes having a "connection with" ERISA plans are superseded by ERISA, or any future substantially similar law that takes its place. In essence, this decision is a reaffirmation of the right and ability of the federal government to, at least in some instances, pre-empt state laws.
Background
Washington resident David A. Egelhoff was married to Donna Rae Egelhoff, and during that time he designated her as the beneficiary of a life insurance policy and pension plan provided by his employer, The Boeing Company. The life insurance policy & pension were governed by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), a piece of federal legislation concerning pension and life insurance programs. David Egelhoff subsequently divorced his wife, but did not immediately remove her as a beneficiary.  Weeks after the divorce had been finalized, David Egelhoff was killed in a car accident. David Egelhoff's children, from a previous marriage, filed suit against Donna Rae Egelhoff for the benefits (life insurance and pension) from their deceased father. The case was considered under Washington state law wherein the designation of a spouse as beneficiary to "nonprobate asset," a life insurance policy or employee benefit plan, is revoked immediately upon the divorce of the designator and the beneficiary. However, under ERISA, this was not the case, and Donna Rae Egelhoff would be the beneficiary of her late ex-husband's benefits.
The trial court decided that ERISA pre-empted Washington state law, and granted Donna Rae Egelhoff the benefits she sought. The Washington Court of Appeals reversed this decision, claiming that the federal law did not supersede state law. The Supreme Court of Washington affirmed this decision, citing that, because the Statute did not "refer to" or have a "connection with" an ERISA plan, the state law would be most appropriate. The Supreme Court granted certiorari and heard the case.
Decision
The Supreme Court disagreed with the decision of the Washington State Supreme Court, and instead ruled that this law did, in fact, have a "connection with" an ERISA plan, and was therefore pre-empted by the federal legislation. According to the decision, the criteria used to determine whether or not a state law has a connection with ERISA, "the Court looks both to ERISA’s objectives as a guide to the scope of the state law that Congress understood would survive, as well as to the nature of the state law’s effect on ERISA plans." Further, the Court believed it, "interfere[d] with nationally uniform plan administration." The Court reasoned that this sort of state law was precisely the sort of situation that ERISA sought to remedy in the first place, and ruled that if it were allowed it would effectively render much of ERISA unenforceable.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 532
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States federal preemption law
Category:Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Washington (state)
"""

From "Eisenstadt v. Baird" ==> """
Eisenstadt v. Baird, 405 U.S. 438 (1972), was a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court that established the right of unmarried people to possess contraception on the same basis as married couples.
The Court struck down a Massachusetts law prohibiting the distribution of contraceptives to unmarried people for the purpose of preventing pregnancy, ruling that it violated the Equal Protection Clause of the U.S. Constitution. The decision effectively legalized (heterosexual) premarital sex in the United States.
Background
William Baird was charged with a felony for distributing contraceptive foams after lectures on birth control and population control at Boston University.Eisenstadt v. Baird Summary The prearranged violation of the law occurred on April 6, 1967 when Baird handed a condom and a package of contraceptive foam to a 19-year-old woman.The Short History of Our Right to Contraceptives: Eisenstadt v. Baird 40 Years Later Under Massachusetts law on "crimes against chastity" (Chapter 272, section 21A), contraceptives could be distributed only by registered doctors or pharmacists, and only to married persons.
After Baird was convicted, an appeal resulted in partial overturn by the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court, which concluded that the lectures were covered by First Amendment protections. However, the court affirmed the conviction under contraceptive distribution laws. Baird filed a petition for a federal writ of habeas corpus, which was refused by the federal district court. Upon appeal, The Court of Appeals for the First Circuit vacated the dismissal and remanded the action with directions to grant the writ, and dismiss the charge, reasoning that the Massachusetts law infringed on fundamental human rights of unmarried couples as guaranteed by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. This ruling was then appealed to the United States Supreme Court, by Sheriff Eisenstadt, who had prosecuted the case, on the ground that Baird lacked standing to appeal, being neither an authorized distributor under the statute nor a single person.
Supreme Court decision
In a 6–1 decision. (Justices Rehnquist and Powell were not sworn in in time to participate in the case), the Court upheld both Baird's standing to appeal and the First Circuit's decision on the basis of the Equal Protection Clause, but did not reach the Due Process issues. The majority opinion was written by Justice William J. Brennan Jr. and joined by three other justices, William O. Douglas, Potter Stewart, and Thurgood Marshall. Brennan reasoned that, since Massachusetts did not (and perhaps could not under Griswold v. Connecticut) enforce its law against married couples, the law worked irrational discrimination by denying the right to possess contraceptives by unmarried couples.  He found that Massachusetts's law was not designed to protect public health and lacked a rational basis.
Brennan, writing for the Court, made four principal observations:
 Baird had standing to assert the rights of unmarried persons who wished to have access to contraceptives.
 The Massachusetts law could not reasonably be held to advance the purpose of deterring fornication, since a) fornication was a misdemeanor in Massachusetts, and a state could not reasonably wish to punish a misdemeanor by forcing an unwanted child on the fornicator; b) the state could not reasonably wish to punish the distributor of contraceptives as a felon for aiding and abetting the misdemeanor of fornication; c) the law did not prohibit the distribution of contraceptives to unmarried persons for the purpose of preventing sexually-transmitted diseases, and d) the law made no attempt to ensure that contraceptives legally obtained by a married person for the purpose of preventing pregnancy would not be used in an extramarital affair.
 The Massachusetts law could not reasonably be held to promote health, as whatever health risks posed by contraceptives were just as great for married persons as unmarried persons.
 The Massachusetts law could not be justified by the State's judgment that contraceptives are immoral per se, because the morality of contraceptives does not depend on the marital status of those who use it.  It is possible that the Due Process right of privacy of married couples to use contraceptives recognized in Griswold v. Connecticut means that married couples have the right to have contraceptives distributed to them; if so, then unmarried people have that same right.  ("If the right of privacy means anything, it is the right of the individual, married or single, to be free from unwarranted governmental intrusion into matters so fundamentally affecting a person as the decision whether to bear or beget a child.")  But even if Griswold does not imply a Due Process right of married couples to be distributed contraceptives, the Equal Protection Clause prevents states from using the immorality of contraception as a basis for denying to unmarried people the same access to contraceptives as married people.
Justice Douglas, concurring, argued that in addition to privacy rights, Baird was engaged in speech while distributing vaginal foam, and his arrest was therefore prohibited by the First Amendment.
Justice White, joined by Justice Blackmun, did not join Brennan's opinion but concurred in the judgment on narrower grounds. White and Blackmun declined to reach the issue of whether Massachusetts could limit distribution of contraceptives only to married couples. They argued that Massachusetts had asserted an implausible health rationale for limiting distribution of vaginal foam to licensed pharmacists or physicians.
Chief Justice Burger dissented alone, arguing that there were no conclusive findings available to the Court on the health risks of vaginal foam since that issue had not been presented to the lower courts, and thus no basis for the Court's finding that the Massachusetts statute served no public health interest. Burger also held that the Massachusetts statute independently advanced the state's interest in ensuring couples receive informed medical advice on contraceptives.
Significance
Later cases have interpreted the ruling's most  famous sentence—"If the right of privacy means anything, it is the right of the individual, married or single, to be free from unwarranted governmental intrusion into matters so fundamentally affecting a person as the decision whether to bear or beget a child."—as recognizing the right of single people to engage in sexual activity.  Carey v. Population Services International, decided in 1977, struck down a New York law forbidding distribution of contraceptives to those under 16 but failed to produce a majority opinion and thus is not widely cited.  Bowers v. Hardwick in 1986 rejected the claim of homosexuals to a fundamental right to engage in sodomy. In dissent, John Paul Stevens argued that Eisenstadt (and Carey) protected premarital heterosexual relations, and that the state had no rationale for distinguishing between heterosexuals and homosexuals. Lawrence v. Texas overruled Bowers in 2003, citing Eisenstadt in support of this ruling, and recognized that consenting adults had a right to engage in private, consensual non-commercial sexual intercourse. Roy Lucas, a prominent abortion rights lawyer, assessed the case as  "among the most influential in the United States during the entire [20th] century by any manner or means of measurement." Eisenstadt v. Baird is mentioned in over 52 Supreme Court cases from 1972 through 2002.  Each of the eleven U.S. Court of Appeals Circuit, as well as the Federal Circuit, has cited Eisenstadt v. Baird as authority.  The highest courts of all 50 States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico have cited Eisenstadt v. Baird. Eisenstadt v. Baird has been described as "among the most influential in the United States during the entire century by any manner or means of measurement".
See also
Bill Baird
Birth control movement in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 405
 Sex-related court cases
References
External links
Bill Baird on Facebook
Pro-Choice League
"The people versus Bill Baird: struggling for your right to privacy" by Bill Baird
"Birth control turns thirty-five" by Joni Baird
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States reproductive rights case law
Category:Birth control law and case law
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:History of women in Massachusetts
Category:Legal history of Massachusetts
Category:1972 in Massachusetts
Category:Boston University
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Birth control in the United States
Category:Condoms
"""

From "Eisner v. Macomber" ==> """
Eisner v. Macomber, 252 U.S. 189 (1920), was a tax case before the United States Supreme Court that is notable for the following holdings:
A pro rata stock dividend where a shareholder received no actual cash or other property and retained the same proportionate share of ownership of the corporation as was held prior to the dividend by the shareholder was not income to the shareholder under the Sixteenth Amendment.
An income tax that was imposed by the Revenue Act of 1916 on such a dividend was unconstitutional even if the dividend indirectly represented accrued earnings of the corporation..
Prior cases
In 1895, the Supreme Court held in Pollock v. Farmers' Loan & Trust Co. that a tax from income on property, unlike a tax on income from employment or vocations, had to be proportionate to the states' congressional representation. In 1913, the United States ratified the Sixteenth Amendment, which allowed taxation of income without regard to source (income from either property or vocations and employment) and without regard to a state's Congressional representation.
In 1918, the Court, in Towne v. Eisner , had addressed a nearly-identical situation to one in 
Eisner v. Macomber. (Eisner was responsible for Internal Revenue Collection in both cases).
However, in the aftermath of Towne v. Eisner, the US Congress passed a revenue collection statute that specifically stated that stock dividends were to be considered as income.
Facts
Myrtle H. Macomber owned 2,200 shares in Standard Oil, which declared a 50% stock dividend. She received 1,100 additional shares, about $20,000 in par value of which represented earnings accumulated by the company, recapitalized rather than distributed, since the effective date of the original tax law.
The current statute expressly included stock dividends in income, and the government contended that the certificates should be taxed as income to Macomber as if the corporation had distributed money to her.  She sued Mark Eisner, the Collector of Internal Revenue, for a refund.
Economic substance of a stock dividend
The stock dividend in this case was the economic equivalent of a stock split, a transaction in which the corporation multiplies the total number of shares outstanding but gives the new shares to shareholders in proportion to the number that they had held. For example, if a corporation declares a "two for one" stock split and distributes no money or other property to any stockholder, a stockholder who held 100 shares at $4 per share will now hold 200 shares with a value of $2 each, both of which with $400 in value.
Stock dividends vs. cash dividends
A shareholder's assets do not grow after this sort of stock dividend. Metaphorically, the "pie" is still the same size, but it has been sliced into more pieces, each piece being proportionately smaller. Of course, the same is true of a cash dividend: the shareholder gains cash, but the corporation that is represented by his shares has also lost cash. The shares thus implicitly decline in value by an equal amount.
A shareholder also makes no "sale or other disposition" of stock after this sort of stock dividend. The taxpayer still owns the same proportionate percentage of the corporation that was owned before the stock dividend. Again, that is true of a cash dividend as well.
However, several important factors distinguish a stock and cash dividend. "Overall, the aim of the tax law is to impose a tax on "dividends" when assets representing corporate earnings are transferred to the shareholders. Stock dividends, however, merely give the shareholders additional pieces of paper to represent the same equitable interest; they do not transfer assets or create new priorities among the security-holders. The total value of the common shares, though now spread out over a larger number of units, is left unchanged from its previous level. In effect, nothing of substance has occurred."
The issue in the case was the following:
Decision
In the majority opinion, Justice Mahlon Pitney ruled that the stock dividend was not a realization of income by the taxpayer-shareholder for the purposes of the Sixteenth Amendment:
We are clear that not only does a stock dividend really take nothing from the property of the corporation and add nothing to that of the shareholder, but that the antecedent accumulation of profits evidenced thereby, while indicating that the shareholder is richer because of an increase of his capital, at the same time shows he has not realized or received any income in the transaction.
The Court noted that in Towne v. Eisner, it had clearly stated that stock dividends were not income, as nothing of value was received by Towne; the company was not worth any less than it was when the dividend was declared, and the total value of Towne's stock had not changed.
Although the Court acknowledged the power of the Federal Government to tax income under the Sixteenth Amendment, it essentially said that Congress was not given the power to tax as income anything other than income. In others words, Congress did not have the power to redefine "income" as it appeared in the Constitution:
Throughout the argument of the Government, in a variety of forms, runs the fundamental error already mentioned—a failure to appraise correctly the force of the term "income" as used in the Sixteenth Amendment, or at least to give practical effect to it. Thus, the Government contends that the tax "is levied on income derived from corporate earnings," when in truth the stockholder has "derived" nothing except paper certificates which, so far as they have any effect, deny him [or "her" — in this case, Mrs. Macomber] present participation in such earnings. It [the government] contends that the tax may be laid when earnings "are received by the stockholder," whereas [s]he has received none; that the profits are "distributed by means of a stock dividend," although a stock dividend distributes no profits; that under the Act of 1916 "the tax is on the stockholder's share in corporate earnings," when in truth a stockholder has no such share, and receives none in a stock dividend; that "the profits are segregated from his [her] former capital, and [s]he has a separate certificate representing his [her] invested profits or gains," whereas there has been no segregation of profits, nor has [s]he any separate certificate representing a personal gain, since the certificates, new and old, are alike in what they represent—a capital interest in the entire concerns of the corporation.
The Court ordered that Macomber be refunded the tax she overpaid.
Dissents
In the dissent, Justice Louis Brandeis took issue with the majority's interpretation of income. He argued that the Sixteenth Amendment authorized Congress to tax "incomes, from whatever source derived" and that the authors of the amendment "intended to include thereby everything which by reasonable understanding can fairly be regarded as income." Also, "Congress possesses the power which it exercised to make dividends representing profits, taxable as income, whether the medium in which the dividend is paid be cash or stock, and that it may define, as it has done, what dividends representing profits shall be deemed income."
He noted that in business circles, cash dividends and stock dividends were treated identically. In effect, he argued that a stock dividend is really a cash dividend since it is really two-step affair, with a cash distribution that is then used to purchase additional shares by the exercise of stock subscription rights.  Brandeis saw no reason for two essentially-identical transactions to be treated differently for tax purposes:
Aftermath
In any event, the success of investors in avoiding tax was short lived. The following year, the Court ruled that capital gains were income and that they should be recognized as income when the stock was sold. In addition, the exception for stock dividends was narrowed by the Court in such cases as United States v. Phellis,  (shares in a subsidiary corporation that were issued to stockholders in the parent corporation were taxable as income); Rockefeller v. United States  and Cullinan v. Walker  (increases in capital accumulated by corporations over time were taxable when shares were distributed to stockholders in a successor corporation).
In 1940, the Supreme Court departed from the realization concept described in Eisner v. Macomber when it held in Helvering v. Bruun,  that "severance" is not an element of realization. In Bruun, a taxpayer-landlord repossessed a property from a tenant—property that had been subject to a 99-year lease after the tenant failed to pay rent and taxes. The lease had allowed for the tenant to construct a new building or other improvements. The tenant had removed the existing building and built a new one. The value of the new building, as of the date of repossession, was $64,245.68. The government contended that the landlord realized a gain of $51,434.25, the difference between the value of the building at the date of repossession and the landlord's basis in the old building of $12,811.43. The landlord argued that there was no realization of the property because no transaction had occurred,  and that the improvement of the property that created the gain was unseverable from the landlord's original capital.
The Court ruled against the landlord and decided that the landlord had realized a gain upon repossession of the property. The Court also said that "severance" was no longer an element of realization.
Use by tax protesters
Eisner v. Macomber is a key case in US income tax law. Its rather narrow but important application has been used by tax protesters who argue that wages from labor cannot be taxed as income. The Macomber decision was not about wages, but stock dividends.
Here is a typical quote from the case used as support of this position:
In order, therefore, that the clauses cited from Article I of the Constitution may have proper force and effect save only as modified by the Amendment, and that the latter also may have proper effect, it is essential to distinguish between what is and what is not income" as the term is there used; and to apply the distinction as cases arise according to truth and substance without regard to form. Congress by any definition it may adopt cannot conclude the matter, since it cannot by legislation alter the Constitution, from which it derives its power to legislate, and within whose limitations alone that power can be lawfully exercised [emphasis added]
The Supreme Court in the case discussed what was income, and quoted from Towne v. Eisner:
Just as we deem the legislative intent manifest to tax the stockholder with respect to such accumulations only if and when, and to the extent that, his interest in them comes to fruition as income, that is, in dividends declared, so we can perceive no constitutional obstacle that stands in the way of carrying out this intent when dividends are declared out of a pre-existing surplus.... Congress was at liberty under the amendment to tax as income, without apportionment, everything that became income, in the ordinary sense of the word, after the adoption of the amendment, including dividends received in the ordinary course by a stockholder from a corporation, even though they were extraordinary in amount and might appear upon analysis to be a mere realization in possession of an inchoate and contingent interest that the stockholder had in a surplus of corporate assets previously existing. [emphasis added]
Important principles in Eisner v. Macomber are that the word "income" in the Sixteenth Amendment is generally given its ordinary plain English meaning and that wealth and property that are not income may not be taxed as income by the Federal Government.
See also
 Irwin v. Gavit
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 252
References
Sources
Chatfield, Michael. "Eisner v. Macomber." In History of Accounting: An International Encyclopedia, edited by Michael Chatfield and Richard Vangermeersch. New York: Garland Publishing, 1996. P. 226.
External links
 Unsuccessful attempts to use Macomber as justification for not paying taxes at quatloos.com:
Snyder v. Indiana Department of State Revenue
Pennybaker v. Commissioner of Internal Revenue
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States Sixteenth Amendment case law
Category:1920 in United States case law
Category:Dividends
"""

From "Eldred v. Ashcroft" ==> """
Eldred v. Ashcroft, 537 U.S. 186 (2003), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States upholding the constitutionality of the 1998 Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act (CTEA). The practical result of this was to prevent a number of works from entering the public domain in 1998 and following years, as would have occurred under the Copyright Act of 1976. Materials which the plaintiffs had worked with and were ready to republish were now unavailable due to copyright restrictions.
Internet publisher Eric Eldred was the lead petitioner, and was joined by a group of commercial and non-commercial interests who relied on the public domain for their work (including Dover Publications) and many amici including the Free Software Foundation, the American Association of Law Libraries, the Bureau of National Affairs, and the College Art Association. Eldred was represented by Lawrence Lessig and a team at the Berkman Center for Internet and Society.
Supporting the law were United States Attorneys General Janet Reno and John Ashcroft, along with a set of amici including the Motion Picture Association of America, the Recording Industry Association of America, ASCAP and Broadcast Music Incorporated.
Background
thumb|150px|left|Eric Eldred, the lead plaintiff.
The Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act (or CTEA) extended existing copyright terms by an additional 20 years from the terms set by the Copyright Act of 1976. The law affected both new and existing works (making it both a prospective extension as well as a retroactive one). Specifically, for works published before January 1, 1978, and still in copyright on October 27, 1998, the term was extended to 95 years. For works authored by individuals on or after January 1, 1978 (including new works), the copyright term was extended to equal the life of the author plus 70 years. For works authored by joint authors, the copyright term was extended to the life of the last surviving author plus 70 years. In the case of works-for-hire, anonymous or pseudonymous works, the term was set at 95 years from the date of first publication, or 120 years from creation.
The practical result of this was to prevent a number of works from entering the public domain in 1998 and following years, as would have occurred under the Copyright Law of 1976. Materials which the plaintiffs had worked with and were ready to republish were now unavailable due to copyright restrictions.
The lead petitioner, Eric Eldred, is an Internet publisher. Eldred was joined by a group of commercial and non-commercial interests who relied on the public domain for their work. These included Dover Publications, a commercial publisher of paperback books; Luck's Music Library, Inc. and Edwin F. Kalmus & Co., Inc., publishers of orchestral sheet music; and many amici including the Free Software Foundation, Tri-Horn International, Boston, Mass., a golf publishing & tech co., the American Association of Law Libraries, the Bureau of National Affairs, and the College Art Association.
Supporting the law were the U.S. government, represented by the Attorney General in an ex officio capacity (originally Janet Reno, later replaced by John Ashcroft), along with a set of amici including the Motion Picture Association of America, the Recording Industry Association of America, ASCAP and Broadcast Music Incorporated.
District court
The original complaint was filed in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia on January 11, 1999. The plaintiffs' argument was threefold:
That by retroactively extending copyright terms, Congress had violated the requirements of the Constitution's Copyright Clause, which gives Congress the following power: To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and DiscoveriesPlaintiffs argued that by reading this formulation so as to allow for any number of retroactive extensions, Congress could in practice guarantee an unlimited period of copyright protection, thus thwarting the intent of the clause.
That any copyright law must be subject to scrutiny under the First Amendment, thereby ensuring a balance between freedom of speech and the interests of copyright.
That the doctrine of public trust requires the government to show a public benefit to any transfer of public property into private hands, and that the CTEA violates this doctrine by withdrawing material from the public domain.
In response, the government argued that Congress does indeed have the latitude to retroactively extend terms, so long as the individual extensions are also for "limited times," as required by the Constitution. As an argument for this position, they referred to the Copyright Act of 1790, the first Federal copyright legislation, which applied Federal protection to existing works. Furthermore, they argued, neither the First Amendment nor the doctrine of public trust is applicable to copyright cases.
On October 28, 1999, Judge June Green issued a brief opinion rejecting all three of the petitioners' arguments. On the first count, she wrote that Congress had the power to extend terms as it wished, as long as the terms themselves were of limited duration. On the second count, she rejected the notion of First Amendment scrutiny in copyright cases, based on her interpretation of Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., v. Nation Enterprises, an earlier Supreme Court decision. On the third count, she rejected the notion that public trust doctrine was applicable to copyright law.
Court of Appeals
The plaintiffs appealed the decision of the district court to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, filing their initial brief on May 22, 2000, and arguing the case on October 5 of the same year in front of a three-judge panel. Arguments were similar to those made in the district court, except for those regarding the public trust doctrine, which were not included in the appeal.
Instead, the plaintiffs extended their argument on the copyright clause to note that the clause requires Congress to "promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts," and argued that retroactive extensions do not directly serve this purpose in the standard quid pro quo previously required by the courts.
The case was decided on February 16, 2001. The appeals court upheld the decision of the district court in a 2-1 opinion. In his dissent, Judge David Sentelle agreed with the plaintiffs that CTEA was indeed unconstitutional based on the "limited Times" requirement. Supreme Court precedent, he argued, held that one must be able to discern an "outer limit" to a limited power; in the case of retrospective copyright extensions, Congress could continue to extend copyright terms indefinitely through a set of limited extensions, thus rendering the "limited times" requirement meaningless.
Following this ruling, plaintiffs petitioned for a rehearing en banc (in front of the full panel of nine judges). This petition was rejected, 7–2, with Judges Sentelle and David Tatel dissenting.
Supreme Court
On October 11, 2001, the plaintiffs filed a petition for certiorari to the Supreme Court of the United States. On February 19, 2002, the Court granted certiorari, agreeing to hear the case.
Oral arguments were presented on October 9, 2002. Lead counsel for the plaintiff was Lawrence Lessig; the government's case was argued by Solicitor General Theodore Olson.
Lessig focused the Plaintiffs' brief to emphasize the Copyright clause restriction, as well as the First Amendment argument from the Appeals case. The decision to emphasize the Copyright clause argument was based on both the minority opinion of Judge Sentelle in the appeals court, and on several recent Supreme Court decisions authored by Chief Justice William Rehnquist: United States v. Lopez (1996) and United States v. Morrison (2000).
In both of those decisions, Rehnquist, along with four of the Court's more conservative justices, held Congressional legislation unconstitutional, because that legislation exceeded the limits of the Constitution's Commerce clause. This profound reversal of precedent, Lessig argued, could not be limited to only one of the enumerated powers. If the court felt that it had the power to review legislation under the Commerce clause, Lessig argued, then the Copyright clause deserved similar treatment, or at very least a "principled reason" must be stated for according such treatment to only one of the enumerated powers.
On January 15, 2003, the Court held the CTEA constitutional by a 7–2 decision. The majority opinion, written by Justice Ginsburg, relied heavily on the Copyright Acts of 1790, 1831, 1909, and 1976 as precedent for retroactive extensions. One of the arguments supporting the act was the life expectancy has significantly increased among the human population since the 18th century, and therefore copyright law needed extending as well. However, the major argument for the act that carried over into the case was that the Constitution specified that Congress only needed to set time limits for copyright, the length of which was left to their discretion. Thus, as long as the limit is not "forever," any limit set by Congress can be deemed constitutional.
A key factor in the CTEA's passage was a 1993 European Union (EU) directive instructing EU members to establish a baseline copyright term of life plus 70 years and to deny this longer term to the works of any non-EU country whose laws did not secure the same extended term. By extending the baseline United States copyright term, Congress sought to ensure that American authors would receive the same copyright protection in Europe as their European counterparts.
The Supreme Court declined to address Lessig's contention that Lopez and Morrison offered precedent for enforcing the Copyright clause, and instead reiterated the lower court's reasoning that a retroactive term extension can satisfy the "limited times" provision in the copyright clause, as long as the extension itself is limited instead of perpetual. Furthermore, the Court refused to apply the proportionality standards of the Fourteenth Amendment or the free-speech standards in the First Amendment to limit Congress's ability to confer copyrights for limited terms.
Justice Breyer dissented, arguing that the CTEA amounted to a grant of perpetual copyright that undermined public interests. While the constitution grants Congress power to extend copyright terms in order to "promote the progress of science and useful arts", CTEA granted precedent to continually renew copyright terms making them virtually perpetual."The present extension will produce a copyright period of protection that, even under conservative assumptions, is worth more than 99.8% of protection in perpetuity (more than 99.99% for a songwriter like Irving Berlin and a song like Alexander's Ragtime Band)." 537 U.S., at 255-256. Justice Breyer argued that it is highly unlikely any artist will be more inclined to produce work knowing their great-grandchildren will receive royalties. With regard to retroactive copyright extension, he viewed it foolish to apply the government's argument that income received from royalties allows artists to produce more work saying, "How will extension help today’s Noah Webster create new works 50 years after his death?". He also attacked the idea that the fair use defense would efficiently solve the First Amendment issue, as the defense could not help "those who wish to obtain from electronic databases material that is not there", e.g. teachers searching online for material to be used in the class (and finding that the ideal material has been deleted from the database).
In a separate dissenting opinion, Justice Stevens also challenged the virtue of an individual reward, analyzing it from the perspective of patent law. He argued that the focus on compensation results only in “frustrating the legitimate members of the public who want to make use of it (a completed invention) in a free market.” Further, the compelling need to encourage creation is proportionally diminished once a work is already created. Yet while a formula pairing commercial viability to duration of protection may be said to produce more economically efficient results in respect of high technology inventions with shorter shelf-lives, the same perhaps cannot be said for certain forms of copyrighted works, for which the present value of expenditures relating to creation depend less on scientific equipment and research and development programs and more on unquantifiable creativity.
Lessig expressed surprise that no decision was authored by Chief Justice Rehnquist or by any of the other four justices who supported the Lopez or Morrison decisions. Lessig later expressed regret that he based his argument on precedent rather than attempting to demonstrate that the weakening of the public domain would cause harm to the economic health of the country.
Later developments
Within a year of Eldred, it was serving as decisive precedent. Two cases, Luck’s Music Library, Inc. v. Ashcroft and Peters and Golan v. Ashcroft and Peters, challenged the constitutionality of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act on the grounds that its "restoration amendment," which provided copyright restriction to foreign works that were in the public domain because foreign works were formerly not copyrightable, violated the First Amendment rights of those who would no longer be able to perform the works without observing copyright. The court cited Eldred and dismissed Luck's Music on the grounds that the First Amendment did not protect the ability to use others' words as much as it does protect one's ability to use their own. Golan v. Ashcroft and Peterss Uruguay Round portion survived a motion to dismiss even though its own challenge to the Sonny Bono Act did not. That case culminated in Golan v. Holder, which held that there was nothing in the Constitution preventing the government from taking works out of the public domain.
A 2007 case, Kahle v. Gonzales, worked from the Eldred v. Ashcroft opinion to argue that a change in copyright law as drastic as the change from opt-in to opt-out required a review in regard to freedom of speech. The plaintiffs, represented by Lawrence Lessig, argued that the limitations placed on speech and expression by copyright were drastically expanded and possibly too limiting. The Ninth Circuit determined that the argument was too similar to the one adjudicated in Eldred and dismissed the case.
See also
Copyright
United States copyright law
Intellectual property clause
Public Domain Enhancement Act
Free culture movement
Related cases
 Golan v. Holder (2012)
 Kahle v. Gonzales (9th Cir. 2007)
References
Further reading
External links
 Oral argument before the Supreme Court, in MP3 format (Transcript)
 Opinion of the Supreme Court, in MP3 format (Text)
 OpenLaw amicus briefs - also has other information including media coverage, etc.
  Links to various briefs filed in the case
  Symposium on Eldred from the Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review
 A timeline of U.S. Copyright
 First-person narrative of the experience of attending the Oral Argument before the Supreme Court
 Lawrence Lessig's article about why Eldred lost
 Thomas Jefferson letters relating to Copyright Clause 
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Copyright Clause case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Copyright term
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:Public domain in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Electric Bond and Share Company v. Securities and Exchange Commission" ==> """
Electric Bond Share Company v. Securities & Exchange Commission, , was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court upheld the constitutionality of the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935.Electric Bond & Share Co. v. Securities & Exchange Comm'n, .
On March 28, 1938, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in favor of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) on the constitutional dispute between the Electric Bond and Share Company and the SEC over the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935. The Act gave the SEC authority to regulate electric companies nationwide and enforce its rules.  It required that all companies selling gas and electricity in the United States register with the SEC and restricted holding companies to one or two tiers of subsidiaries. The Act also gave the SEC the power to limit holding companies to a geographic area so that individual states could regulate them.
After the Act was signed into law on August 26, 1935 the electric industry contested the validity of the entire act, 15 U.S.C.A. § 79 et seq., as being in excess of the powers granted to Congress by section 8 of article 1, and in violation of section 1 of article 1 and of the Fifth and Tenth Amendments, of the Constitution of the United States.
On November 26, 1935, the SEC filed its test case in the District Court for the Southern District of New York against the Electric Bond and Share Company (EBASCo). Fourteen of EBASCo's subsidiaries were also petitioners in the case.
Background
In 1914, as a tactic to counter the growing support of public ownership of electric companies, the Vice President of the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, August Hockenbeamer, came up with the idea of selling non-voting securities (stocks) to the public, something theretofore not done in the industry. The National Electric Light Association openly promoted the idea of selling securities regularly to its members, documenting its historic growth, as part of its ongoing public-relations campaign, as later documented in the FTC's 1928-35 Investigations. The FTC's Investigations found serious flaws in how Holding companies were used to manipulate public investors in the electric industry that led to the passage of the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935.
The Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 was passed by the 74th United States Congress as major New Deal reform legislation. Also known as the Wheeler-Rayburn bill, it subjected U.S. holding companies for the first time to federal regulation. The law gave the SEC the authority to require registration of electric holding companies and lock them down geographically so that they were no longer able to evade state public utilities commissions. It also gave the SEC the power to force holding companies down to just two levels of subsidiaries or break them up. On November 26, 1935, the SEC filed its test suit against the EBASCo. that included 14 of EBASCo's subsidiaries.  The SEC won the initial test case in the Southern District Court of New York. Industry opponents then appealed the decision to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals that also upheld the law.Electric Bond & Share Co. v. Securities & Exchange Comm'n, 
Robert E. Healy, was the general counsel for the Federal Trade Commission that carried out the 1928-35 investigation of the electric industry.  The investigation produced detailed recommendations for what the Public Utility Act should do to fix the growing concentration of holding companies.   He was appointed by President Roosevelt to be a SEC commissioner when that agency was formed, which was the federal agency given the task of enforcing the Act. Franklin D. Roosevelt also appointed him to be a member of his National Power Policy Committee that wrote the legislation that congress passed on August 24, 1935.
Healy picked Benjamin V. Cohen to be the principal author of the Act. Cohen, who received a Doctor of Juridical Science from Harvard, became a member of President Roosevelt's "Brain Trust" at the suggestion of Felix Frankfurter. Cohen had also worked for Louis Brandeis. In his 2003 book, Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. labeled the Public Utility Company Act as "neo-Brandeisian".  At the time when Schlesinger used the term neo-Brandeisian, he was referring to the historic ideas of supreme court justice Louis Brandeis' views on United States antitrust law.
thumb|List of constitutional challenges against PUHC Act and SEC 1938According to the SEC's 1936 annual report, once the enabling legislation passed the U.S. Attorney General, U.S. Postmaster General, and the Commission announced that they would "not enforce any criminal penalties of the Act until the constitutionality of the law had been established by the Supreme Court in a civil suit". In the meantime, electric companies across the United States started filing suit against the law's passage.  
The government followed a strategy devised by Benjamin V. Cohen to avoid a test case as long as possible, and then make it a case chosen by the government, not the utilities., Chapter XXIV. On November 26, 1935, the Commission filed the test case against the Electric Bond and Share Company in the District Court for the Southern District of New York. On December 7, 1935, the U.S. Attorney General and the SEC made a motion to stay all lawsuits that the electric industry had already filed in the D.C. District Court against the Act. The Court ruled in its favor on January 9, 1936. However, on June 22nd, 1936, the U.S. Court of Appeals, reversed the decision because the lawsuits were not all identical. By June 30, 1936, the number of industry lawsuits against the SEC jumped to 58. The U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York ruled in favor of the SEC on January 29, 1937. On November 8th, 1937, the Second Court of Appeals also ruled in favor of the Commission.
thumb|Members of the Supreme Court in 1938 By 1938, thirty-nine of the other fifty-one cases were still active.  On March 28, when the U.S. Supreme Court decided the case in favor of the SEC, only one of the other cases had been ruled on. That case was Burco v. Whitworth, 297 U.S. 726 (1936), which lost. All of the other cases were dropped after the Supreme Court decision.
The 1938 decision was decided by the Hughes Court that had held sway during the Great Depression and the New Deal.  The Court had been dominated by four conservatives known as the "Four Horsemen" that had struck down many of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal policies. However, two of the horsemen, Willis Van Devanter and George Sutherland left the court prior to the case being heard. One of the new judges, Hugo Black, who was a Senator in 1935, played a key role in the Act's passage
In 1941 Robert E. Healy gave a speech that included a summary of the 1935 Public Utility Holding Company Act as well as the events before and after its passage. He stated that the passage of the Act gave the SEC the authority to regulate electric holding companies and protect investors. Mr. Healy addressed the industry's attempt to terrify the general public about section 11 of the act during debate in congress and that it would "destroy the utility industry".  Instead section 11, he said was "akin to the philosophy of the Sherman Act" and "the utility house is being set in order" based on the findings and recommendations of the 1928-1935 Federal Trade Commission Investigation.
Judgment
The case was heard before the U.S. Supreme Court from February 7–9, 1938.
Lawyers for Ebasco included former Solicitor General of the United States Thomas D. Thacher and John F. MacLane from the law firm Simpson, Thacher & Bartlett, with Frank A. Reid and A.J.G. Priest  of the law firm Reid-Priest also taking part in the brief, for petitioners.
United States Assistant Attorney General Robert H. Jackson and Benjamin V. Cohen, with whom United States Attorney General Cummings, Solicitor General Stanley Forman Reed, Assistant Solicitor General Bell, and  Allen E. Throop (SEC General Counsel), Thomas G. Corcoran, Paul A. Freund, John J. Abt, and Frederick B. Wiener were on the brief, for the government.
U.S. Solicitor General Stanley Reed was confirmed to the U.S. Supreme Court on January 25, 1938. He took part in presenting the case to the Court, but stepped aside in the case's decision. Cohen and Corcoran were the principal authors of the Public Utility Holding Company Act.
EBASCo. claimed that sections 4(a) and 5 of the Act which required holding companies to register with the SEC violated the Fifth and Tenth Amendments of the Constitution. The Southern District Court of New York ruled in favor of the government as did the appeals court.  EBASCo claimed that the U.S. Congress had no right to regulate its interstate activities, but both the court and the Federal Trade Commission investigation between 1928-35 documented that it had been selling services, securities and energy across state lines. Ebasco's core strategy/claim that if any section of the act were in violation, the whole Act should be thrown out.
In his opinion, released on March 28, Chief Justice Hughes denied the defendant's argument as well as the Ebasco's attempt to block the Act from obtaining financial information to protect investors.
On Page 441-2 of the decision, Chief Justice Hughes quoted directly from the act and why Congress wanted to federal supervision of electric holding companies. It summarized the activities of Holding Companies and that the many tiered subsidiaries made effective state control of its interstate activities difficult "if not impossible" to regulate.  He also stated that "the national interest and the interest of investors and consumers may be adversely affected".
His opinion was in favor of the Act and that the parts of it relating to registration of utility holding companies were constitutional.
On March 28, 1938, Chief Justice Hughes wrote the majority opinion in favor of the SEC.
There was no written dissent from Justice McReynolds.
Once again, Ebasco attempted to challenge the constitutionality of the Act's Section 11 but on November 25, 1946, the Supreme Court ruled 6-0 in favor of the Act and the SEC (see American Power & Light Co. v. Securities and Exchange Commission 1946).
Standard And Poor's Outlook, No. 39, P. 462. dated 1943 made the following comment on the Act:
"... there is no denying that [SEC policy] has helped investors by improving the financial status of many subsidiaries of utility holding companies..."
In 1946 the University of Pennsylvania Law Review published "A Death Sentence or a New Lease On Life? A Survey Of Corporate  Adjustments Under the Public Utility Holding Company Act" By Robert M. Blair-Smith and Leonard Helfenstein (pg 148-201). Their piece documented the process of how the SEC oversaw the reorganization the United Light and Power Company and its 75 subsidiaries (pg 161-188) over a ten-year period with the goal of protecting public investors.  Their conclusion was that:
"...the Commission under Section 11 has been to eliminate or reduce the leverage feature in equity securities of holding-company systems, to bring sound equity securities out of system portfolios into the public markets in place of the relatively weak and speculative securities of the holding companies..."
Their study also said:
"Between the end of 1935 and June 30, 1944, holding companies divested themselves of 266 companies with assets of over 3 3/4 billion dollars."
 Subsequent developments 
 North American Co. v. SEC
 1942 - MORGAN STANLEY & CO., Inc., v. SECURITIES EXCHANGE COMMISSION. 126 F.2d 325 Circuit Court of Appeals, Second Circuit
 SEC v. Chenery Corp. (1943)
 1943 - American Gas & Electric Co. v. Security and Exchange Commission
 1944 - American Power & L. Co. v. Securities and Ex. Com'n, 141 F.2d 606 US Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
 1944 - U.S. District Court of Delaware:  United Gas Corp.
 1944 - In Re Securities and Exchange Commission, 142 F.2d 411 US Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit
 1945 - American Power & Light Co. v. Securities & Exchange Commission
 1945 - In Re Standard Gas & Electric Co., 59 F. Supp. 274 U.S. District Court of Delaware
 1946 - American Power & Light Co. v. Securities and Exchange Commission
 1946 - North American Co. v. SEC 
 1949 - U.S. Supreme Court - Electric Power & Light Co.
 1952 - Kantor v. American & Foreign Power Co.
 1953 - U.S. N.Y. District Court - Electric Bond and Share Co. 
 1954 - U.S. Court of Appeals - Electric Power & Light Corporation
 Energy Policy Act of 1992
 The Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 was Repealed by the Energy Policy Act of 2005
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 303
References
External links
Evening Star: HOLDING FIRM ACT DECLARED VALID BY HIGH COURT, 6-1
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1938 in United States case law
"""

From "Elgin v. Department of Treasury" ==> """
Elgin v. Department of Treasury, 567 U.S. 1 (2012), was a United States Supreme Court case where the Court ruled that the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 (CSRA) gives exclusive jurisdiction for claims under the Act to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.. Additionally, the Court held that the Act bars federal district courts from ruling on matters related to the act including adverse employment actions of the federal departments, and allows the Merit Systems Protection Board to hear constitutional arguments for wrongful employee severance and adverse employment actions. It was a 6–3 decision, with the majority opinion delivered by Justice Clarence Thomas. The case greatly limited the recourse of federal employees to the courts for adverse employment practices, allowing such recourse only to a few, specific courts as aforementioned.
Prior to the Supreme Court
Michael B. Elgin and several other employees of the U.S. Department of the Treasury were fired for willingly and knowingly failing to register for the Selective Service, pursuant to , which forbids any federal executive employees who committed such an omission. Elgin challenged his discharge before the Merit Systems Protection Board, claiming such a requirement is unconstitutional being a bill of attainder and a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, since only males are required to enroll in the Selective Service System. The Merit Systems Protection Board referred the case to an administrative law judge, who dismissed the appeal for lack of jurisdiction, concluding that an employee is not entitled to Merit Systems Protection Board review of agency action that is based on an absolute statutory bar to employment. The same administrative law judge also ruled that the Merit Systems Protection Board did not have jurisdiction to rule on the constitutionality of statutes.
Rather than appealing to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit as is required by the CSRA, Elgin and several other petitioners appealed to the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts. The court denied Elgin's claims, holding that the act and Elgin's severance was constitutional.Elgin v. United States, 594 F. Supp. 2d 133 (D. Mass. 2009); reconsidered and vacated, 697 F. Supp. 2d 187 (D. Mass. 2010); Elgin appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, which ruled that federal district courts have no jurisdiction over the matter. Elgin appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
 See also 
 Rostker v. Goldberg
 National Coalition for Men v. Selective Service System
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Gender issues in the military
Category:Conscription in the United States
"""

From "Eli Lilly & Co. v. Medtronic, Inc." ==> """
Eli Lilly and Company v. Medtronic, Inc., 496 U.S. 661 (1990), is a United States Supreme Court case related to patent infringement in the medical device industry.  It held that (e)(1). of United States patent law exempted premarketing activity conducted to gain approval of a device under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act from a finding of infringement..
See also
 Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr (1996)
 Riegel v. Medtronic, Inc. (2008)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 496
 References 
External links
Category:United States biotechnology case law
Category:Eli Lilly and Company
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:Medtronic litigation
"""

From "Elk Grove Unified School District v. Newdow" ==> """
Elk Grove Unified School District v. Newdow, 542 U.S. 1 (2004), was a case decided by the U.S. Supreme Court.. The lawsuit, originally filed as Newdow v. United States Congress, Elk Grove Unified School District, et al. in 2000, led to a 2002 ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit that the words "under God" in the Pledge of Allegiance are an endorsement of religion and therefore violate the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The words had been added by a 1954 act of Congress that changed the phrase "one nation indivisible" into "one nation under God, indivisible".Newdow v. United States Congress,  After an initial decision striking the congressionally added "under God", the superseding opinion on denial of rehearing en banc was more limited, holding that compelled recitation of the language by school teachers to students was invalid.Newdow v. United States Congress, 
On June 14, 2004, the Supreme Court held Michael Newdow, as a noncustodial parent, did not have standing to bring the suit on his daughter's behalf. The mother was previously given sole legal custody of the daughter. The Ninth Circuit's decision was thus reversed as a matter of procedural law, so it did not consider the constitutional question raised by the case.
On January 3, 2005, a new suit was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California on behalf of three unnamed families. On September 14, 2005, District Court Judge Lawrence Karlton ruled in favor of Newdow. Citing the precedent of the 2002 ruling by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, Judge Karlton issued an order enjoining the school district defendants from continuing their practices of leading children in the pledge with "under God." The case was later appealed to the Ninth Circuit under Newdow v. Carey and was reversed.
U.S. District Court Case
Michael Newdow, a Sacramento, California attorney and emergency medicine physician, filed suit in March 2000 against the Elk Grove Unified School District. Newdow sued as the next friend on behalf of his daughter, who was enrolled in the Elk Grove public schools. He said the words "under God" in the Pledge of Allegiance amounted to an unconstitutional establishment of religion and that, as such, the daily recitation of the Pledge with the offending words interfered with his right to inculcate his daughter with his religious beliefs.
U.S. Magistrate Judge Peter A. Nowinski found the Pledge was constitutional. The District Court accepted the magistrate's finding and dismissed the case on June 21, 2000. Newdow then appealed.
U.S. Court of Appeals, Ninth Circuit
The Ninth Circuit issued three opinions in the case, as outlined below.
Newdow I – June 26, 2002
A three-judge panel of the court unanimously found Newdow had standing as a parent to challenge a practice that interferes with his right to direct the religious education of his daughter. On the merits of the case, the court reversed the trial court decision on a 2-to-1 vote, on June 26, 2002. The majority opinion was written by Judge Alfred T. Goodwin with a partial concurrence and partial dissent written by Judge Ferdinand F. Fernandez.
In reviewing the case, the court applied the Lemon Test, the Endorsement Test, and the Coercion Test. In doing so, the Court concluded recitation of the Pledge with the words "under God" included violated the Establishment Clause.
Fernandez asserted in his partial dissent that the religious content of the "under God" addition is so small that it is de minimis—so trivial as to be properly beneath judicial notice.
Public and congressional reaction to the Ninth Circuit's decision was decidedly negative. About 150 Members of Congress stood on the front steps of the Capitol and recited the Pledge including the words under God; and the Senate passed a non-binding resolution affirming the presence of under God by a unanimous vote.S. 2690 .
Newdow II – December 4, 2002
After the June opinion was issued, Sandra Banning—the mother of the child in question (Newdow and Banning were not married) filed a motion to intervene or, alternatively, to dismiss Newdow's complaint. She declared that although she and Newdow shared physical custody of their daughter, a California court order granted her exclusive legal custody of the child, including the sole right to represent her legal interests and make all decisions about her education and welfare. Banning further stated that her daughter is a Christian who believes in God and has no objection either to reciting or hearing others recite the Pledge of Allegiance, or to its reference to God. Banning said she believed her daughter would be harmed if the litigation were permitted to proceed because others might incorrectly perceive the child as sharing her father's atheist views. Banning accordingly concluded, as her daughter's sole legal custodian, that it was not in the child's interest to be a party to Newdow's lawsuit.
The court's second published opinion noted that Newdow no longer claimed to represent his daughter, but the judges unanimously concluded that Banning's sole legal custody of the child did not deprive Newdow, as a noncustodial parent, of Article Three standing to object to unconstitutional government action affecting his child. The court further held that under California law Newdow retained the right to expose his child to his particular religious views even if those views contradicted the mother's, and that Banning's objections as sole legal custodian did not defeat Newdow's right to seek redress for an alleged injury to his own parental interests.
Newdow III – February 28, 2003
Defendants sought en banc review. This was denied and an amended order and opinion was issued in February 2003. The amended opinion omitted the initial opinion's discussion of Newdow's standing to challenge the 1954 Act and declined to determine whether Newdow was entitled to declaratory relief regarding the constitutionality of that Act.
On September 11, 2003, Newdow was awarded partial custody of his daughter, including joint legal custody.
Quotations and legal detail
From the 9th circuit hearing:
 Decided – the 1954 insertion of "under God" was made "to recognize a Supreme Being" and advance religion at a time "when the government was publicly inveighing against atheistic communism"—a fact which (according to the court) the federal government did not dispute. The court also noted that when President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed the act which added the phrase "under God," he also announced "From this day forward, the millions of our school children will daily proclaim in every city and town, every village and rural schoolhouse, the dedication of our Nation and our people to the Almighty."
 Judge Alfred Goodwin from the 9th Circuit remarked: "A profession that we are a nation 'under God' is identical, for Establishment Clause purposes, to a profession that we are a nation 'under Jesus,' a nation 'under Vishnu,' a nation 'under Zeus,' or a nation 'under no god,' because none of these professions can be neutral with respect to religion."
U.S. Supreme Court
On March 24, 2004 the Supreme Court of the United States heard oral argument in the case to consider two questions: (1) whether Newdow had standing as a noncustodial parent to challenge the School District's policy on recitation of the Pledge, and (2) if so, whether the policy offends the First Amendment.
Justice Antonin Scalia recused himself from the case after a request by Newdow that cited Scalia's disapproval of the Ninth Circuit decision in a public speech. According to Scalia, many lower courts often misinterpret the Establishment Clause, extending its proscription of religiosity in the public sphere.
On June 14, 2004, in an opinion written by Justice John Paul Stevens, five of the remaining eight justices – Stevens, Anthony Kennedy, Stephen Breyer, David Souter, and Ruth Bader Ginsburg – found Michael Newdow lacked standing to bring the case as "next friend" to his daughter, because Sandra Banning had sole legal custody of the child at the time – including exclusive authority over the girl's education. The majority also found that Michael Newdow lacked prudential standing to bring the case on behalf of himself due to the custody arrangement. This resulted in reversal of the Ninth Circuit's decision as a matter of procedural law.
The other three justices concurred in the judgment reversing the Ninth Circuit, but dissented on the issue of standing. They found Michael Newdow did have standing to bring the suit. Thus, they proceeded to examine the constitutional question, and in doing so they found it did not offend the Constitution. Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote an opinion in which the other two joined in part; and both justice Sandra Day O'Connor and Justice Clarence Thomas wrote their own separate opinions.
Rehnquist's opinion asserts the term "under God" does not endorse or establish religion but it actually asserts that the term merely acknowledges the nation's religious heritage, in particular the role of religion for the Founding Fathers of the United States. Thus, according to the opinion, the Pledge is a secular act rather than an act of indoctrination in religion or expression of religious devotion.
Justice Thomas, by contrast, asserts that finding the Pledge unconstitutional is an unjustifiable expansion of the meaning of "coercion" as that term is used in legal precedent: to prohibit compelling students in a "fair and real sense" by "subtle and indirect public and peer pressure" (see, Lee v. Weisman.) to be prayerful, as well as prohibiting actual coercion by force of law and threat of penalty. Further, he argues that the Establishment Clause ought not be considered a right that attaches to individuals pursuant to the Incorporation Doctrine, because he believes the clause only prohibits interference by the federal government in the right of individual states to establish their own official religions – notwithstanding current majority opinion on the question is against states having such a right, as a result of the Incorporation Doctrine.
In a concurring opinion Justice O'Connor referenced the endorsement test and wrote: "When a court confronts a challenge to government-sponsored speech or displays, I continue to believe that the endorsement test “captures the essential command of the Establishment Clause, namely, that government must not make a person’s religious beliefs relevant to his or her standing in the political community by conveying a message ‘that religion or a particular religious belief is favored or preferred.’ ” County of Allegheny v. American Civil Liberties Union, Greater Pittsburgh Chapter, 492 U. S. 573, 627 (1989) (opinion of O’Connor, J.) (quoting Wallace v. Jaffree, 472 U. S. 38, 70 (1985) (O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment)).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 542
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Religious Heritage of America
West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943)
References
External links
 Oral Argument
 Ninth Circuit decision
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States education case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:Pledge of Allegiance
Category:2004 in religion
Category:2004 in education
Category:Education in Sacramento County, California
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Legal history of California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Alliance Defending Freedom litigation
"""

From "Elk v. Wilkins" ==> """
Elk v. Wilkins, 112 U.S. 94 (1884), was a United States Supreme Court landmark 1884 decision respecting the citizenship status of Indians..
John Elk, a Winnebago Indian, was born on an Indian reservation within the territorial bounds of United States. He later resided off-reservation in Omaha, Nebraska, where he renounced his former tribal allegiance and claimed birthright citizenship by virtue of the Citizenship Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The case came about after Elk tried to register to vote on April 5, 1880 and was denied by Charles Wilkins, the named defendant, who was registrar of voters of the Fifth ward of the City of Omaha.
In a 7–2 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that even though Elk was born in the United States, he was not a citizen because he owed allegiance to his tribe when he was born rather than to the United States, and therefore was not subject to the jurisdiction of the United States when he was born. The United States Congress later enacted the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924, which established citizenship for Indians previously excluded by the Constitution. Though rendered undebatable for its application to native Indians by this law, the majority opinion offered by the Court in this case remains valid for interpretation of future citizenship issues regarding the 14th Amendment.
Background
The question then was whether an Indian born a member of one of the Indian tribes within the United States is, merely by reason of their birth within the United States and of their afterward voluntarily separating themself from the tribe and taking up residence among white citizens, a citizen of the United States within the meaning of the first section of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution.
Under the Constitution, Congress had and exercised the power to regulate commerce with the Indian tribes, and the members thereof, within or without the boundaries of one of the states of the Union. The "Indian tribes, being within the territorial limits of the United States, were not, strictly speaking, foreign states"; but "they were alien nations, distinct political communities", with whom the United States  dealt with through treaties and acts of Congress.John C. Eastman, "From Feudalism to Consent: Rethinking Birthright Citizenship," Legal Memorandum No. 18 (Heritage Foundation, Washington D.C.), March 30, 2006, at 3, available at http://www.heritage.org/research/legalissues/lm18.cfm . The members of those tribes owed immediate allegiance to their several tribes, and were not part of the people of the United States.Elk, 112 U.S. at 99.
Decision
Even though Elk was born within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States, he was born as a subject of an Indian nation, and thus could not meet the allegiance test of the jurisdictional phrase because he "owed immediate allegiance to" his tribe, a vassal or quasi-nation, not to the United States. The Court held Elk was not "subject to the jurisdiction" of the United States at birth.   "The evident meaning of these last words is, not merely subject in some respect or degree to the jurisdiction of the United States, but completely subject to their political jurisdiction, and owing them direct and immediate allegiance."Elk, 112 U.S. at 102.
Subsequent legislation
The exclusion of Native Americans from citizenship was eventually eliminated by the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924. At the time, two thirds of Native Americans had already achieved citizenship."Indian Affairs: Laws and Treaties", Compiled and edited by Charles Kappler, Vol. IV Laws (1927), Washington: Government Printing Office, available at 
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 112
Standing Bear v. Crook
United States nationality law
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1884 in United States case law
Category:United States Citizenship Clause case law
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:History of Omaha, Nebraska
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:Ho-Chunk
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1880 Nebraska elections
Category:Race-related case law in the United States
Category:Native American history of Nebraska
"""

From "Elkins v. United States" ==> """
Elkins v. United States, 364 U.S. 206 (1960), was a US Supreme Court decision that held the "silver platter doctrine", which allowed federal prosecutors to use evidence illegally gathered by state police, to be a violation of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.. 
evidence of illegal wiretapping had been seized from the home of James Butler Elkins by Portland, Oregon police officers on an unrelated search warrant, and he was subsequently convicted in federal court. Elkins appealed, arguing that evidence found by the officers should have been inadmissible under the exclusionary rule, which forbids the introduction of most evidence gathered through Fourth Amendment violations in criminal court.
In a 5–4 decision, the Court overturned the silver platter doctrine and Elkins' conviction. Associate Justice Potter Stewart wrote the majority opinion, while Associate Justices Felix Frankfurter and John M. Harlan II dissented. By giving a rationale for a broader interpretation of Fourth Amendment rights, the decision prepared the way for Mapp v. Ohio (1961), which applied the exclusionary rule to the states.
 Silver platter doctrine 
The Fourth Amendment prevents most warrantless searches by law enforcement officers, and since Weeks v. United States (1914), has been enforced by the exclusionary rule, which excludes most evidence gathered through Fourth Amendment violations from criminal trials. While Wolf v. Colorado (1949) had held the amendment to apply to the states, a process known as incorporation, the exclusionary rule had explicitly not been incorporated by the decision. Evidence gathered by state law enforcement was therefore not yet bound by the same strictures as that gathered by federal law enforcement.
In Lustig v. United States (1949), Justice Felix Frankfurter coined the silver platter doctrine, ruling that evidence gathered by Fourth Amendment violations was still admissible if state police gave it to federal officials on "a silver platter"—that is, without any level of involvement by federal authorities. This doctrine nonetheless created an incentive for federal authorities to coordinate with state law enforcement in the gathering of evidence.
 Background of the case 
Portland, Oregon police officers searched the home of James Butler Elkins, ostensibly for obscene material, and seized tape recordings that Elkins had made from illegal wiretaps. He was subsequently convicted in federal court of intercepting and divulging telephone communications, but appealed his federal conviction on the grounds that state police had gathered the evidence against him in violation of his Fourth Amendment rights. His conviction was upheld by the Ninth US Circuit Court of Appeals.
 Court's decision 
thumb|Associate Justice Potter Stewart
Associate Justice Potter Stewart delivered the opinion of the court in this case, in which Chief Justice Earl Warren and Associate Justices Hugo Black, William O. Douglas, and William J. Brennan, Jr. joined. Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter wrote a dissenting opinion that was joined by Associate Justices John M. Harlan II, Charles E. Whittaker, and Tom C. Clark. Harlan also wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Whittaker and Clark.
The Court overturned the silver platter doctrine, ruling that "[e]vidence obtained by state officers during a search which, if conducted by federal officers, would have violated the defendant's immunity from unreasonable searches and seizures under the Fourth Amendment is inadmissible". Elkins' conviction was therefore overturned. Stewart wrote that the primary purpose of the exclusionary rule was to provide a disincentive to abuses by law enforcement, stating that "[t]he rule is calculated to prevent, not to repair. Its purpose is to deter—to compel respect for the constitutional guaranty in the only effectively available way—by removing the incentive to disregard it."
Frankfurter's dissent criticized the extension of the exclusionary rule, noting that the conduct of the state police in the Elkins investigation had already been found illegal at the state level; he argued that the Court's extension of the rule would only create further confusion, and that the relation between federal and state criminal law should be governed by the principle of federalism. Harlan's dissent followed similar reasoning to Frankfurter's and argued that Elkins' conviction should be upheld.
Scholar Jacob W. Landynski called Stewart's opinion "the most thorough and convincing analysis in favor of the exclusionary rule to be found in any opinion of the Court". In giving a rationale for a broader interpretation of Fourth Amendment rights, the decision set the stage for Mapp v. Ohio (1961), which applied the exclusionary rule to the states.
 References 
External links
Category:1960 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Ellis v. United States (1907)" ==> """
Ellis v. United States, 206 U.S. 246 (1907), is a court case that was ultimately decided by the U.S. Supreme Court. The case, which was identified as case No. 567, was argued in conjunction with three cases entitled Eastern Dredging Company v. United States (Nos. 664, 665, and 666) and three cases entitled Bay State Dredging Company v. United States (Nos. 667, 668, and 669).Ellis v. United States, .
All seven cases concerned the issue of whether the federal government had the power to limit the number of hours worked per day by federal workers or employees of federal contractors. In its judgment, the Supreme Court upheld a federal law limiting the hours worked by such persons.
The cases were originally addressed by the District Court of the United States for the District of Massachusetts. They were argued before the U.S. Supreme Court on April 23 and 24, 1907, and decided on May 13, 1907.
D. T. Watson argued for the plaintiff in No. 567; Edward E. Blodgett and G. Philip Wardner argued for the plaintiff in Nos. 664, 665, 666; W. Orison Underwood, Henry F. Knight, and Johnson, Clapp, & Underwood argued for the plaintiff in Nos. 667, 668, 669. Solicitor General Hoyt, Attorney General Bonaparte, and Mr. Otis J. Carlton argued for the defendant.
Background
The plaintiffs had been found guilty under the Act of August 1, 1892, c. 352, 27 Stat. 340, “Relating to the Limitation of the Hours of Daily Service of Laborers and Mechanics Employed upon the Public Works of the United States and of the District of Columbia.”
In Ellis's case, No. 567, the plaintiff had agreed to construct a pier at the Boston Navy Yard within six months. When work fell behind he had his men work for nine hours a day instead of eight.
The Eastern Dredging Company was hired to dredge a portion of the channel in Boston Harbor, and the Bay State Dredging Company was engaged to dredge Chelsea Creek in Boston Harbor. The three Eastern Dredging cases were as follows: No. 664 involved the employment of two deck hands and an assistant craneman and deck hand; No. 665, the employment of a master, craneman, and fireman; and No. 666, the employment of the captain, mate, engineer, and foreman of a tug and a man in charge of a scow. Of the Bay State Dredging cases, No. 667 involved the employment of a captain, mate, and fireman; No. 668, the employment of a craneman and deck hand; and No. 669, the employment of a scowman and the captain and engineer of a tug.
The plaintiffs challenged the constitutionality of the act under which they had been found guilty, which limited all laborers and mechanics employed by the United States, by the District of Columbia, or by their public-works contractors or subcontractors, to eight hours a day except in emergency situations. The two dredging firms also challenged the applicability of the law to the activity of dredging, as opposed to building.
Court's opinion
Justice Holmes found that while the contention of unconstitutionality was not frivolous, the act was justified. Citing Atkin v. Kansas, 191 U.S. 207, which upheld the right of a state to pass similar laws, he wrote: “We see no reason to deny to the United States the power thus established for the States.” Another contention of the plaintiffs was that “the Government waived its sovereignty by making a contract, and that even if the Act of 1892 were read into the contract, a breach of its requirements would be only a breach of contract and could not be made a crime.” Holmes called this contention “a mere confusion of ideas,” explaining that “The Government purely as contractor, in the absence of special laws, may stand like a private person, but by making a contract it does not give up its power to make a law.”
Holmes did, however, accept the claim by the two dredging companies that some of the men employed by them did not strictly qualify as “laborers and mechanics” and “were not employed upon any of the public works of the United States within the meaning of the act.” In other words, he accepted that the distinction between employing construction workers to build a pier on land and employing seamen to dredge a channel in a waterway was significant enough that the former activity fell within the purview of the act while the latter activity did not. He therefore affirmed the judgment in the case against Ellis while reversing the judgments in 664 through 669.
Justice Moody took no part in the decision on the Ellis case, and dissented on 664 through 669, a dissent in which he was joined by Justices Harlan and Day.
Justice McKenna felt that the work in Chelsea Creek fell within the scope of the act, but otherwise agreed with the court's judgment.
Justice Moody's dissent
Justice Moody argued that the dredging of channels did indeed fall within the scope of the act. He argued that the channels were indeed “public works,” and that it was unreasonable to think that the legislators who had written the act in question had intended that men who work on a pier “should work only eight hours a day, while those who work nearby on the channel itself should be exempted from this restriction.” 
He acknowledged that seamen were “not laborers or mechanics” and, when working at sea, could not practicably “be brought within the limits of an eight-hour day,” but he added that when a seaman is hired to do other work, such as dredging along the coast, he is not working as a seaman but can in fact be described as a “laborer or mechanic.”  Justice Moody did not find it meaningful for the purposes of the case that “the scows and dredges were vessels, or those employed upon them for some purposes are deemed seamen”; rather, what mattered was what kind of work the men were engaged in while employed by the appellants.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1907 in United States case law
Category:Labor rights
"""

From "Elonis v. United States" ==> """
Elonis v. United States, 575 U.S. 723 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning whether conviction of threatening another person over interstate lines (under 18 U.S.C. § 875(c).) requires proof of subjective intent to threaten or whether it is enough to show that a "reasonable person" would regard the statement as threatening. In controversy were the purported threats of violent rap lyrics written by Anthony Douglas Elonis and posted to Facebook under a pseudonym. The ACLU filed an amicus brief in support of the petitioner. It was the first time the Court has heard a case considering true threats and the limits of speech on social media.
 Background 
Elonis was in the process of divorce and made a number of public Facebook posts.
He "posted the script of a sketch" by The Whitest Kids U' Know, which originally referenced saying "I want  To kill the President of the United States" and replaced the president with his wife:
Elonis ended the post with this statement: "Art is about pushing limits. I'm willing to go to jail for my constitutional rights. Are you?"
A week later, Elonis posted about local law enforcement and a kindergarten class, which caught the attention of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Then, he wrote a post on Facebook about one of the agents who visited him:
He concluded:
The actions led to Elonis's indictment by a grand jury on five counts of threats to park employees and visitors, local law enforcement, his estranged wife, an FBI agent, and a kindergarten class that had been relayed through interstate communication.
At the district court, he moved to dismiss the indictment for failing to allege that he had intended to threaten anyone. His motion was denied. He requested a jury instruction that "the government must prove that he intended to communicate a true threat."  which was also denied.
He was convicted on the last four of the five counts. He was sentenced to 44 months in prison and three years on supervised release.
He appealed unsuccessfully to the circuit court of appeals, renewing his challenge to the jury instructions.
He appealed to the Supreme Court based on lack of any attempt to show intent to threaten and on First Amendment rights.
Decision
On June 1, 2015, the Supreme Court reversed Elonis's conviction in an 8–1 decision. Chief Justice John G. Roberts wrote for a seven-justice majority, Samuel Alito authored an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part, and Clarence Thomas authored a dissenting opinion.  The finding of the circuit court was reversed and the matter remanded.
Majority opinion
The majority opinion, written by Roberts, did not rule on First Amendment matters or on the question of whether recklessness was sufficient mens rea to show intent. It ruled that mens rea was required to prove the commission of a crime under §875(c).
Importantly, the mens rea issue had been preserved for review, since Elonis had raised that objection at every stage of the previous proceedings.
The government contended that the presence of the words "intent to extort" in §875(b) and §875(d) implied that the absence in §875(c) was constructive. The court disagreed, holding that the absence of the language in §875(c) was because the section was intended to have a broader scope than threats relating to extortion.
The opinion drew on many Supreme Court cases that held that in criminal law, mens rea was required though it had not been mentioned explicitly in statute.
Consequently, the court ruled in favor of Elonis.
Alito's concurrence
Samuel Alito, concurring in part and dissenting in part, opined that while agreeing that mens rea was required and specifically that showing negligence was not sufficient, the court should have ruled on the question of recklessness. He further opined that recklessness was sufficient to show a crime under that provision on the basis that going further would amount to amending the statute, rather than interpreting it. Since Elonis explicitly argued that recklessness was not sufficient, Alito said:
Alito also addressed the First Amendment question, elided by the majority opinion. He held that "lyrics in songs that are performed for an audience or sold in recorded form are unlikely to be interpreted as a real threat to a real person.... Statements on social media that are pointedly directed at their victims, by contrast, are much more likely to be taken seriously."
Thomas's dissent
Clarence Thomas, dissenting, wrote against discarding the "general intent" standard without replacing it with a clearer standard.
Thomas argued that "there is no historical practice requiring more than general intent when a statute regulates speech."
Thomas cited Rosen, arguing that general intent was sufficient in this case. However, the majority opinion offers refutation in that Rosen turned on ignorance of the law: knowledge as to whether material was legally obscene, not on whether it was intended to be obscene. He also supported the government's claim that the presence of "intent to extort" language in the adjacent §875(b) and did not address the majority's reasoning on that language.
Thomas used precedent, notably from the states and 18th-century England based on other but similar and, arguably, influencing legislation to support his "general intent" claim. Thomas also drew a parallel with general intent in tort. While he sought to address the First Amendment issues, he never strayed far from "general intent."
Aftermath
On remand, the Court of Appeals reaffirmed the conviction “conclud[ing] beyond a reasonable doubt that Elonis would have been convicted if the jury had been properly instructed” and therefore was harmless error.
See also
 Rule of lenity
Footnotes
External links
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
*
Category:2015 in United States case law
"""

From "Elrod v. Burns" ==> """
Elrod v. Burns, 427 U.S. 347 (1976), is a United States Supreme Court decision regarding political speech of public employees.. The Court ruled in this case that public employees may be active members in a political party, but cannot allow patronage to be a deciding factor in work related decisions. The court upheld the decision by the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals ruling in favor of the respondent.
 Background 
Richard J. Elrod was elected Cook County, Ill. Sheriff. As a Democrat, he dismissed four non-civil service employees. John Burns and the other dismissed employees claimed it was on the grounds that they were members of the Republican Party. The previous sheriff, a Republican, had hired them all. Burns and other former employees claimed discrimination due to their affiliation, or lack of affiliation, to a particular political party. The Cook County Sheriff's Office had a tradition of operating under the partisan spoils system.
 Constitutional Question 
The constitutional question is if the firing of Burns and the other respondents was in violation of the Hatch Act and within the jurisdiction of First Amendment accepted free speech by a public employee. The court was deciding whether these statutes should apply to public, non-federal employees.
 Decision 
Justice Brennan wrote the decision affirming the 7th Circuit Court decision. The opinion stated that the Republican employees were denied a civil liberty by losing jobs due to political affiliation.
“Patronage dismissals severely restrict political belief and association, which constitute the core of those activities protected by the First Amendment, and government may not, without seriously inhibiting First Amendment rights, force a public employee to relinquish his right to political association as the price of holding a public job” – Justice Brennan 
Justice Stewart wrote a concurring decision, highlighting that non-policymaking officials cannot be fired on the basis of political affiliation or belief.
The decision upheld the belief that the ‘spoils system’ is unconstitutional through first amendment freedoms. The Supreme Court protected the rights of employees by giving further allowance of free speech by public employees. The decision deemed that the firing of non-policymaking, public employees was unconstitutional, it did not touch on the topic of hiring or promotion.
The decision built off Keyishian v. Board of Regents (1967) that deemed it illegal for public employees to be fired for being members of the Communist Party..
 Dissent 
Justice Powell wrote a dissent claiming that half of the employees in the Cook County, Ill. Sheriff's Office are merit based and are protected from being fired by a new administration. The other half of employees, which Burns was a part of, were hired based on principles decided by the previous sheriff, a Republican. The non-merit employees were hired on basis of patronage and they should be able to be fired on the basis of patronage. The dissent claims that partisan politics at the state level are necessary for the political system to evolve.
“The Court holds unconstitutional a practice as old as the Republic, a practice which has contributed significantly to the democratization of American politics.” – Justice Powell 
Justice Powell goes on to cite the removal of political opponents from roles by founding fathers, such as John Adams, Thomas Jefferson and their successors.
 The Hatch Act 
Congress passed the Hatch Act, or the Act to Prevent Pernicious Political Activities, in 1939. It prevents many federal employees from participating in certain partisan activities.. Specifically, it prohibits campaign activities by federal employees. In an earlier Supreme Court ruling Justices Marshall and Brennan signed on to an opinion in 1973 stating.
"It is no concern of government what an employee does in his or her spare time, whether religion, recreation, social work or politics is his hobby, unless what he or she does impairs efficiency or other facets of the merits of his job." – Mr. Justice Douglas
The court had deemed this as a balance between not restricting speech and making sure that public employees do not over step the boundaries of the office due to political affiliation. The 14th Amendment states that all constitutional rights and laws are to be enforced at the state level.
 Subsequent Cases 
In Rutan v. Republican Party of Illinois (1990), the state of Illinois put a hiring freeze on public employees without permission from the governor. The new employees being hired were all members of the Republican Party. The court decided in favor of the petitioner adding the Elrod v. Burns ruling that nonpolicymaking government employees cannot be hired based on political patronage..
Heffernan v. City of Paterson (2016) was a similar case that took into consideration partisan acts but a member of the Paterson, NJ police force. Jeffery Heffernan was seen carrying a campaign sign to a sick parent. As a result of being seen with the sign, he was demoted for public engagement of political activities. The court overturned that decision claiming that he was acting under protected speech.
Following the Elrod v. Burns decision, the court has stayed with the sentiment that the free speech rights of government employees is protected when they are in non-policymaking or traditionally partisan roles.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 427
 References 
External links
Category:Judiciaries
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1976 in United States case law
"""

From "Empire HealthChoice Assurance, Inc. v. McVeigh" ==> """
Empire HealthChoice Assurance, Inc. v. McVeigh, 547 U.S. 677 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court case.
Empire Healthchoice Assurance, Inc. was a health insurance company that sued the estate of a deceased federal employee who received $157,000 in insurance benefits as the result of an injury. The wife of this federal employee had won $3.2 million in a separate lawsuit from those who she claimed had caused her husband's injuries. Empire Healthchoice Assurance sued her for reimbursement of the benefits paid to him on the grounds that a provision in the federal insurance plan required paid benefits to be reimbursed when the beneficiary is compensated for an injury by a third party. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled against the health insurance company. The Supreme Court, in an opinion by Ruth Bader Ginsburg, affirmed the Court of Appeals' ruling in a 5-4 opinion. Justices Breyer, Kennedy, Souter, and Alito dissented.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Employment Division v. Smith" ==> """
Employment Division, Department of Human Resources of Oregon v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872 (1990), is a United States Supreme Court case that held that the state could deny unemployment benefits to a person fired for violating a state prohibition on the use of peyote even though the use of the drug was part of a religious ritual. Although states have the power to accommodate otherwise illegal acts performed in pursuit of religious beliefs, they are not required to do so.
Facts
Alfred Leo Smith and Galen Black were members of the Native American Church and counselors at a private drug rehabilitation clinic. They were fired because they had ingested peyote, a powerful entheogen, as part of religious ceremonies at the Native American Church. At the time, intentional possession of peyote was a crime under Oregon law without an affirmative defense for religious use. The counselors filed a claim for unemployment compensation with the Employment Division of the Oregon Department of Human Resources, but the claim was denied because the reason for their dismissal was deemed work-related "misconduct". The Oregon Court of Appeals reversed that ruling, holding that denying them unemployment benefits for their religious use of peyote violated their right to exercise their religion. The Oregon Supreme Court agreed, although it relied not on the fact that peyote use was a crime but on the fact that the state's justification for withholding the benefits—preserving the "financial integrity" of the workers' compensation fund—was outweighed by the burden imposed on the employees' exercise of their religion. The state appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, again arguing that denying the unemployment benefits was proper because possession of peyote was a crime.
The U.S. Supreme Court let stand the Oregon Supreme Court's judgment regarding Smith and Black and returned the case to the Oregon courts to determine whether or not sacramental use of illegal drugs violated Oregon's state drug laws (485 U.S. 660 (1988)). On remand, the Oregon Supreme Court concluded that while Oregon drug law prohibited the consumption of illegal drugs for sacramental religious uses, this prohibition violated the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment.Employment Division, Department of Human Resources of Oregon v. Smith Oyez.org. Retrieved 30 March 2020. The state asked the U.S. Supreme Court to review this second decision of the Oregon Supreme Court, and it agreed to do so. In earlier rulings like Sherbert v. Verner (1963), the Court had decided that the government could not condition access to unemployment insurance or other benefits on an individual's willingness to give up conduct required by their religion. But the Supreme Court did not find that this principle also applied when the conduct in question is justifiably prohibited by law.
Of particular importance was that the Oregon law was not directed at the Native Americans' religious practice specifically; thus, it was deemed constitutional when applied to all citizens:494 U.S. at 885.
Majority opinion
The majority opinion was delivered by Justice Antonin Scalia. The First Amendment forbids government from prohibiting the "free exercise" of religion. This means that government may not regulate beliefs as such, either by compelling certain beliefs or forbidding them. Religious belief frequently entails the performance of physical acts—assembling for worship, consumption of bread and wine, abstaining from certain foods or behaviors. Government could no more ban the performance of these physical acts when engaged in for religious reasons than it could ban the religious beliefs that compel those actions in the first place. "It would doubtless be unconstitutional, for example, to ban the casting of statues that are to be used for worship purposes or to prohibit bowing down before a golden calf."
But Oregon's ban on the possession of peyote is not a law specifically aimed at a physical act engaged in for a religious reason. Rather, it is a law that applies to everyone who might possess peyote, for whatever reason—a "neutral law of general applicability". Scalia characterized the employees' argument as an attempt to use their religious motivation to use peyote in order to place themselves beyond the reach of Oregon's neutral, generally applicable ban on possession of peyote. The Court held that the First Amendment's protection of the "free exercise" of religion does not allow a person to use a religious motivation as a reason not to obey such generally applicable laws. Citing Reynolds v. United States (1878), Scalia wrote, "To permit this would be to make the professed doctrines of religious belief superior to the law of the land, and in effect to permit every citizen to become a law unto himself." Thus, the Court had held that religious beliefs did not excuse people from complying with laws forbidding polygamy, child labor laws, Sunday closing laws, laws requiring citizens to register for Selective Service, or laws requiring the payment of Social Security taxes.
By contrast, the cases in which the Court had allowed a religious motivation to exempt a person from a neutral, generally applicable law involved the assertion of both the right of free exercise along with some other right. Thus, religious publishers are exempt from a law requiring them to obtain a license if that license may be denied to any publisher the government deems nonreligious. The government may not tax religious solicitors. The government may not require the Amish to send their children to school because their religion demands otherwise, and Amish parents, like all parents, have the right to direct the education of their children. Because Smith and Black were not asserting a hybrid right, they could not claim a religious exemption under the First Amendment from Oregon's ban on peyote.
Smith and Black had argued that, at the very least, the Court should uphold Oregon's ban on peyote as applied to them only if Oregon had a compelling interest in prohibiting their religious use of peyote. The Court had invalidated three other unemployment compensation restrictions under this standard. But those other restrictions themselves required consideration of individualized circumstances, such as when unemployment compensation was denied to a person who could not, for religious reasons, work on Saturdays. If a state has in place a system of individualized consideration, the constitution does not allow the state to refuse to extend that system to cases of religious hardship without a compelling reason.
The difference between the other unemployment cases the Court had decided and this case was that Oregon's ban on peyote applied to everyone equally—in other words, it made no room for individualized consideration of the reasons a person might want to use peyote.494 U.S. at 888-89 (citations omitted).
Rather than interpret the First Amendment to require the exemption that Smith and Black sought, the Court encouraged them to seek redress from the legislature. It observed that Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico already specifically exempted religious uses from their otherwise generally applicable peyote bans. "Just as a society that believes in the negative protection accorded to the press by the First Amendment is likely to enact laws that affirmatively foster the dissemination of the printed word, so also a society that believes in the negative protection afforded to religious belief can be expected to be solicitous of that value in its legislation as well." Requiring claims for religious exemptions to be vetted by the legislative process might put less popular religions at a disadvantage, but the Court held that this situation was preferable to the relative anarchy that would result from "a system in which each conscience is a law unto itself."
Concurring opinion
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor disagreed with the majority's analytical framework, preferring to apply the traditional compelling interest test to Oregon's ban on peyote. She agreed with the Court's initial premise that the Free Exercise Clause applied to religiously motivated conduct as well as religious beliefs, but pointed out that even a so-called neutral law of general applicability imposes a burden on a person's exercise of religion if that law prevents a person from engaging in religiously motivated conduct or requires them to engage in conduct forbidden by their religion. The First Amendment has to reach both laws that expressly target religion as well as generally applicable laws; otherwise, the law would relegate the constitutional protection of the free exercise of religion to "the barest level of minimum scrutiny that the Equal Protection Clause already provides".
But First Amendment rights are not absolute. The law tolerates burdens on the free exercise of religion that serve a compelling governmental interest and are narrowly tailored to meet that interest. "The compelling interest test effectuates the First Amendment's command that religious liberty is an independent liberty, that it occupies a preferred position, and that the Court will not permit encroachment upon this liberty, whether direct or indirect, unless required by clear and compelling governmental interests of the highest order."
Thus the critical question in this case is whether exempting respondents from the State's general criminal prohibition "will unduly interfere with fulfillment of the governmental interest," O'Connor wrote. "Although the question is close, I would conclude that uniform application of Oregon's criminal prohibition is 'essential to accomplish,' its overriding interest in preventing the physical harm caused by the use of a Schedule I controlled substance."
First, O'Connor considered the interest of Smith and Black. There was no doubt that the exemption from Oregon's ban on peyote was not a pretext for Smith and Black. It was directly linked to the exercise of their religious beliefs, the sincerity of which the Court does not and should not question. Peyote is a sacrament in the Native American Church; thus, members must "choose between carrying out the ritual embodying their religious beliefs and avoidance of criminal prosecution. That choice is ... more than sufficient to trigger First Amendment scrutiny."
Despite this choice, "Oregon's criminal prohibition represents that state's judgment that the possession and use of controlled substances, even by only one person, is inherently harmful and dangerous," O'Connor wrote. "Because the health effects caused by the use of controlled substances exist regardless of the motivation of the user, the use of such substances, even for religious purposes, violates the very purpose of the laws that prohibit them." Furthermore, society's interest in preventing trafficking in controlled substances was similarly central to effectuating Oregon's ban on peyote. O'Connor likewise suggested that Smith and Black seek redress in the state legislature and not the courts, for the fact that other states allow religious use of peyote does not compel Oregon to follow suit. Indeed, not even Smith and Black disputed that Oregon's interest in outlawing peyote was compelling.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Harry Blackmun agreed with O'Connor that the compelling interest test should apply to Oregon's ban on peyote, but disagreed with her that the ban was supported by a compelling interest that was narrowly tailored. Blackmun began by "articulat[ing] in precise terms the state interest involved" in the ban. He focused narrowly on the state's interest in not exempting religious use from its otherwise generally applicable ban on peyote rather than the state's broader interest in "fighting the critical 'war on drugs.'" Blackmun framed the issue as he did because "failure to reduce the competing interests to the same plane of generality tends to distort the weighing process in the state's favor." He questioned whether Oregon actually enforced its criminal prohibition on peyote against religious users, noting that it had not actually prosecuted Smith or Black. Because Oregon had not prosecuted any religious users of peyote, its "asserted interest thus amounts only to the symbolic preservation of an unfettered prohibition. But a government interest in symbolism, even symbolism for so worthy a cause as the abolition of unlawful drugs, cannot suffice to abrogate the constitutional rights of individuals."
Oregon also claimed an interest in protecting the health and safety of its citizens from the dangers of illegal drug use, but there was no evidence that religious use of peyote actually harmed anyone. That peyote was a Schedule I drug did not persuade Blackmun. The federal government may have placed peyote on Schedule I, but the federal government also tolerated the religious use of peyote. In addition, other Schedule I drugs (such as cannabis) have lawful uses. Religious use was not recreational use; the Native American Church ritual in which peyote is consumed is heavily supervised, thus mitigating Oregon's health and safety concerns. The religious use occurs in a context that harmonizes with the state's general ban. The Native American Church discourages nonreligious use of peyote, and promotes family harmony, self-reliance, and abstinence from alcohol. Research suggests that religious use of peyote can help curb "the tragic effects of alcoholism on the Native American population." And as for the state's interest in abolishing drug trafficking, Blackmun pointed out that there is "practically no illegal traffic in peyote."
Finally, Blackmun expressed concern for "the severe impact of a state's restrictions on the adherents of a minority religion." Eating peyote is "an act of worship and communion," a "means for communicating with the Great Spirit." If Oregon is a hostile environment in which to practice the Native American religion, its adherents might be forced to "migrate to some other and more tolerant region." Blackmun found it inconsistent with First Amendment values to denigrate an "unorthodox" religious practice in this way.
 Aftermath 
Smith set the precedent "that laws affecting certain religious practices do not violate the right to free exercise of religion as long as the laws are neutral, generally applicable, and not motivated by animus to religion." In other words: When "the government has a 'generally applicable' law or regulation and enforces the law neutrally, the government's action is presumptively legitimate, even if it has some 'incidental' adverse impact on a religious group or person." 
Congress passed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) in 1993, which required the application of strict scrutiny to laws restricting religious freedom. In response to the Supreme Court's 1997 ruling in City of Boerne v. Flores, which declared the RFRA unconstitutional as applied to the states, Congress passed the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act (RLUIPA) in 2000, which grants special privileges to religious landowners and prisoners.
In Fulton v. City of Philadelphia (2021), the Supreme Court ruled that certain services like foster care certification fell outside of public accommodations covered by the anti-discriminatory nature of Smith, and as a result, discriminatory policies related to these services could be reviewed through strict scrutiny; in the specific case of Fulton, the Supreme Court ruled that Philadelphia's policy not to contract a religious-based foster care agency because of its anti-same sex couple policy violated its freedom of religious exercise rights. In a 77-page concurrence, Justice Samuel Alito, joined by Justices Clarence Thomas and Neil Gorsuch, wrote that he would have overruled Smith.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
Further reading
External links
Category:Native American Church
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:1990 in religion
Category:Unemployment in the United States
Category:Legal history of Oregon
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:Lophophora
"""

From "Emporium Capwell Company v. Western Addition" ==> """
Emporium Capwell v. Western Addition, 420 U.S. 50 (1975), was a United States Supreme Court case.Emporium Capwell Co. v. Western Addition, . The court reversed and remanded the Court of Appeals ruling. The Supreme Court ruled on the basis of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the National Labor Relations Act of 1935 (NLRA).
 Background 
Emporium Capwell was a department store chain in San Francisco. Most minorities worked in the stock and marketing area of the store, while Caucasians worked in the selling areas where the furniture and electronics were. The union for the Emporium was known as the Local 1100.  At the beginning of the 20th century, President Woodrow Wilson created the War Labor Board in 1918. The War Labor Board was President Wilson's tactic of decreasing the increasing tension of employees and employers. The board could not do much, but it did manage to negotiate the employers into a somewhat peaceful agreement of no strikes and lockouts. Congress then passed the Norris-LaGuardia Act of 1932, which stated that the courts can not put an injunction on strikes. The National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) was founded the day that congress passed the NLRA. The board consists of five president appointed and senate approved people. The purpose of this board is to protect the rights of workers. The National Labor Relations Act of 1935, also known as the Wagner Act, gave employees the right to form labor unions and to negotiate with their employer. Through this act, workers found the courage to organize unions more and negotiates better wages and working conditions with their employers.
 History 
Local 1100, the union representing workers at Emporium Capwell, had a large increase in membership in 1968. The large increase was due to minorities joining the union and filing many complaints. Tom Hawkins, Jim Hollins, and other African American clerks had been working at the Emporium for a long time, and most of them had seniority. The minorities believed they deserved promotions because of their intelligence and how long they had been at the job. The complaints were suggested to be  taken as individual complaints instead of a store wide complaint issued by black employees. The employees felt like their grievance was not heard and was not being brought to the forefront of the union's issues with the company, so the black employees disregarded the union's grievance system. The union advised the black workers several times to not boycott, or picket, the store but this fell to deaf ears. On November 9, 1968, a group of workers from the Emporium began a boycott of the store. The boycott did not make news. After two Saturdays of leafleting in front of the store, Hawkins and Hollins were fired. According to the department store, the situation could have been better handled through arbitration. The leafleting was seen as a deliberate attempt to hurt the store in order to get the Emporium to negotiate with them individually.
 Supreme Court Considerations 
The Supreme Court took into considerations other cases such as NLRB v. Allis-Chalmers Company and NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp, to make their determining decision. The courts had many cases before pertaining to the NLRB and NLRA, so this decision was an easy yet hard one for them. This decision would either limit or expanded the rights of unionist and also affect minorities as they felt they were discriminated.
 Decision 
On February 18, 1975, the court released their 8–1 decision which reversed the decision of lower courts. The Supreme Court was reluctant to make a decision that would override the statutes of Title VII.
 Majority opinion 
The Supreme Court justices made the decision in favor of Emporium. The NLRA protects the union from being fired for protesting and gives them the right to negotiate with their employer. The justices argued that the NLRA was not violated at any point during this entire situation. The justices argued that Hollins and Hawkins felt that they were discriminated on their own instances, and by taking action based on their feelings then the employers, Emporium, were not wrong in their actions. The Justices opinionated that on statutory grounds, this case may be appropriate but not on the terms that is being brought before them.
 Douglas' Dissent 
Justice William Orville Douglas wrote a dissent in which he stood alone in. Douglas objected that the Court's ruling left those who were in minority groups within the union would be powerless against the majority. This would, in essence, repress the needs of the few. Douglas also argued that the union was in breach of its duties to represent its members fairly. Douglas held that Alexander v. Gardner-Denver Co.  prohibited unions from stopping seeking help through Title VII. Throughout his dissent, Douglas equated the court's decision to making minorities and individuals prisoners of the union system.
 References 
External links
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:History of San Francisco
Category:1968 labor disputes and strikes
"""

From "Encino Motorcars v. Navarro" ==> """
Encino Motorcars v. Navarro, 579 U.S. ___ (2016), 584 U.S. ___ (2018), was a Supreme Court of the United States case addressing overtime pay. Specifically at issue is whether automotive service advisors are eligible for overtime pay under the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
The case had been heard twice by the Supreme Court. In the first pass, the Court had vacated a previous decision by the Ninth Circuit Appeals Court which relied on an interpretive ruling on the Fair Labor Standards Act provided by the United States Department of Labor to states that service advisors were not exempt, and remanded the case back to the Ninth Circuit.. On rehearing, the Ninth Circuit still found the same; its decision was reversed in the Supreme Court's 2018 ruling..
Facts and prior history
Respondents are "service advisors" at Mercedes-Benz of Encino (California). Their primary job responsibilities involve identifying service needs and selling service solutions to the dealership's customers. Respondents brought suit against the dealership under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), seeking time-and-a-half overtime pay for working more than 40 hours per week.
The FLSA exempts from its overtime requirements "any salesman, partsman, or mechanic primarily engaged in selling or servicing automobiles." The district court denied the claims, concluding that a service advisor is a "salesman . . . engaged in ... servicing automobiles" and therefore exempt from the FLSA's overtime requirements. The Ninth Circuit reversed, citing a 2011 Department of Labor interpretive regulation stating that service advisors are not exempt under §213(b)(10)(A) because they do not personally service automobiles. This finding was contrary for findings from the Fourth and Fifth Circuits, several district courts, and the Supreme Court of Montana," all of which held that service advisors are exempt employees.
First Supreme Court opinion
Encino petitioned to the Supreme Court, who granted certiorari, and heard the case on April 20, 2016. The Court ruled on June 20, 2016, giving a 6-2 decision to vacate the Ninth Circuit’s decision and remanded the case back to that court. The majority decision was provided by Justice Anthony Kennedy, joined by Justices Roberts, Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan. Kennedy's opinion focused on whether the 2011 DOL regulation qualified for the "Chevron deference", defined by Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. and which states that courts must defer to regulations made by the appropriate administrative agency granted powers by Congress on some matters. Kennedy stated that past cases related to the Chevron deference, such as FCC v. Fox (2009) and National Cable & Telecommunications Ass'n v. Brand X Internet Services (2005), determined that this deference is only allowable when agencies make these regulations with "good reasons for the new policy"; the 2011 DOL policy change, the Court determined, was a complete change from a 1978 DOL policy, and the DOL did not provide adequete rationale for its change. As such, the Court ruled that the Ninth could not consider the 2011 DOL ruling as part of its decision. Kennedy's decision otherwise did not rule on the other merits of the case. 
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Alito. In the dissent, Thomas agreed that the 2011 DOL ruling did not enjoy Chevron deference, but believed that the Supreme Court should evaluate the other merits of the case at that time, and in his opinion, the FLSA should be read to have service advisers as exempt from overtime as they are "primarily engaged in ... servicing automobiles", and suggested reversal of the Ninth Circuit's decision on this basis.
Remand to Ninth Circuit
The Ninth Circuit still found against Encino during the rehearing, ruling that the service advisors were not exempt, basing their decision primarily on the legislative history of FLSA.
Second Supreme Court opinion
Encino again appealed to the Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the case in September 2017. The case provides the unusual example of the same case being heard a second time, allowing a view into the new court's attitude toward federal rulemaking.
The Court heard oral arguments January 17, 2018. The court issued its ruling on April 2, 2018, in a 5–4 decision that reversed the Ninth Circuit and affirmed that service advisors are to be considered exempt under FLSA. The majority opinion was written by Justice Clarence Thomas joined by Justices Roberts, Alito, Kennedy, and Gorsuch, while Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the dissenting opinion joined by Justices Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan.
See also
 Fair Labor Standards Act
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States labor case law
"""

From "Endrew F. v. Douglas County School Dist. RE–1" ==> """
Endrew F. v. Douglas County School Dist. RE–1, 580 U.S. ___ (2017), was a United States Supreme Court case that held that the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ("IDEA"), et seq. required schools to provide students an education that is "reasonably calculated to enable a child to make progress appropriate in light of the child’s circumstances.", slip. op. at 11. In a unanimous opinion written by Chief Justice John Roberts, the Court vacated the judgment of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit.
The central issue in the case was about "the level of educational benefit school districts must provide students with disabilities as defined by IDEA." The Supreme Court held that the proper standard under the IDEA "is markedly more demanding than the 'merely more than de minimis''' test applied by the Tenth Circuit."Endrew F., slip op. at 14, 16. The Court added that meaningful, "appropriately ambitious" progress goes further than what the lower courts had held.The Supreme Court Rules In Favor Of A Special Education Student NPR News, Retrieved March 24, 2017 The Court, however, rejected a stricter equal access or equal opportunity standard for a free and appropriate education proposed by the plaintiff. The case was described by advocates as "the most significant special-education issue to reach the high court in three decades." 
Case background
In 2010, Endrew, who was in Grade 5 at the time at Summit View Elementary school in Douglas County School District RE-1 in Colorado, began to exhibit "severe behavioral issues." The parents removed their child from Summit View and enrolled him in a specialized school for children with autism, Firefly Autism in Denver, with an annual tuition of $70,000. The family requested reimbursement for the Firefly tuition claiming the Douglas County School District had not fulfilled the requirements of IDEA. On May 15, 2016, they lost their case before the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit with circuit judges Harris Hartz, Timothy Tymkovich, and Gregory A. Phillips presiding. Their argument was that "the federal statute only requires that schools provide students with "some educational benefit."" In an amicus brief submitted by the Office of the Solicitor General, the Supreme Court was urged to take the case stating that the 10th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals "had set the bar — a standard of 'merely … more than de minimis' educational benefit — too low."
Supreme Court takes the case
In September 2016, the U.S. Supreme Court announced that it would hear the "potentially groundbreaking case" brought by a "Douglas County couple who claim that their autistic son was not provided an adequate education in the public school system as required by federal law." Access to public education through IDEA had been affirmed by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1982 in Board of Education v. Rowley, but the quality of guaranteed education for students with disabilities under IDEA had not been addressed. This Supreme Court case has the potential to "affect the education of 6.7 million children with disabilities" as the Court "struggles "to decide whether it should require public schools to do more under a federal law that calls for them to provide a free education that addresses the children's needs." In the Solicitor General's Amicus brief, the Supreme Court was advised that "Resolving the conflict among the circuits will ensure that millions of children with disabilities receive a consistent level of education, while providing parents and educators much-needed guidance regarding their rights and obligations."
On November 21, 2016, 118 lawmakers filed a bicameral amicus brief supporting the rights of students with disabilities to receive a "meaningful" public education. Since August 2016, National Education Association (NEA), the United States' largest trade union, former officials of the U.S. Department of Education, the National Disability Rights Network, the National Education Association, the Council of Parent Attorneys and Advocates, the National Center for Special Education in Charter Schools, and others have "submitted amicus briefs in support of the child."
Supreme court argument
Supreme Court Justices Stephen G. Breyer, Samuel A. Alito Jr., and Anthony M. Kennedy expressed concerns about the implications of implementing IDEA with changes in quality of education standards. Breyer cautioned about potential rising costs of litigation, for example, extraneous lawsuits. Kennedy questioned the financial cost to districts with severely disabled students; Alito considered the burden on poorer school districts.
Not all of the eleven circuit courts have considered the issue of standards and in those that have, only two set "meaningful educational benefit" standard. The Supreme Court will decide whether a uniform standard should apply nationally. Alito expressed frustration with the "blizzard of words" produced in the last thirty years of appeals courts hearings which offered different views on standards.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg cited the Board of Education v. Rowley (1982)''  in which the Court held that public schools were "not required by law to provide sign language interpreters to deaf students who are otherwise receiving an equal and adequate education."
The lawyer for the parents, Jeffrey L. Fisher, claimed that schools should provide "substantially equal educational opportunities" and in most cases, the costs involve "things like providing Braille textbooks, providing an iPad, providing some specialized instruction by a staff member who's already on staff...[T]here are going to be some extreme cases....[IDEA] does not permit cost to trump what the act otherwise requires. Schools should provide "a level of educational services designed to allow the child to progress from grade to grade in the general curriculum."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States disability case law
Category:2017 in United States case law
Category:Public education in the United States
Category:Education in Douglas County, Colorado
"""

From "Engel v. Vitale" ==> """
Engel v. Vitale, 370 U.S. 421 (1962), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that it is unconstitutional for state officials to compose an official school prayer and encourage its recitation in public schools, due to violation of the First Amendment. The ruling has been the subject of intense debate.
Background
On November 30, 1951, the Board of Regents of New York approved a nondenominational prayer for their morning procedures.  Students would be given the choice to be excused for the morning prayer if they chose to.  The prayer was twenty-two words that went as follows:
The case was brought by a group of families of public school students in New Hyde Park from the Herricks Union Free School District who sued the school board president William J. Vitale, Jr. The families argued that the voluntary prayer written by the state board of regents to "Almighty God" contradicted their religious beliefs. Led by Steven I. Engel, a Jewish man, the plaintiffs sought to challenge the constitutionality of the state's prayer in school policy.  They were supported by groups opposed to the school prayer including rabbinical organizations, Ethical Culture, and Jewish organizations. 
The acting parties were neither all members of a single particular religious persuasion, nor all atheists. Their religious identities were legally identified in court paperwork as two Jews, an atheist, a Unitarian church member, and a member of the New York Society for Ethical Culture. However, despite being listed in the court papers as an atheist, plaintiff Lawrence Roth, who was raised Jewish, later denied that he was an atheist and described himself as religious and a participant of prayer. When religious affiliation was discussed during preparations for the case, Roth claimed he was "a very religious person, but not a churchgoer" and that he said prayers but was unsure of what prayer could accomplish. This resulted in the group's lawyer telling him "You're the atheist." Roth later stated "apparently, you have to have an atheist in the crowd, so we started from there."
The plaintiffs argued that opening the school day with such a prayer violates the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution (as applied to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment), which states, in part, "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion".U.S. Const. Amend. I. The governments of twenty-two states submitted an amicus curiae brief to the Supreme Court urging affirmance of the New York Court of Appeals decision that upheld the constitutionality of the prayer.The amicus curiae brief was submitted by the attorneys general of Arizona, Arkansas, Connecticut, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Indiana, Kansas, Maryland, Mississippi, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Carolina, North Dakota, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Texas, and West Virginia. .  The American Jewish Committee, the Synagogue Council of America, and the American Ethical Union each submitted briefs urging the Court to instead reverse and rule that the prayer was unconstitutional.
Opinion of the Court
In a 6–1 decision, the Supreme Court held that reciting government-written prayers in public schools was unconstitutional, violating the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.
In his opinion for the Court, Justice Black explained the importance of separation between church and state by giving a lengthy history of the issue, beginning with the 16th century in England. He noted that prayer is a religious activity by its very nature, and that prescribing such a religious activity for school children violates the Establishment Clause.
The Court rejected the defendant's arguments that students were not asked to observe any specific established religion, that the traditional heritage of the nation was religious, and that the prayer was voluntary. The Court held that the mere promotion of a religion is sufficient to establish a violation, even if that promotion is not coercive. The Court further held that the fact that the prayer is vaguely-enough worded not to promote any particular religion is not a sufficient defense, as it still promotes a family of religions (those that recognize "Almighty God"), which still violates the Establishment Clause.
In a concurring opinion, Justice Douglas argued that the Establishment Clause is also violated when the government grants financial aid to religious schools.
In his dissenting opinion, Justice Stewart contended that the Establishment Clause was originally written to abolish the idea of a state-sponsored church, and not to stop a non-mandatory "brief non-denominational prayer".
Subsequent developments
Since its decision, Engel has been the subject of intense debate. It has become considered one of the Court's "liberal" decisions alongside decisions such as its sequel, Abington School District v. Schempp,  Griswold v. Connecticut, Miranda v. Arizona and its sequel, in re Gault, Eisenstadt v. Baird,  Roe v. Wade, Obergefell v. Hodges, Miller v. California and Mapp v. Ohio, and has been criticized for its broadness in holding that a showing of coercion is not required to demonstrate an Establishment Clause violation.
Engel has been the basis for several subsequent decisions limiting government-directed prayer in school. In Wallace v. Jaffree (1985), the Supreme Court ruled Alabama's law permitting one minute for prayer or meditation was unconstitutional. In Lee v. Weisman (1992), the court prohibited clergy-led prayer at middle school graduation ceremonies. Lee v. Weisman, in turn, was a basis for Santa Fe ISD v. Doe (2000), in which the Court extended the ban to school-organized student-led prayer at high school football games in which a majority of students voted in favor of the prayer.
One myth of the Engel v. Vitale case was that an atheist leader Madalyn Murray O'Hair was responsible for the landmark ruling of the case. A year after the 1962 ruling there were two separate suits challenging Bible-reading; one by Ed Schempp in Philadelphia and the other by Mrs. O'Hair in Maryland. The court combined the two cases and subsequently ruled consistent with Engel."School Prayer Ruling", New York Times, 26 December 1996.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 370
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Separation of church and state in the United States
 West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943)
 Everson v. Board of Education (1947)
 Abington School District v. Schempp (1963)
 Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971)
 Wallace v. Jaffree (1985)
 Kennedy v. Bremerton School District (2022)
 Herricks Union Free School District
References
Further reading
 .
 Laats, Adam. "Our schools, our country: American evangelicals, public schools, and the Supreme Court decisions of 1962 and 1963." Journal of religious history 36.3 (2012): 319-334.
 .
 .
External links
 Government case review
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:1962 in United States case law
Category:Religion and education
Category:United States education case law
Category:Education in Nassau County, New York
Category:1962 in religion
Category:1962 in education
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Religion in New York (state)
Category:Prayer
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "England v. Louisiana State Board of Medical Examiners" ==> """
England v. Louisiana State Board of Medical Examiners, 375 U.S. 411 (1964), was a United States Supreme Court decision that refined the procedures for U.S. federal courts to abstain from deciding issues of state law, pursuant to the doctrine set forth in Railroad Commission v. Pullman Co., 312 U.S. 496 (1941).
Facts
The plaintiffs were chiropractors in the state of Louisiana. They sued in the United States District Court to prevent state officials from applying a licensing scheme to them, arguing both that they were not within the group to whom the statute applied, and that the statute infringed the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The District Court noted that a state court might find that the state law did not apply to the plaintiffs, and abstained from hearing the case pursuant to the Pullman abstention doctrine.
The plaintiffs noted that a case refining Pullman called Government and Civil Employees Organizing Committee, CIO v. Windsor, 353 U.S. 364 (1957) had held that the judgment of the state court was meaningless unless the state court was aware that constitutional questions had also been raised as to the validity of the statute. The plaintiffs therefore brought both claims in the Louisiana state court (as they believed Pullman and Windsor required). The state court found against them on both statutory and constitutional claims.
The plaintiffs then returned to the District Court seeking a new hearing on the constitutional question. The defendant then sought a dismissal on res judicata grounds, contending that the decision of the state court was binding as to the constitutional issue.
Issue
Can the federal court hear the case once the state has ruled on the merits of the constitutional issue?
Result
The Supreme Court, in an opinion by Justice Brennan, noted that the state court determination would indeed bind the federal court. The proper procedure, the Court determined, is to give notice that the federal issue is contended, but to expressly reserve the claim on the federal issue for the federal court. If such a reservation is made, the parties can return to the federal court, even if the state court makes a ruling on the issue.
However, the Court also noted that even if the parties did not expressly reserve the federal issues, they can still return to the federal court if it is apparent that the parties had avoided adjudication of the federal law issues.
Because the plaintiffs in this case believed that they were just following the law as required, they would not be barred from continuing in the federal court.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 375
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States abstention case law
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:Chiropractic
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "English v. General Electric Co." ==> """
English v. General Electric, 496 U.S. 72 (1990), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that state-law claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress is not pre-empted by the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974.
Background
Petitioner English, a laboratory technician at a nuclear facility operated by respondent General Electric Company (GE), complained to GE's management and to the Federal Government about several perceived violations of nuclear-safety standards at the facility, including the failure of her co-workers to clean up radioactive spills in the laboratory. Frustrated by GE's failure to address her concerns, English on one occasion deliberately failed to clean a work table contaminated with uranium during an earlier shift. Instead, she outlined the contaminated areas with red tape to make them conspicuous and, a few days later, called her supervisor's attention to the fact that the marked-off areas still had not been cleaned. Shortly after work was halted for inspection and cleaning of the laboratory, GE charged English with a knowing failure to clean up radioactive contamination, temporarily assigned her to other work, and ultimately discharged her. She then filed a complaint with the Secretary of Labor, alleging that GE's actions violated 210(a) of the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, which makes it unlawful for a nuclear industry employer to retaliate against an employee for reporting safety violations. Although an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) found a 210(a) violation, the Secretary dismissed the complaint as untimely under the 30-day limitations period provided by 210(b)(1). Subsequently, English filed a diversity action seeking compensatory and punitive damages from GE in the District Court, raising, inter alia, a state-law claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress. While rejecting GE's argument that the latter claim fell within a field - nuclear safety - that had been completely pre-empted by the Federal Government, the court nevertheless dismissed the claim on the ground that it conflicted with three particular aspects of 210 and was therefore pre-empted. The Court of Appeals affirmed.
Held
English's state-law claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress is not pre-empted by federal law. pp. 78–90.
(a) The claim is not barred on a field pre-emption theory. After reviewing the relevant statutory provisions and legislative history, the Court in Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Comm'n, 461 U.S. 190, concluded that "the Federal Government has occupied the entire field of nuclear safety concerns," id., at 212, and expressed the view that Congress intended that only the "Government should regulate the radiological safety aspects involved in the construction and operation of a nuclear plant," id., at 205. English's action, however, does not fall within the boundaries of the pre-empted field as so defined, since the state tort law at issue is not motivated by safety concerns, see id., at 213, and since the claim's actual effect on the nuclear safety decisions made by those who build and run nuclear facilities is not sufficiently direct and substantial, cf. Silkwood v. Kerr-McGee Corp., 464 U.S. 238. It is thus not surprising that there is no evidence of the necessary "clear and manifest" intent by Congress to pre-empt such claims. pp. 80–86.
(b) English's claim does not conflict with particular aspects of 210. First, neither the text nor the legislative history of 210(g) - which provides that "Subsection (a) of this section [the prohibition on employer retaliation] shall not apply" where an employee "deliberately causes a violation of any requirement of this Act or the Atomic Energy Act" - reflects a congressional desire to preclude all relief, including state remedies, to a whistle-blower who deliberately commits a safety violation. Even if that were Congress' intent, the federal interest would be served by pre-empting recovery by violators of safety standards. Here, the ALJ found that English did not deliberately commit a violation. Second, absent some specific suggestion in the text or legislative history, the failure of 210 to provide general authorization for the Secretary to award punitive damages for 210(a) violations does not imply a congressional intent to bar a state action, like English's, that permits such an award. Third, the expeditious timeframes provided for the processing of 210 claims do not reflect a congressional decision that, in order to encourage the reporting of safety violations and retaliatory behavior, no whistle-blower should be able to recover under any other law after the time for filing under 210 has expired. Since many retaliatory incidents are a response to safety complaints made to the Federal Government, the Government is already aware of these safety violations even if employees do not invoke 210's remedial provisions. Moreover, the suggestion that employees will forgo their 210 options and rely solely on state remedies is simply too speculative a basis on which to rest a pre-emption finding. pp. 87–90.
Summary of preemption law
The court provided a summary of preemption law.
Excerpt (summary of preemption law)
Our cases have established that state law is pre-empted under the Supremacy Clause, U.S. Const., Art. VI, cl. 2, in three circumstances. First, Congress can define explicitly the extent to which its enactments pre-empt state law. See Shaw v. Delta Air Lines, Inc., 463 U.S. 85, 95-98, 103 S.Ct. 2890, 2898-2900, 77 L.Ed.2d 490 (1983). Pre-emption fundamentally is a question of congressional intent, see Schneidewind v. ANR Pipeline Co., 485 U.S. 293, 299, 108 S.Ct. 1145, 1150, 99 L.Ed.2d 316 (1988), and when Congress has made its intent known through explicit statutory language, the courts' task is an easy one.
Second, in the absence of explicit statutory language, state law is pre-empted where it regulates conduct in a field that Congress intended the Federal Government to occupy exclusively. Such an intent may be inferred from a "scheme of federal regulation . . . so pervasive as to make reasonable the inference that Congress left no room for the States to supplement it," or where an Act of Congress "touch[es] a field in which the federal interest is so dominant that the federal system will be assumed to preclude enforcement of state laws on the same subject." Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., 331 U.S. 218, 230, 67 S.Ct. 1146, 1152, 91 L.Ed. 1447 (1947). Although this Court has not hesitated to draw an inference of field pre-emption where it is supported by the federal statutory and regulatory schemes, it has emphasized: "Where . . . the field which Congress is said to have pre-empted" includes areas that have "been traditionally occupied by the States," congressional intent to supersede state laws must be " 'clear and manifest.' " Jones v. Rath Packing Co., 430 U.S. 519, 525, 97 S.Ct. 1305, 1309, 51 L.Ed.2d 604 (1977), quoting Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., 331 U.S., at 230, 67 S.Ct., at 1152.
Finally, state law is pre-empted to the extent that it actually conflicts with federal law. Thus, the Court has found pre-emption where it is impossible for a private party to comply with both state and federal requirements, see, e.g., Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Paul, 373 U.S. 132, 142-143, 83 S.Ct. 1210, 1217-1218, 10 L.Ed.2d 248 (1963), or where state law "stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress." Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U.S. 52, 67, 61 S.Ct. 399, 404, 85 L.Ed. 581 (1941).  See also Maryland v. Louisiana, 451 U.S. 725, 747, 101 S.Ct. 2114, 2129, 68 L.Ed.2d 576 (1981).
References
External links
Category:United States federal preemption law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:General Electric litigation
"""

From "Enmund v. Florida" ==> """
Enmund v. Florida, 458 U.S. 782 (1982), is a United States Supreme Court case. It was a 5–4 decision in which the United States Supreme Court applied its capital proportionality principle, to set aside the death penalty for the driver of a getaway car, in a robbery-murder of an elderly Floridian couple..
 Background 
While Earl Enmund sat outside in the getaway car, his accomplices Sampson and Jeanette Armstrong rang the doorbell of Thomas and Eunice Kersey, who lived at a farmhouse in Central Florida. When Thomas Kersey answered, Sampson Armstrong held him at gunpoint while Jeanette took his money. Eunice came out with a gun and shot Jeanette, wounding her. Sampson shot back and killed both of the Kerseys. The Armstrongs took all the Kerseys' money and then went back to the getaway car Enmund was driving.  
Enmund and the Armstrongs were indicted for first-degree murder and robbery. The judge instructed the jury that under Florida law, killing a human being while engaged in the perpetration or in the attempt to perpetrate a robbery is first-degree murder. Jeanette and Sampson Armstrong were convicted of first-degree murder. At a separate penalty hearing, the trial judge found that the murders were committed for pecuniary gain and were especially heinous, atrocious, or cruel, and no statutory mitigating factors applied, and then sentenced Enmund to death. On appeal, the Florida Supreme Court rejected Enmund's contention that his death sentence was inappropriate because he did not kill or intend to kill the Kerseys. It held that the "felony murder rule and the law of principals combine to make a felon generally responsible for the lethal acts of his co-felon."Enmund v. Florida, 399 So.2d 1362, 1370 (Fla. 1981).
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice White  delivered the opinion of the Court.   The question before the Court was whether death is a valid penalty under the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments for one who neither took life, attempted to take life, nor intended to take life.  The majority found that the record did not support a finding that Enmund killed or attempted to kill the Kerseys, and the record did not support a finding that Enmund intended to participate in the killing or facilitate the killing. Accordingly, the Court held the imposition of a sentence of death upon Enmund was prohibited by the Eighth Amendment because Enmund only "aided and abetted a felony in the course of which a murder is committed by others but who does not himself kill, attempt to kill, or intend that a killing take place or that lethal force will be employed."
 Concurring opinion 
Justice Brennan delivered a concurring opinion and stated that the death penalty is a cruel and unusual punishment prohibited by the Eighth Amendment in all circumstances.
 Dissent 
Justice O'Connor, joined by Chief Justice Burger, Justice Powell, and Justice Rehnquist, delivered the dissenting opinion, on the basis that the majority opinion interferes with state criteria for assessing guilt.
 See also 
 Tison v. Arizona
 Felony murder and the death penalty in the United States
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Florida
Category:1982 in United States case law
"""

From "Entergy Corp. v. Riverkeeper Inc." ==> """
Entergy Corp. v. Riverkeeper, Inc., 556 U.S. 208 (2009), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court that reviewed the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) interpretation of the Clean Water Act regulations with regard to cooling water intakes for power plants. Existing facilities are mandated to use the "Best Technology Available" to "minimize the adverse environmental impact.".  The issue was whether the agency may use a cost–benefit analysis (CBA) in choosing the Best Available Technology or (BAT) to meet the National Performance Standards (NPS).
Reversing a lower court opinion, the 5-1-3 ruling upheld the EPA's decision as reasonable to allow CBA to determine the best technology available to maintain national environmental standards.
Parties
Petitioner: Entergy Corporation is an energy company engaged primarily in electric power production and retail electric distribution operations.  Entergy owns and operates both nuclear and fossil fuel power plants generating an aggregated 30,000 megawatts of electrical capacity.  Indian Point Energy Center is a subsidiary of Entergy Corporation operating a three-unit nuclear power plant in Buchanan, New York, the facility at issue in this case.
Respondent: Riverkeeper is a member-supported environmental protection organization dedicated to defending the Hudson River and its tributaries for New York City and Hudson Valley residents.  Over the past four decades Riverkeeper has been successful as the public's watchdog in bringing hundreds of pollution violations to justice and protecting drinking water for local communities.  Riverkeeper has an ongoing interest in replacing Indian Point nuclear power plant with renewable energy.
This case is a consolidation of three cases for review by the Supreme Court 
Entergy Corporation v. Riverkeeper, Inc., et al.
PSEG Fossil LLC, et al., v. Riverkeeper, Inc., et al.
Utility Water Act Group, v. Riverkeeper, Inc., et al.
Background
Among the ten major environmental regulatory statutes enacted from the 1960s through the 1980s only the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) and the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) granted authority to weigh the cost and benefits in determining policy requirements.  The remainder of the regulations rely mainly on harm-based or technology-based methodologies that clearly exclude cost–benefit analysis (CBA) or at a minimum do not provide for it. The Clean Water Act statute uses technology based methods to meet its standards. (See Note 1.)
Three pre-Entergy Supreme Court decisions offer historical guidance into the possible crafting of the CBA canon.  Each of them address the priority of environmental health and safety concerns with the appropriate level of cost-benefit analysis.
 In Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill the Court interpreted section 7 of the Endangered Species Act as discontinuing the construction of the Tellico Dam after the project was more than 80 percent complete and had spent over $50 million in order to save the snail darter (an unknown species at the time).
 In American Textile Manufacturers Institute, Inc. v. Donovan the court addressed whether the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) could adopt cost–benefit analysis with regards to cotton dust standards for employees.  The Court ruled that CBA was not authorized by the statute because feasibility analysis was authorized.
 In Whitman v. American Trucking Associations, Inc., the Court held that section 109 of the Clean Air Act (CAA) prohibited cost considerations when setting the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) In a unanimous Court, Justice Scalia considered that section 109 requires the public to be protected with "an adequate margin of safety" and that the CAA had specific reference to cost considerations in related provisions but not with setting the NAAQS.
Various States and environmental groups challenged the Bush Administration Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) interpretation of § 316(b) of the Clean Water Act (CWA), 33 U.S.C. §1326(b), that allowed exceptions to power plants that diverged from national standards.  The claim against the EPA was that the agency unreasonably interpreted the regulations of the CWA when it determined that cost–benefit analysis was a method that could be used to determine the BAT when minimizing the adverse effects of cooling water intakes from power plants. This new interpretation of the statute allows for cost to influence the choice of "best technology available" lowering the standard reduction of "adverse environmental impact."
Statute and regulations
Section 316(b) of the Clean Water Act requires that permittees under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) that operate facilities with cooling water intake structures ensure that the location, design, construction, and capacity of their structures reflect the best technology available to minimize detrimental impacts to the environment. The intake structures remove billions of aquatic organisms each year from United States waterways. Most impacts are in early life stages of fish, crustaceans, and other aquatic life.
Prior case
The case preceding this Supreme Court case was decided in the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. This court heard Riverkeeper, Inc. v. EPA, in 2006 and decided the case in 2007. Then-Circuit Judge Sotomayor wrote the opinion for the court. In this decision the court stated that in order to meet the statute facilities could not use restoration enhancements (restocking fish, restoring habitat, etc.) to meet the National Performance Standard (NPS). Additionally, the court remanded the case to the EPA for clarification of EPA rules regarding NPS determination by CBA and the use of a variance for facilities claiming excessive costs to implement mandated technology. And most importantly to this case, the court decided that a CBA is not consistent with the requirement of using the best technology available for minimizing adverse environmental impact. The statutory language requires the EPA's selection of BAT be driven by technology. Cost can only be used to determine if remediation can be reasonably borne by the industry and determining the specific technology that meets the standards at the lowest cost. Thus suspending this aspect of Phase II as stated above.
This case
The petitioner's power plants had cooling water intake structures that threatened freshwater aquatic life by compression against intake screens (impingement) or by suctioning organisms into the cooling system (entrainment). They challenged the Second Circuit decision that cost benefit analysis cannot be used in the interpretation of the Clean Water Act in determination of the national performance standard and best available technology for existing power plants.
The respondents supported the Second Circuit's finding that the EPA's decision of site-specific cost–benefit variance provision and the use of CBA to determine national performance standard and best available technology for existing facilities is not within the statute and remand the regulations to the agency for clarification.
Adverse environmental impact
The process of pulling water into a facility from a natural body of water for use in industrial cooling can have a significant effect on living organisms in that body of water. Estimates for 2004 show that in just one day industry can pull as much as  of water into facilities for cooling purposes. The pressure and flow of this large volume of water can impinge large organisms like fish against intake points or entrain small organisms like plankton, eggs and larvae into the cooling system killing or injuring them. A single power plant can impinge a million adult fish in just three weeks. One plant can entrain some 3 - 4 billion smaller fish and shellfish in a year. This can have a destabilizing effect on local ecosystems. Nationwide, "the impingement and entrainment reduction benefits range from $73 million to $83 million per year. These benefits are primarily from improvements to commercial and recreational fishing." There are likely other benefits externalized in this equation such as higher functioning ecosystems, intrinsic value of non-fisheries species to name two.  In light of these findings, when congress amended the Clean Water Act in 1972, it directed the EPA to regulate these systems so as to "minimize adverse environmental impact". As of 2014, there were 1065 existing facilities in the US that draw at least  a day. EPA estimated that 521 are manufacturing facilities and 544 are power plants.
EPA rule making
Three Phases (rules) have been created over the years by the EPA in response from industry, environmental groups and judicial review to clarify exactly what is needed to meet the statute. Promulgated 1326(b) regulations making the best technology available determination on a case-by-case basis for both Phase I and Phase II facilities.
 Phase I regulations (created in 2001) govern new cooling water intake structures and mandate closed-cycle cooling systems as BAT.
 Phase II (2004) regulations apply generally to large existing facilities and outlines alternatives to closed-cycle cooling to meet reduction standards.
 Phase III (2006) addresses certain existing facilities and new coastal and offshore facilities, not an issue in this case.
The National Performance Standard (NPS), set by the EPA for new facilities is closed-cycle cooling systems, which can reduce impingement and entrainment by up to 98%. For existing facilities NPS in Phase II is "to reduce impingement mortality for all life stages of fish and shellfish by 80 to 95 percent from the calculation baseline; a subset of facilities must also reduce entrainment of such aquatic organisms by 60 to 90 percent from the calculation baseline."
In Phase II the EPA declined to specifically mandate closed-cycle cooling systems as BAT for existing facilities due to the compliant cost, which could be nine times the amount of other methods of reduction approaching the same standard. A cost–benefit analysis is incorporated to determine the standard. Existing facilities have alternatives to meet these reduction standards including existing technologies, additional fish protection technologies,  and restoration measures.  Phase II rules outline these alternatives and also permit site-specific variances from the NPS and if the permitting agency imposes restrictions that render results "as close to practical to the applicable performance standards", using "Best Professional Judgement".
Phase II update: In 2007 "EPA suspended the Cooling Water Intake Structure Regulations for existing large power plants as an unreasonable interpretation of the statute. This suspension was in response to the 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals decision in Riverkeeper, Inc., v. EPA. (2007)" (see below for details). In 2011 the Supreme Court ruling stated that Phase II was a reasonable interpretation of the statute reversing the lower court ruling allowing the use of Phase II.
Main issue - Best Available Technology - BAT
The main issue for the court was to decide if the Clean Water Act statute language is unambiguous or not and whether the EPA interpretations (rules - see below) were reasonable. At the heart of the issue is if the EPA is authorized to consider CBA in determining BAT when meeting the NPS to "minimize adverse environmental impact."
The EPA does not dictate what type of system existing facilities need to use, but determines the standard that must be met. As guidance they use the terminology "Best Available Technology" which is defined here as "Any standard ... applicable to a point source shall require that the location, design, construction, and capacity of cooling water intake structures reflect the best technology available for minimizing adverse environmental impact." Existing power plants of this type need to use an appropriate system that is the BAT that meets the standard of reduction. The EPA works with each facility to ensure compliance on a site by site basis and can issue variance under specific circumstances. The definition for BAT in the Clean Water Act does not include a CBA as part of the criteria for choosing this technology as it does in definitions of other types of technology for meeting different environmental health standards.
Decision
The judgment of the court of appeals is reversed and remanded.
Justice Scalia delivers the opinion of the court.
In a five justice majority opinion written by Justice Scalia, the Court overturns the Second Circuit's ruling and found that Congress did not speak directly to whether or not cost–benefit analysis could be used in environmental standards under the "best technology available" verbiage.  And found that the EPA's interpretation of the regulations to be reasonable.   Four different CWA tests were mentioned in the opinion, however two received greater attention.  One called for the use of "best available technology economically achievable" (BATEA) and the other test required  the "best available demonstrated control technology" (BADT).  The BATEA test was intended to allow progress toward the goal of eliminating  the discharge of all pollutants.  While the BADT test was applicable to new point sources and was aimed to advance the strategy of "where practicable", a standard allowing no pollutant discharges.  The Court differentiated the BAT test from other tests on the basis of distinguishable language and interpreted the ambiguity to allow the agency greater discretion in determining the content of the test. (See Note 2.)
In Whitman v. American Trucking Associations, Inc. the Court ruled that Congress was "unambiguously barred cost considerations" in setting air quality standards under section 109 of the Clean Air Act (CAA).  The statute was silent on the issue because it had expressly allowed for the consideration of costs in other provisions of the act.  However, concerning the CWA in regards to Entergy, the Court determined that statutory silence was not intended to limit the agency's discretion in consideration of a cost–benefit analysis when determining compliance with national environmental standards.
After determining that the statutes did not specifically address the "best technology available" language contained in the Clean Water Act, the second test was to determine if the agency's interpretation of the regulation was reasonable. This was in reference to the U.S. Supreme Courts decision in Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. otherwise known as "Chevron deference".  This case granted deference to the administrative agency's interpretation of its own regulations if the congressional intent was unclear.  Although the court did not address the quality of the agency's interpretation in Entergy, it did find EPA to be reasonable in its interpretation. 
Justice Breyer concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Although Justice Breyer agrees with the Court concerning the use of a cost–benefit analysis in determining environmental standards for water-intake systems, he also admonished the EPA for changing its stance on granting variances.  Justice Breyer would have remanded the case to allow the EPA to explain the reasoning behind the change. In siding with the majority in Entergy, Justice Breyer acknowledges that Congress had a reason to limit the weight of cost–benefit analysis for the following reasons.  It may delay regulatory process, undervalue the true cost benefit of environmental externalities, and may reduce market incentives to developing advanced treatment technologies.  However, on the other hand, forbidding CBA may lead to "irrational results" and since every "real choice" requires a comparison, an absolute prohibition would be difficult to enforce.
Justice Stevens, with whom Justice Souter and Justice Ginsburg join, dissenting.
Justice Stevens believed that Section 316(b) of the CWA prohibited the use of cost-benefit analysis based on the language and stated that Congress' intent was to play a temporal role for existing power plants until a more ambitious standard could be set. And declared that if a cost–benefit analysis were to be done, monetize all aquatic life not just the 1.8 percent believed to have commercial or recreational value.  EPA's estimate of aquatic life value was $83 million for less than 2% of aquatic life as opposed to a measured $735 million for all aquatic life.
Held: The EPA permissibly relied on cost–benefit analysis in setting the national performance standards in providing for cost–benefit variances from those standards as part of the Phase II regulations. EPA's perspective is that 1326(b)'s "best technology available for minimizing adverse environmental impact" standard permits consideration of the technology costs and the relationship between the added cost and the related environmental benefit. EPA needs to demonstrate that it has a reasonable interpretation of the statute, not necessarily the only possible interpretation or even the interpretation deemed best by the courts.
Future implications
 The United States Supreme Court issued an important decision interpreting Federal Water Pollution Control Act section 316(b) to allow the United States Environmental Protection Agency to include cost/benefit considerations in establishing technology-based requirements for cooling water intake structures.
 Part of EPA's Phase II regulations are upheld so there will be greater regulatory certainty for industry and federal and state agencies. With this judgment here will also be greater regulatory flexibility for industry. However, this regulatory flexibility also may result in significant environmental harm as facilities are not required to implement technology that arguably is the most protective of the nation's waterways.
 New EPA Rule. As a result of the Supreme Court remand, EPA issued a final rule in 2014 to further clarify requirements for cooling water intake structures at existing power plants and factories. The rule affects about 1065 existing facilities, and requires them to select one of seven technology options.EPA (2014-08-15). "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System—Final Regulations To Establish Requirements for Cooling Water Intake Structures at Existing Facilities and Amend Requirements at Phase I Facilities." Federal Register, .
 Entergy v Riverkeeper designates an important move in the Court's orientation towards increasing the weight of CBA with Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) regulations.  Entergy joins a list of recent Supreme Court rulings that seem aimed at rebalancing the perceived excesses of strict EHS legislation of the 1960s, 1970s, and the 1980s Five major environmental decisions from 2008 to 2009, including Entergy, have resulted in adverse environmental decisions.  Four of the five preserved executive branch judgments that precluded environmental protections. (See Note 3.)
 See also 
 Entergy Louisiana, Inc. v. Louisiana Public Service Commission
 United States v. Enmons
References
Notes
 Note 1: Statutes enacted during this period that did not authorize CBA include the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251–1387 (2006); Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. §§  401–7671q (2006); Endangered Species Act, 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531–1544 (2006); Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601–9675; Safe Drinking Water Act (pre-1996 amendments), Pub. L. No. 93-523, 88 Stat. 1660 (1994); Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901–6986; Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 11001–05, 11021–23, 11041–050; and the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, 33 U.S.C. §§ 2701–2762.
 Note 2: In section 316(b)’s BAT requirement for water intake structures, the CWA establishes a range of pollution reduction standards for various categories of dischargers and pollutants; these standards, in general order of ascending stringency, include best practicable technology (“BPT”), best conventional technology (“BCT”), best available technology economically achievable (“BATEA”), and best available demonstrated technology (“BADT”).156 The statutory factors for BPT and BCT expressly include consideration of the  relationship between costs and benefits; the statutory factors for BATEA and BADT do not.
 Note 3: See Winter v. Natural Res. Def. Council, 129 S. Ct. 365 (2008) (invalidating lower court injunction protecting whales from military sonar tests); Entergy Corp. v. Riverkeeper, Inc., 129 S. Ct. 1498 (2009) (upholding EPA's use of CBA to select less protective standard for cooling water structures); Coeur Alaska, Inc. v. Se. Alaska Conservation Council, 129 S. Ct. 2458 (2009) (upholding less protective interpretation of CWA requirements for gold mine discharges); Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. United States, 129 S. Ct. 1870 (2009) (limiting scope of liability under CERCLA); Summers v. Earth Island Inst., 129 S. Ct. 1142 (2009) (denying standing to environmental plaintiffs).
External links
Riverkeeper et. al. v EPA - Second Circuit Court of Appeals decided 2004 
Riverkeeper v EPA - Second Circuit Court of Appeals decided 2007
EPA - Cooling Water Intakes - all regulations and support documents
Category:2009 in the environment
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:Entergy
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Entergy Louisiana, Inc. v. Louisiana Public Service Commission" ==> """
Entergy Louisiana, Inc. v. Louisiana Public Service Commission, 539 U.S. 39 (2003), is a Supreme Court of the United States case holding that a federal administrative agency approved public utility tariff preempted a state public utilities commission rate order under the filed rate doctrine..
Background
Entergy, a multistate holding company, allocated the costs of its electric generating capacity, including capacity held in extended reserve shutdown, among its five public utilities that it owned pursuant to a tariff schedule MSS-1 approved by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). The tariff delegated discretion to Entergy to determine the specific cost allocations. The resulting costs, which changed monthly, were then assigned under the Entergy System Operating Agreement to each of the five public utilities under an automatic adjustment clause in the tariff, so FERC review and approval of a specific cost allocation was not required.
In May 1997 Entergy Louisiana, Inc., one of the five public utilities, filed its annual retail electric rate case with the Louisiana Public Service Commission (PSC). The PSC issued an order disallowing the costs associated with the electric generating units in extended shutdown reserve from being recovered in rates. The PSC concluded that since FERC had never determined that the allocation of costs as determined by Entergy was consistent with the Entergy System Operating Agreement, it could make this prudency decision without violating the Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution. As a result of this decision, Entergy Louisiana was required to pay the allocated costs of the extended shutdown reserve generation but could not recover these costs in its retail electric rates.
Entergy Louisiana appealed the PSC order to the Supreme Court of Louisiana. The state court upheld the PSC order as not being barred by federal preemption because the PSC was not attempting to regulate interstate wholesale electric rates. The court also noted that FERC never ruled on the issue of whether Entergy Louisiana's decision to include the extended shutdown reserve generating units was a prudent one or whether to include these costs in rates was mandatory.
Opinion of the Court
The U.S. Supreme Court stated that it granted certiorari to determine whether its filed rate doctrine holdings in Nantahala Power and Light Co. v. Thornburg, 476 U.S. 953 (1986), and Mississippi Power and Light Co. v. Mississippi ex rel. Moore, 487 U.S. 354 (1988), would lead to federal preemption of the Louisiana PSC order. The filed rate doctrine is an American administrative law rule that a court should not permit a collateral attack on a tariffed rate of a public utility that was determined by an agency, and that any litigation regarding the validity of that rate must be conducted before that agency. With the Supremacy Clause, any tariffed rate approved by a federal agency must be given effect by a state public utility commission that regulates a public utility and sets intrastate rates.
Nantahala held that cost allocations related to a FERC approved power agreement must be followed by state agencies in setting public utility rates. In Mississippi Power, FERC had allocated the costs of the Grand Gulf Nuclear Generating Station among various public utility companies. The Supreme Court of Mississippi ruled that the state PSC could consider the prudence of the Grand Gulf costs allocated to a public utility since FERC had never ruled on the prudency of these costs. The U.S. Supreme Court disagreed, stating that FERC orders must be given preemptive effect regardless of whether a particular matter had been litigated and decided by FERC.
Applying the Nantahala and Mississippi Power holdings to the Louisiana case, the Court noted that the PSC order impermissibly had the effect of trapping generation costs with the public utility by excluding them from recovery in rates. Although the Entergy System Operating Agreement differed from the tariffs in the Nantahala and Mississippi Power cases in that it left the classification of reserve generating units to an operating committee, this delegated discretion did not allow the PSC room for a finding of imprudence where a FERC mandated cost allocation would not. As Congress had permitted the use of automatic adjustment clauses in the Federal Power Act,Federal Power Act, . the Court decided the MSS-1 schedule constituted such a clause. The Court then determined that there was no reason to create an exception to the filed rate doctrine for tariffs using this type of clause.
The U.S. Supreme Court also stated that the Louisiana Supreme Court ruling regarding the ability of the PSC to conduct prudency reviews was the same erroneous reasoning advanced by the Mississippi Supreme Court in the Mississippi Power case. The Court explained that it did not matter whether FERC had specifically ruled on the reserve generating units, but only whether the FERC approved tariff dictated how and by whom that classification should be made. For these reasons, the decision of the state court was reversed.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 539
 Entergy Corp. v. Riverkeeper Inc.
 United States v. Enmons
 References 
External links
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States energy case law
Category:Entergy
"""

From "Environmental Defense v. Duke Energy Corp." ==> """
Environmental Defense v. Duke Energy Corporation, 549 U.S. 561 (2007), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that while a term may be used more than once in a statute, an agency has the discretion to interpret each use of the term in a different way based on the context. In a unanimous decision, the court held in favor of the plaintiff's (Environmental Defense) argument.
This case addressed the Clean Air Act (CAA) and two of its programs, Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) and New Source Performance Standard (NSPS). PSD applies to regulating annual emissions; NSPS pertains to regulating hourly emissions. Each section of the Clean Air Act, that outlines the provisions of the PSD and the NSPS, defines "modification" differently. As a result, the inconsistency of the term "modification" in the CAA becomes the main debate of the case and the main argument for both the plaintiffs and defendants.
Parties
Plaintiffs
The Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) is a nonprofit organization that works to reduce threats to the earth's environment that impact the climate, ocean, and ecosystems. The EDF was founded in 1967, in response to implications from usage of DDT. Today, with more than 2 million members, the EDF uses scientific support, economics, and environmental law to solve environmental problems. Additionally, the EDF develops "unlikely" partnerships to broaden support and expand reach for various issues.
Defendants
Duke Energy Corporation is a large-scale power company and utility in the United States that supplies and delivers electricity to nearly 7.4 million customers, covering a 50,000 square mile service territory. The company's electricity generation portfolio is composed predominantly of natural gas, nuclear, oil, and coal-fired power, as well as some renewable energy. The electrical generating capacity of Duke Energy totals 52,700 megawatts. The company has $133 billion in assets and approximately 28,800 employees. The company's mission is to provide electric services "in a sustainable way – affordable, reliable, clean".
Background
Clean Air Act
The US Clean Air Act was enacted in 1963 and was the federal government's first major step towards air pollution control. Currently the CAA regulates six criteria air contaminants from stationary sources: particulate matter, lead, ozone, nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and sulfur oxides. Amendments have been added to the CAA, in 1970, 1977, and 1990. Objective of the regulation is to "protect human health, welfare and the environment by maintaining and improving the quality of the air through the development of standards".
New Source Performance Standards
The New Source Performance Standards, 42 U.S.C. 7411, was added to the CAA in 1970 and is a required permitting process in an attainment and nonattainment area. The NSPS imposes emission standards for pollutants in new or reconstructed stationary sources that undergo "modification." The controls are technology based, as set by the EPA, but are delegated to the states to implement through their State Implementation Plan (SIP).
The CAA defines "modification" under the NSPS as "any physical change in, or change in the method of operation of, a stationary source which increases the amount of any air emitted by such source or which results in the emission of any air pollution not previously emitted." If there is a "modification," a physical change in the source's method of operation would increase the emission rate of pollution expressed in kilograms per hour (kg/h).
Prevention of Significant Deterioration
When a pollutant source is in an attainment area, it becomes subject to the PSD permitting process. The PSD is part of the New Source Review program and was added to the CAA in 1977 with the goal of not allowing the good air to deteriorate, since it is only required for areas of attainment. The PSD is focused on air quality in the region, in regards to health effects, as opposed to the emission technology. While some argue that the PSD is not needed as the public health is protected by National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), others may say that the PSD prevents the "flight of industry" from dirty to clean areas that are in attainment, as they would not have to comply with as strict of regulations. Before this program was implemented, there was nothing in place that addressed potential air quality deterioration.
The CAA defines "modification" under the PSD as "net annual emissions increase". This is when the actual emissions from a pollutant source would increase the average for the two prior years; "any physical change in or change in the method of operation of a major stationary source that would result in: a significant emissions increase of a regulated NSR pollutant; and a significant net emissions increase of that pollutant from the major stationary source."
Case
In 1988, Duke Energy Corporation began a series of improvements to its eight power plants in order to modernize its facilities, taking twelve years to complete. The power generation plants were coal-fire powered and utilized "boilers and steam turbines". The improvements incorporated alterations to the boilers as well as portions of "waterwalls, superheaters, and reheaters". The work was costly but would allow Duke's facilities to run with full capability without having various units down.
On December 22, 2000, the EPA filed suit against Duke Energy Corporation in District Court, for the 29 alterations to their power plants that had been performed. The EPA claimed they had lacked the proper PSD permits and in doing so, violated the CAA. Duke argued that their improvements did not fall within the scope of the PSD program because the power plants' hourly emissions rate would not be altered. Shortly thereafter, three other environmental groups, led by Environmental Defense, joined the EPA in the suit. Environmental Defense, on the other hand, believed that by improving the plants, Duke would be able to run for longer hours, causing the "total annual emissions" to increase. This they believed, constituted the need for PSD to apply.
Arguments
Environmental Defense argued that Duke Energy had violated the CAA under PSD by failing to receive permits to conduct modifications to their power plants. The modifications made would increase net emissions per year. The term "modification" in the PSD provision relates to an overall increase of "annual emissions" rather than an increase in "hourly emissions", as Environmental Defense argues. They also contended that the D.C. Circuit was the necessary court to handle this case and not the Fourth Circuit. They believed the Fourth Circuit did not have authority to make a decision on this case because the CAA is "statutorily delegated to the D.C. Circuit".
Duke Energy Corporation argued that its improvements did not need a permit because the changes had not increased their hourly rate of emissions. The NSPS defines "modification" as an increase in emissions per hour and the same definition must be applied to the PSD. The renovations were needed as a result of physical deterioration and age of the plants and modernization was necessary to avoid replacement. Throughout their renovations, the hourly emission rates were kept constant and Duke argued they had not violated the PSD provisions. Concerning whether the Fourth District had authority to rule in this case, Duke believed they did since it was only an issue of interpreting provisions. Exclusive jurisdiction by the D.C. Circuit was according to Congress, only regarding "actions brought to enforce the PSD provisions." Duke argued that if the Fourth Circuit could not interpret regulations in this manner, it would present "serious constitutional questions regarding the availability of judicial review" by keeping courts from carrying out their duty to assert the law.
District Court opinion
Knowing that analysis of the pertinent Clean Air Act amendments was difficult, the District Court allowed flexibility to the EPA in interpreting these amendments as well as their own regulations and should be given "controlling weight unless it is plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the regulation." The court also acknowledged that this flexibility does not allow the EPA "unbridled discretion" to interpret the Clean Air Act amendments freely. The court is still responsible for deciphering if the EPA's analysis agrees with Congress's objective.
On August 26, 2003 the District Court composed a "three-faceted holding" based on whether:
1.) the "modification" completed was a "routine maintenance, repair and replacement";
2.) a "net emissions increase" occurs only when the "hourly rate of emission increases";
3.) Duke's failure to obtain a PSD permit before performing its modifications represented an ongoing violation for statute of limitations purposes.
The major finding at this court level was that in regards to the PSD regulation, a "net increase" of emissions can only occur when there is an increase in the hourly rate of emission. Although Duke had increased their hours of operation, they had not altered the hourly emission rate at its plants. Because of this, the District Court held that there had been no net increase of emission and Duke had not violated the PSD regulation and so, had not needed to acquire a permit for a major modification.
Fourth Circuit opinion
Environmental Defense appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, which affirmed the District Court's ruling. The Fourth Circuit stated that different meanings of the word "modification" are not possible because Congress made clear that the legislative definition of "modification" were the same in both the PSD and NSPS regulations. And thus the EPA could not interpret "modification" differently in either regulation but must interpret the term "consistently and uniformly for the purposes of both sets of regulations". The Fourth Circuit decision depended on precedent set by the Rowan case. After the 4th Circuit decision, the plaintiff and intervenor environmental groups filed a petition for certiorari with the Supreme Court. Both Duke Energy and the United States objected this action, however, the Supreme Court granted the petition on May 15, 2006.
Rowan Companies Inc. v. United States is a related case in that it also concerns interpreting the same single term in two different regulations. In this case, the word "wages" was interpreted differently in two tax provisions by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The Supreme Court stated that the differing interpretations were impermissible because the IRS lacked the ability to interpret "wages" differently within the framework of this case. In this instance, the judgment affirms the general belief that "the same words, when repeated, carry the same meaning."
Supreme Court decision
The judgment of the Court of Appeals was vacated and remanded. Justice Souter delivered the opinion of the Court.
It was found that the EPA did not have to interpret "modification" in PSD regulations the same way the term is interpreted in New Source Performance Standard regulations. The Court's opinion recognized that two uses of the same term, with the same definition, usually would mean the same thing. Yet in this instance, the term "modification" and its definition differ broadly. The Court concluded that "EPA's construction need do no more than fall within the limits of what is reasonable, as set by the Act's common definition."
Justice Thomas wrote separately to note that although he agrees with the substantive ruling on the matter, he did not agree with the dicta in Part III-A of the Court's opinion. Thomas believed that the EPA could not have different regulatory definitions of "modification" under PSD and NSPS. He also states that the Court should still apply its "usual presumption that the same words repeated in different parts of the same statute have the same meaning" and does not believe the Court's opinion overcame this presumption.
Significance
The Supreme Court's decision demonstrates how discretion is given to the agency in interpreting regulations and definitions. Utilizing the Chevron test (Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.)), the agency can determine whether the statutory language is vague. For future implications, agencies may be able to alter regulatory requirements to make compliance more complex or costly. Conversely, the precedent set in this case could allow a more thorough Congress to limit this type of agency discretion in the future.
This ruling was also significant because it provided a precedent that favored stronger regulation of stationary pollution sources. Even though the rate of emissions per hour would not have increased, the net emission per year would have due to increased hours of operation. As a result, the air quality was considered to be adversely impacted. The Duke decision may signify that the Court will take environmental policy into consideration more in the future. The decision shows that the Supreme Court is more likely to interpret environmental laws in line with the legislation's objective rather than following the order of constricted rules of "statutory construction".
References
External links
Category:2007 in the environment
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2007 in United States case law
"""

From "Epic Systems Corp. v. Lewis" ==> """
Epic Systems Corp. v. Lewis, 584 U.S. ___ (2018), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States on how two federal laws, the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) and the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA), relate to whether employment contracts can legally bar employees from collective arbitration. The Supreme Court had consolidated three cases, Epic Systems Corp. v Lewis (Docket 16-285), Ernst & Young LLP v. Morris (16-300), and National Labor Relations Board v. Murphy Oil USA, Inc. (16-307). In a 5–4 decision issued in May 2018, the Court ruled that arbitration agreements requiring individual arbitration and  prohibiting class action lawsuits are enforceable under the FAA, regardless of allowances set out within the NLRA.
Background
 Federal Arbitration Act 
The Federal Arbitration Act (FAA)  was enacted in 1925, and allowed for disputes related to contractual agreements to be settled through arbitration outside of the judicial system. The FAA includes allowances for contracts to contain provisions for compulsory and binding arbitration agreements. The language in question to the case related to the FAA's "savings clause", which stated that written arbitration agreements "shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract."
 National Labor Relations Act of 1935 
The National Labor Relations Act of 1935 (NLRA, also known as the Wagner Act)  was passed among several other laws and programs under the New Deal. The NLRA enabled employees to form trade unions and to take collective actions against employers, among other aspects, as to counter unfair employment practices that had plagued the Great Depression.
Section 7 of the NLRA reads, in part:
This case centered on whether employee class action lawsuits fell under "other concerted activities" of NLRA's section 7.
 Prior cases 
The Supreme Court case was the consolidation of three prior cases which had created a split opinion in the Circuit Courts in relation to the FAA and the NLRA, and which all had submitted petitions for writ of certiorari in 2016.
Epic Systems Corp. v. Lewis (Docket 16-285) involved employees at Epic Systems, a Wisconsin healthcare software company. In April 2014, the company notified employees to agree to a new employee policy that required them to use individual arbitration in any disputes. Employee Jacob Lewis, a technical writer, agreed to the terms as instructed. Later, in February 2015, Lewis filed a suit against the company in the United States District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin as a collective action by the other technical writers, asserting their failure to follow Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 and Wisconsin law related to overtime pay. Epic attempted to dismiss the suit, arguing that the arbitration agreement signed by Lewis prevents him from taking collective actions and requiring individual arbitration. The District Court refused to dismiss the case, arguing that Lewis' action was a protected concerted activity under Section 7 of the NLRA, and that the arbitration agreement in April 2014 violated those terms. Epic appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, arguing that the District Court failed to uphold the standards of the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA), which they claim made any written arbitration agreements binding regardless of the NLRA. The Circuit Court rejected Epic's arguments, agreeing that the District Court's ruling on the NLRA was correct, and that the FAA had a "saving clause" which states that the FAA may be unenforceable if "such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract", referring to the NLRA language.Epic Sys., 823 F.3d at 1156.
Ernst & Young LLP v. Morris (Docket 16-300) involved the multinational accounting firm Ernst & Young. Stephen Morris and Kelly McDaniel were employees of Ernst & Young and had signed employee contracts that required individual arbitration on their employment in the 2000s. Morris and McDaniel brought a class-action suit in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York on behalf of Ernst & Young employees in California, asserting the firm had violated the Fair Labor Standards Act related to overtime pay. The case was transferred to the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, where the Court ruled that Ernst & Young's arbitration was binding and dismissed the case. The Court said in its decision, that Congress in passing the NLRA did not signify any intent to override the FAA, and ruled on the basis of the FAA's provisions. Morris and McDaniel appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. The Ninth Circuit reversed and remanded the District Court's decision, stating that the NLRA's Section 7 protects concerted activities, which was to be considered covered by the FAA's saving clause.
National Labor Relations Board v. Murphy Oil USA, Inc. (Docket 16-307) involved the petrochemical company Murphy Oil. Sheila Hobson was an employee and had agreed to the individual arbitration agreement as part of her employment contract. In 2010, Hobson and three other employees filed suit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Alabama alleging complaints under the Fair Labor Standards Act. Murphy Oil sought the Court to dismiss the case and compel arbitration under the employment contract, and the Court agreed. Hobson filed a complaint with the National Labor Relations Board, who evaluated Hobson's case. During this period, the Board reviewed a similar charge against construction firm D. R. Horton; the Board issued a formal complaint against Horton, but Horton challenged this case in United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. The Fifth Circuit ruled against the Board, stating that the FAA was not overridden by the NLRA. Despite this ruling, the Board found in favor of Hobson's case against Murphy Oil, still asserting the NLRA protected collective actions within the FAA's saving clause, and issued a formal complaint against the company. Murphy Oil challenged the Board's ruling in the Firth Circuit Court. The Board attempted seek an en banc hearing but was denied by the Court, and the Court followed suit from the Horton case, ruling against the Board and finding the FAA was not overridden by the NLRA.
Supreme Court
The three cases above created a split decision among the circuit courts related to how the FAA and NLRA interacted. All three cases were petitioned to the Supreme Court of the United States for a writ of certiorari during 2016, effectively asking the same questions related to the FAA and NLRA. The Court agreed to hear the cases in January 2017, consolidating them into a single case. Observers felt that the case would favor the employers, as the Court had ruled favorably in support of arbitration in recent cases, including AT&T Mobility LLC v. Concepcion,  and DIRECTV, Inc. v. Imburgia, .
The prospective for how the case would be resolved changed following the election of Donald Trump as President of the United States, succeeding Barack Obama. During the Obama administration, the National Labor Relations Board agency had generally favored employees and helped to defend against unfair arbitration practices. The Board continued to support employees in its petition of National Labor Relations Board v. Murphy Oil, stating "Resolving the question presented will have a direct and immediate effect on countless employees and employers throughout the nation because individual-arbitration agreements have become so widespread." By June 2017, the Board, now operating under the Trump administration, issued its amicus curiae for the case supportive of the employers' position. Further, following the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, Trump's nominee for the vacant seat, Neil Gorsuch, had been confirmed in April 2017. The replacement of Justice Scalia helped retain a majority of conservative justices on the Court, which was expected to likely favor employers.
The court heard oral arguments on October 2, 2017, which observers felt favored the employers' position. During the arguments Chief Justice John Roberts noted that a decision favoring the employees would disrupt the status quo, asking the respondents' counsel, "So this decision in your favor would invalidate...agreements covering [25 million] employees?" Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg was critical that employee contracts with arbitration agreements provided "no true bargaining" and considered that a ruling in favor of employers would create a situation similar to yellow-dog contracts, which would ban employees from unionizing and for which the NLRA had been created to prevent.
The Court issued its decision on May 21, 2018. In a 5–4 decision, the Court ruled that the FAA makes individual arbitration agreements enforceable, and that neither the saving clause of the FAA or the NLRA operate to override that outcome. Justice Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion joined by Justices Roberts, Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito, with Thomas also writing a concurring opinion. Gorsuch wrote that in reviewing the intent of Congress in the passage of the NLRA and FAA, that through the FAA "Congress has instructed federal courts to enforce arbitration agreements according to their terms—including terms providing for individualized proceedings." Gorsuch wrote that the Congressional intent behind the FAA was a "liberal federal policy favoring arbitration", whereas the NLRA dealt more with the actions of collective bargaining, and that the "other concerted activities" language of Section 7 of the NLRA must be read with this intent and not towards dispute resolution. The opinion reversed the Circuit Court rulings in both Epic Systems and in Ernst Young, remanding these back to the Circuit Court, while affirming the decision in National Labor Relations Board.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the dissenting opinion, and read parts of her opinion at the bench, and was joined by Justices Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan. Ginsburg wrote that "The court today holds enforceable this arm-twisted, take-it-or-leave-it contracts—including the provisions requiring employees to litigate wage and hours claims only one-by-one. ... Federal labor law does not countenance such isolation of employees."
Impact
The case had been of significant interest as tens of millions of Americans are employed under contracts that require individual arbitration over collective actions. The inability for employees to take collective action had been said to potentially allow employers to be less accountable to employees, and would deter employees from taking the time, cost, and effort needed to resolve individual arbitration, effectively silencing their concerns.
Justice Ginsburg's dissenting opinion stated that "Congressional correction" of the majority decision was "urgently in order" to protect employees. The AFL–CIO also stated that Congress should "immediately enact" legislation to override the ruling. Some reporters opined that the decision would impact how sex discrimination in the workplace would be handled as otherwise protected by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and how that would affect efforts like the Me Too movement, since enforced individual arbitration allows employers to quietly handle such complaints.
Jonathan H. Adler and Samuel Estreicher speculated that the decision will actually benefit the majority of workers because it provides a renewed incentive to put fair arbitration agreements in place. Many individual employees lack the resources to hire an attorney to pursue their case in court, and arbitration could provide a low-cost alternative that allows them to present their cases.
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
 Justice Department briefs
 SCOTUSblog summary
 Ballotpedia summary
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:United States arbitration case law
"""

From "Epperson v. Arkansas" ==> """
Epperson v. Arkansas, 393 U.S. 97 (1968), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case that invalidated an Arkansas statute prohibiting the teaching of human evolution in the public schools..  The Court held that the First Amendment to the United States Constitution prohibits a state from requiring, in the words of the majority opinion, "that teaching and learning must be tailored to the principles or prohibitions of any religious sect or dogma." The Supreme Court declared the Arkansas statute unconstitutional because it violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.  After this decision, some jurisdictions passed laws that required the teaching of creation science alongside evolution when evolution was taught.  These were also ruled unconstitutional by the Court in the 1987 case Edwards v. Aguillard..
 Background 
This case focused on the constitutionality of a 1928 Arkansas statute prohibiting the teaching of human evolutionary theory in its public schools and universities. The statute was enacted during a period of Christian Fundamentalist religious fervor in the 1920s. The Arkansas statute was modeled after Tennessee's 1925 "Butler Act", the subject of the well known Scopes Trial in 1925. The Tennessee Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the Tennessee law in 1927, allowing the state to continue to prohibit the teaching of evolution.
The Arkansas law was passed through the initiative process, the first anti-evolution law in the United States passed through general election, and teachers who violated it were made subject to fine and dismissal by the state.  The law made it unlawful for any teacher or other instructor in any university, college, public school or other institution of the state which is supported in whole or in part from public funds derived by state or local taxation to teach the theory or doctrine that mankind ascended or descended from a lower order of animals, and also that it be unlawful for any teacher, textbook commission, or other authority exercising the power to select textbooks for above-mentioned institutions to adopt or use in any such institution a textbook that teaches the doctrine or theory that mankind ascended or descended from a lower order of animal. 
Thirty years later, Cold War concerns over Soviet success with the 1957 Sputnik launch led to the 1958 National Defense Education Act and Biological Sciences Curriculum Study setting textbook standards which included evolution.
The case in Epperson v. Arkansas involved the teaching of biology in a Little Rock high school. Based upon the recommendation of the school biology teachers, the administrators adopted the 1965 textbook Modern Biology for the 1965–1966 school year, which contained a chapter discussing Charles Darwin and evolutionary theory, and prescribed the subject be taught to the students.
Susan Epperson was a teacher in the Little Rock school system, employed to teach 10th grade biology at the Little Rock Central High School.  The adoption of the new textbook and curriculum standard put her in a legal dilemma because it remained a criminal offense to teach the material in her state, and to do as her school district instructed would also put her at risk of dismissal.  Epperson was not opposed to the teaching, and with backing from the Arkansas chapter of the National Education Association and the American Civil Liberties Union, and the unequivocal support of the Little Rock Ministerial Association, filed suit to test the federal constitutionality of the Arkansas state law.  She filed in the Chancery Court in Pulaski County seeking nullification of the law and an injunction against her being dismissed for teaching the evolutionary curriculum. She was joined in the suit by H. H. Blanchard, a parent with children in the school.
The trial began on April 1, 1966, and the court's decision was issued on May 27, 1966. The Chancery Court held that the statute violated the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution which protects citizens from state interference with freedom of speech and thought as contained in the constitution's First Amendment. The lower court decided the law was unconstitutional because it "tends to hinder the quest for knowledge, restrict the freedom to learn, and restrain the freedom to teach."Epperson, 393 U.S. at 100.
The state then appealed the decision to the Arkansas Supreme Court, which reversed the lower court ruling on June 5, 1967.  The opinion read:
Upon the principal issue, that of constitutionality, the court holds that Initiated Measure No. 1 of 1928, Ark.Stat.Ann. § 81627 and § 81628 (Repl.1960), is a valid exercise of the state's power to specify the curriculum in its public schools. The court expresses no opinion on the question whether the Act prohibits any explanation of the theory of evolution or merely prohibits teaching that the theory is true, the answer not being necessary to a decision in the case and the issue not having been raised.
This decision left the ban against teaching evolution in effect.
Decision
Epperson appealed the State Supreme Court's reversal to the United States Supreme Court.  Eugene R. Warren presented arguments for the appellant, Epperson, and Don Langston, an Assistant Attorney General for Arkansas, argued on behalf of the state of Arkansas.  Both Langston and the State Appeal Court focused on the power given to states to set curriculum standards, and did not delve far into the subject of evolutionary theory itself nor to the boundaries between church and state.See:
 Text of Arkansas Supreme Court decision quoted in US Supreme Court Justice Fortas' opinion, footnote 7, "Upon the principal issue, that of constitutionality, the court holds that Initiated Measure No. 1 of 1928...is a valid exercise of the state's power to specify the curriculum in its public schools. The court expresses no opinion on the question whether the Act prohibits any explanation of the theory of evolution or merely prohibits teaching that the theory is true; the answer not being necessary to a decision in the case, and the issue not having been raised."
 US Supreme Court Justice Harlan concluded the brevity of the opinion signaled a deliberate attempt to sidestep the controversy between evolution and religion. , p 108
The U.S. Supreme Court hearing commenced on October 16, 1968, and its unanimous decision was announced on November 12, 1968. It found the reasons given in the Arkansas reversal were in error.  The court went on to say the clear purpose of the Arkansas statute against the teaching of evolution was to protect a particular religious view, and was thus unconstitutional.  In a decision written by Justice Abe Fortas, the Court held, The overriding fact is that Arkansas’ law selects from the body of knowledge a particular segment which it proscribes for the sole reason that it is deemed to conflict with a particular religious doctrine; that is, with a particular interpretation of the Book of Genesis by a particular religious group.
The Court found that not only was the state prohibited from advancing or protecting a particular religious view, but that, [T]he state has no legitimate interest in protecting any or all religions from views distasteful to them.
Justice Hugo Black issued a separate opinion to overturn the Arkansas law, finding the law unconstitutionally "vague" rather than an unconstitutional religious infringement.  While agreeing with the majority to reverse the State Appeal Court decision, his opinion details his dissent from the majority over the First Amendment issue.
Consequences
Though William Jennings Bryan famously testified to some questions about Biblical creation in the 1925 Scopes v. State trial, that Court, like this one, was asked only to judge whether or not teachings about human evolution could be prohibited in the public schools.  Even in that case Bryan, who opposed the evolution instruction, never argued that the teaching of Biblical creation belonged in the school.
The precedent set in Epperson, in which the Court concluded the sole motive behind the ban against evolution teaching in Arkansas was to protect a particular religious view, effectively nullified all other related evolution education prohibitions throughout the United States. Within a short time of the Epperson decision, religious opponents of the teaching attempted through other means to lessen its influence in the curriculum, including requiring schools to teach biblical creation alongside evolution or forcing schools to provide disclaimers that evolution was "only a theory".  These attempts eventually resulted in precedent-setting court decisions including McLean v. Arkansas, and ultimately Edwards v. Aguillard, which struck down a Louisiana statute as unconstitutional.
Related cases
Joseph Burstyn, Inc v. Wilson - 1952
Engel v. Vitale - 1962
Abington School District v. Schempp - 1963
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 393
References
External links
 Case Brief at Lawnix.com
 Creationism/ID: A Short Legal History
 Encyclopedia of Arkansas History and Culture entry on Epperson v. Arkansas
 The Biology Teacher Next Door: Susan Epperson at Evolution 2004
 Discovery on scotusnotes.org
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States creationism and evolution case law
Category:Legal history of Arkansas
Category:United States education case law
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:1968 in religion
Category:1968 in education
Category:1968 in Arkansas
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Little Rock Central High School
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Public education in Arkansas
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v. Abercrombie & Fitch Stores" ==> """
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v. Abercrombie & Fitch Stores, 575 U.S. 768 (2015), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding a Muslim American woman, Samantha Elauf, who was refused a job at Abercrombie & Fitch in 2008 because she wore a head scarf, which conflicted with the company's dress code. The Supreme Court of the United States ruled 8-1 in Elauf's favor on June 1, 2015.
 Background 
In 2008, Elauf, then 17 years old, applied for a job at an Abercrombie & Fitch store in Tulsa, Oklahoma. During her interview with the company, she was wearing a head scarf, but did not say why. The woman interviewing her, Heather Cooke, was initially impressed with Elauf, but also concerned about her head scarf. Cooke had told the manager of the store that she thought Elauf was wearing the scarf for religious reasons, but the manager responded that employees were not allowed to wear hats at work, and so declined to hire her.
In 2009, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission sued Abercrombie & Fitch on Elauf's behalf. This led to a lawsuit in a federal district court that resulted in Elauf receiving $20,000 in damages. However, this decision was later reversed by the 10th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, which ruled in favor of Abercrombie & Fitch on the basis that Elauf did not provide the company with information about her need for an accommodation.
 Opinion of the Court 
On June 1, 2015, the Supreme Court ruled 8–1 in favor of Elauf. In an opinion by Associate Justice Antonin Scalia, the Court held that Elauf did not have to explicitly request an accommodation to obtain protection from Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits religious discrimination in hiring.
Justice Samuel Alito wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment, stating that evidence of Abercrombie's knowledge of Elauf's religious practice was sufficient grounds to rule against Abercrombie.EEOC, slip op. at 2 (Alito, S., concurring). Justice Clarence Thomas concurred in part and dissented in part. Thomas agreed with the majority's interpretation that Title VII protects against "intentional discrimination" against a particular religious group, but felt that Abercrombie did not really engage in that here because their dress code was a religion-neutral policy that affected all potential applicants.EEOC, slip op. at 5-6 (Thomas, C., dissenting). This ruling revived the lawsuit Elauf had filed against the company.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Abercrombie & Fitch
Category:Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Category:Religious discrimination in the United States
"""

From "Erhardt v. Boaro, 113 U.S. 527" ==> """
Erhardt v. Boaro, 113 U.S. 527 (1885), was an action for the possession of a mining claim in Pioneer mining district, in the County of Dolores, and State of Colorado. The claim was designated by the plaintiff as "The Hawk Lode" mining claim, and by the defendants as "The Johnny Bull Lode" mining claim. It contains two counts. The first alleges that the right of possession of the claim by the plaintiff on June 17, 1880, is by virtue of its location pursuant to the laws of the United States and of the state, and the local rules and customs of miners in the district, and by virtue of priority of possession, the wrongful entry upon the premises by the defendants on the thirtieth of that month, their outing the plaintiff therefrom, and unlawfully withholding the possession from him, to his damage of $50,000. The second count, in addition to the citizenship of the parties, the possession of the claim by the plaintiff, and the subsequent wrongful entry of the defendants, and their ousting him, alleges that the defendants worked and mined in the claim, and dug out and removed from it large quantities of gold and silver bearing ore of the value of $50,000, to the damage of the plaintiff in that amount. The plaintiff therefore prays judgment for the possession of the mining premises and for damages of $100,000.Erhardt v. Boaro, .
The answer of the defendants contains a specific denial of the several allegations of the complaint, and as to that it avers their want of information and demands proof. And it sets up the discovery of the claim in controversy on June 30, 1880, by the defendants Boaro and Hull, to which they gave the designation of "The Johnny Bull Lode," and its definite location and record within ninety days thereafter, and their subsequent relocation of the claim September 8, 1880, to avoid a conflict with an adjoining claim. They pray therefore that they may be decreed its possession and ownership in accordance with their rights.
In the trial, the plaintiff produced evidence showing that on June 17, 1880, one Thomas Carroll, a citizen of the United States, while searching, on behalf of himself and the plaintiff, also a citizen, for valuable deposits of mineral, discovered, on vacant unoccupied land of the public domain of the United States in the Pioneer mining district mentioned, the outcrop of a vein or lode of quartz and other rock bearing gold and silver in valuable and paying quantities; that by an agreement between him and the plaintiff, pursuant to which the explorations were prosecuted, all lodes and veins discovered by him were to be located, one-fifth in his name and four-fifths in the name of the plaintiff; that on the day of his discovery, Carroll designated the vein or lode as the "Hawk Lode," and posted at the point of discovery a plain sign, or notice in writing, as follows:
HAWK LODE
We, the undersigned, claim 1,500 feet on this mineral-bearing lode, vein, or deposit. Dated June 17, 1880.
JOEL B. ERHARDT, 4/5ths
THOMAS CARROLL, 1/5th
that on the same day at the point of his discovery, Carroll commenced excavating a discovery shaft, and sank the same to the depth of about eighteen inches or two feet on the vein; that on the 30th of the month, in the temporary absence of himself and the plaintiff, the defendant Boaro, with knowledge of the rights and claims of the plaintiff and Carroll, entered upon and took possession of their excavation, removed and threw away or concealed the stake upon which their written notice was posted, and at the point of Carroll's discovery of the vein or lode, erected a stake and posted thereon a discovery and location notice as follows:
JOHNNY BULL LODE
We, the undersigned, claim 1,500 feet on this mineral-bearing vein or lode, running six hundred feet northeast and nine hundred feet southwest, and 150 feet on each side of the same, with all its dips and spurs, angles, and variations.
June 30, 1880.
ANTHONY BOARO
W. L. HULL
The evidence also showed that Boaro and Hull entered upon the premises on or about July 21, 1880, and remained thereafter continuously in possession; that threats of violence to the plaintiff and Carroll, if they should enter upon the premises or attempt to take possession of them, were communicated to Carroll as having been made by Boaro early in August following; that in consequence of such threats and the possession held by Boaro, Carroll was prevented from resuming work upon and completing the discovery shaft, and from entering upon any other part of the lode or vein and performing the acts of location required by law within the time limited. The evidence also tended to show that within ninety days from the discovery of the lode by Carroll, one French, on behalf of the plaintiff and Carroll, secretly caused the boundaries of the claim to be marked by six substantial posts, so as to include the place of discovery and the premises in controversy, and filed in the office of the recorder of the county a location certificate setting forth the name of the lode, the date of the location, the names of the plaintiff and Carroll as locators, and the course of the lode or vein, and giving such a description of the claim, with reference to natural objects and permanent landmarks, as would suffice to identify the same with reasonable certainty.
The evidence offered by the defendants rebutted that of the plaintiff, and showed that on June 30, 1880, when Boaro entered upon the ground in controversy, he found nothing on the surface to indicate a vein or lode, or that any excavation had been made or stake erected, as alleged by the plaintiff, or that any portion of the ground claimed by the defendants had ever been previously located or claimed; that their discovery cut was commenced at a point thirty-five feet distant from the point described and claimed by Carroll as the point at which he had begun to sink the discovery shaft of the "Hawk Lode," and erected his stake and posted his notice, and that the top of the vein was at least four feet below the surface; that Carroll had abandoned all claim to the premises in controversy, and that his omission to perform the required location work was due to such abandonment, and not to any threats of the defendants, or of any of them, nor to the occupation of the ground by Boaro and Hull, or either of them; that neither the plaintiff nor Carroll ever demanded possession of or asserted any title to the premises until the working of the claim by the defendants had shown it to be valuable.
The evidence of the defendants also showed that they had commenced work upon the claim about July 21, 1880, and sank and excavated an open cut, striking the vein or lode at the depth of ten feet or more, and exposed therein a vein of rock in place bearing gold and silver; that no mineral nor any indications of a vein or lode were found until they reached the depth of seven or eight feet, and that subsequently, and within the time limited by law, they marked the bounds of their claim on said lode, called by them the "Johnny Bull Lode" and recorded a location certificate, describing their claim by reference to natural objects and permanent landmarks and complying in all respects with the requirements of the law.
The court was requested to instruct the jury that from and after the date of the discovery upon vacant, unoccupied mineral lands, of the outcrop of a vein or body of mineral-bearing rock, the discoverer is entitled to the possession of the point at which he made his discovery and of such a reasonable amount of adjacent ground as is necessary or incidental to the proper prosecution of the work of opening up or exposing the vein or body of mineral-bearing rock to the depth and within the time required by law, and that to such extent he is protected by law in his possession for the period of sixty days from the date of his discovery. But the court refused to give this instruction, and the plaintiff excepted to the refusal. The court charged the jury, among other things, that it was in evidence, and seemed to be conceded, that the notice on the stake put up by Carroll contained no specification or description of the territory claimed by the locators, as that they claimed a number of feet on each side of the discovery or in any direction therefrom, and "in this respect," said the court, "the notice was deficient, and under it the locators could not claim more than the very place in which it was planted. Elsewhere on the same lode or vein, if it extended beyond the point in controversy, any other citizen could make a valid location, for this notice, specifying no bounds or limits, could not be said to have any extent beyond what would be necessary for sinking a shaft," and also that to entitle the plaintiff to recover, "it should appear from the evidence that Boaro entered at the very place which had been taken by Carroll, because, as Carroll's notice failed to specify the territory he wished to take, it could not refer to or embrace any other place than that in which it was planted."
The defendant obtained a verdict, the plaintiff brought the case to the high court on writ of error to review the judgment entered thereon.
Justice Field delivered the opinion of the Court.
The high court reversed the judgment of the court below, and the case remanded for a new trial.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Dolores County, Colorado
Category:Legal history of Colorado
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Erhardt v. Boaro, 113 U.S. 537" ==> """
Erhardt v. Boaro, 113 U.S. 537 (1885), was a suit instituted in equity ancillary to a principal action brought for the possession of a mining claim (Erhardt v. Boaro, 113 U.S. 527 (1885)). The object of the suit was to restrain the commission of waste by the defendants pending the outcome of the main action.Erhardt v. Boaro, .
It was formerly the doctrine of equity in cases of alleged trespass on land not to restrain the use and enjoyment of the premises by the defendant when the title was in dispute, but to leave the complaining party to his remedy at law. A controversy as to the title was deemed sufficient to exclude the jurisdiction of the court. In Pillsworth v. Hopton, 6 Ves. 51, which was before Lord Eldon in 1801, he is reported to have said that he remembered being told in early life from the bench "that if the plaintiff filed a bill for an account and an injunction to restrain waste, stating that the defendant claimed by a title adverse to his, he stated himself out of court as to the injunction."
It is common practice in cases where irremediable mischief is being done or threatened going to the destruction of the substance of the estate, such as the extracting of ores from a mine or the cutting down of timber or the removal of coal, to issue an injunction though the title to the premises be in litigation. The authority of the court is exercised in such cases, through its preventive writ, to preserve the property from destruction pending legal proceedings for the determination of the title. Jerome v. Ross, 7 Johns. Ch. 315, 332; Le Roy v. Wright, 4 Sawyer 530, 535.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Dolores County, Colorado
Category:Legal history of Colorado
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Erica P. John Fund, Inc. v. Halliburton Co." ==> """
Erica P. John Fund, Inc. v. Halliburton Co., 563 U.S. 804 (2011), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that "securities fraud plaintiffs need not prove loss causation in order to obtain class certification." Their decision cleared the way for class action to proceed against Halliburton over its alleged misrepresentation of facts material to the value of its stock price.
Aftermath
On remand, the United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas held that Halliburton had discharged its burden of proof that alleged corrective disclosures had not resulted in any price impact for five, but not a sixth, corrective disclosure. Accordingly, a class action has been certified for the last instance., discussing 
The Court now allows defendants "to present evidence before a class is certified showing that the alleged fraud had no effect on the price" movements." Securities class action litigation will face additional hurdles and may be curbed, but not eliminated as result. with further restriction of law being dependent on the United States Congress.
A further attempt by Halliburton to defeat class action was taken at the Court of Appeal in April 2013, and once again defeated. Undeterred Halliburton again petitioned the Supreme Court to reconsider this position. At stake was "one of the fundamental tenets of securities fraud litigation: a doctrine known as fraud on the market." If this theory were unavailable, issues of individual shareholders' reliance would overshadow the common issues, and the class would not be eligible for certification under Rule 23 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
On June 23, 2014, the Supreme Court affirmed the reasoning of Basic Inc. v. Levinson, saying that it was not espousing any particular theory of markets, only the presumption that false statements can affect the price:
Further reading
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 563
 References 
External links
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Halliburton
"""

From "Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins" ==> """
Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64 (1938), was a landmark U.S. Supreme Court decision in which the Court held that there is no general American federal common law and that U.S. federal courts must apply state law, not federal law, to lawsuits between parties from different states that do not involve federal questions. In reaching this holding, the Court overturned almost a century of federal civil procedure case law, and established the foundation of what remains the modern law of diversity jurisdiction as it applies to United States federal courts.
Although the decision is not widely known by laypeople, most American lawyers and legal scholars regard Erie as one of the most important decisions in U.S. Supreme Court history. The decision "goes to the heart" of the American system of federalism and the relationship between the U.S. federal government and the states.
Legal background
Under the traditional view of the United States's system of federalism, each U.S. state is a sovereign polity in all aspects other than those the U.S. Constitution commits to the federal government, which has supremacy over the states in those areas. Consequently, each U.S. state has its own courts and legal system governing areas such as property law, contract law, tort law, commercial law, criminal law, and family law. Due to the United States's historical origins in the British Empire, all U.S. states except Louisiana have inherited or adopted the English common law for their legal systems.
Shortly after the Constitution was ratified, Congress passed the Judiciary Act of 1789, which created the U.S. federal court system underneath the U.S. Supreme Court. The Act gave U.S. federal courts a type of authority known as diversity jurisdiction, which allows them to hear lawsuits between citizens of different states involving disputes over substantial sums of money, even when no questions of federal law are involved. Section 34 of the Judiciary Act—known as the Rules of Decision Act—provided that federal courts would apply state laws when adjudicating lawsuits between citizens of different states.
Interpreting this statute's meaning has been among the most difficult legal issues in American federal jurisprudence. The statute provides that U.S. federal courts shall apply state law when hearing cases under diversity jurisdiction. But it does not specify whether the phrase "the laws of the several States"  means only statutes passed by a state's legislature, or whether it also includes the common law decisions of a state's supreme court.
The U.S. Supreme Court addressed the question in its 1842 decision Swift v. Tyson. In Swift, the Court ruled that the Rules of Decision Act's phrase "laws of the several States" referred only to each state's statutory laws passed by their legislatures, and did not include each state supreme court's interpretation and construction of the English common law. The Court concluded that this allowed U.S. federal courts to create a general American "federal common law" for federal courts that would cover areas such as commercial law. But applying the Court's holding in Swift proved difficult, and American lawyers, judges, and legal scholars became increasingly opposed to it during the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Case history
In the early hours of July 27, 1934, a man named Harry Tompkins was walking home along a pathway next to a set of railroad tracks in Hughestown, Pennsylvania. An oncoming train approached and, as it passed, Tompkins was struck by an object—apparently an unlatched door—protruding from one of the train cars. The collision knocked Tompkins to the ground, and his right arm was crushed beneath the train’s wheels. An ambulance took him to a local hospital where doctors amputated most of his right arm.
The train that hit Tompkins was owned and operated by the Erie Railroad Company. After he recovered from his injuries, Tompkins sued Erie Railroad for negligence. Because Tompkins resided in Pennsylvania and Erie Railroad was incorporated in New York, Tompkins invoked diversity jurisdiction and filed his lawsuit in U.S. federal court, rather than Pennsylvania or New York state court. The case was tried in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York, with U.S. district judge Samuel Mandelbaum presiding.
At trial, Erie Railroad argued that Pennsylvania law should govern Tompkins's negligence claim. The pathway along which Tompkins had been walking when the train struck him was an Erie Railroad right-of-way. Previous decisions of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania had held that, under Pennsylvania law, a person walking along a railroad's right-of-way was a trespasser to whom the railroad was not liable for negligence unless its negligence was "wanton" or "wilful". Because Tompkins had not alleged that Erie Railroad had been wantonly or willfully negligent, the railroad's lawyers made a motion to dismiss his claim, citing these Pennsylvania cases. Mandelbaum denied the motion, ruling that under Swift v. Tyson Tompkins's claim was governed by federal common law, not Pennsylvania law. The trial went forward and, in October 1936, the jury found Erie Railroad liable for Tompkins's injuries and awarded him $30,000 in damages.
Erie Railroad appealed the verdict to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. A panel consisting of U.S. circuit judges Thomas Walter Swan, Martin Thomas Manton, and Learned Hand heard the appeal and ruled in Tompkins's favor, affirming the trial court's verdict. The railroad then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the case and granted certiorari.
Supreme Court decision
On April 25, 1938, the Supreme Court issued a 6–2 decision in favor of Erie Railroad that overruled Swift v. Tyson and held that U.S. federal courts must apply state law, not general "federal common law", when adjudicating claims in lawsuits between citizens of different U.S. states.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|upright=1.0|Justice Louis Brandeis, the author of the majority opinion in Erie
For the purposes of the decision's core holding, six justices formed the majority and joined an opinion written by justice Louis Brandeis.  
The Court began by framing the case around the question of "whether the oft-challenged doctrine of Swift v. Tyson shall now be disapproved.", quoting Erie, 304 U.S. at 69. In the opinion's first section, the Court reviewed the history of the Swift doctrine. The Court referenced the research of American legal scholar Charles Warren, who in a 1923 Harvard Law Review article had published evidence of an earlier draft of the Rules of Decision Act that explicitly included states' common laws in its definition of "the laws of the several states". The Court concluded that Warren's discovery proved that the Swift Court's interpretation of the Act had been "erroneous"., quoting Erie, 304 U.S. at 72. 
In the opinion's second section, the Court explained that the Swift doctrine had not produced the legal uniformity the Court had hoped it would, but had instead allowed litigants from other states to discriminate against other litigants in their home states. The Court said that because the Swift doctrine dictated that a lawsuit between two in-state parties would be decided under state law while an identical lawsuit between an in-state party and an out-of-state party would be decided under federal common law, the Swift doctrine was allowing plaintiffs to manipulate which law would be applied to their lawsuits by strategically filing them in specific state or federal courtsa practice now known as "forum shopping". The Court decried this practice, saying that it allowed plaintiffs to introduce "grave discrimination" against parties from other states., quoting Erie, 304 U.S. at 74.
Furthermore, the Court held that the Swift doctrine had not only been a "social and political" failure, but had also been unconstitutional—though the opinion did not explain how.
Having determined that the Swift doctrine was unconstitutional, the opinion's third section declared that there is no general U.S. federal common law, and that U.S. federal courts hearing cases under diversity-of-citizenship jurisdiction must apply state laws as construed by state supreme courts.
The Court emphasized that its ruling was not meant to strike down any federal laws, but was only intended to "declare that in applying the [Swift] doctrine this Court and the lower courts have invaded rights which in our opinion are reserved by the Constitution to the several States.", quoting Erie, 304 U.S. at 79–80.
Applying its holding to the facts of Tompkins's case, the Court held that both the district court and the Second Circuit had erred by not applying Pennsylvania law to Tompkins's claim against Erie Railroad. The Court reversed the Second Circuit's decision and remanded the case, instructing the court to determine whether the railroad company's interpretation of Pennsylvania law had been correct.
Reed's concurrence in the judgment
Justice Stanley F. Reed concurred only in the judgment. Reed agreed with the Court's core holding that Swift v. Tyson should be overruled and that federal courts should apply state law when deciding cases under diversity jurisdiction. But Reed disagreed with the Court's conclusion that the Swift doctrine had been unconstitutional, saying instead that he thought it had been merely an erroneous interpretation of the Rules of Decision Act.
Butler's dissent
Justice Pierce Butler filed a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice James McReynolds, in which he argued the majority had engaged in judicial activism. He asserted the majority had completely rewritten the two questions presented in the petition for certiorari as a constitutional question, when there really was no constitutional issue.  He pointed out that no one in this case had directly challenged the Swift regime, which the Court had adhered to for so long in so many cases.
Aftermath
On remand, the three Second Circuit judges determined that Erie Railroad's characterization of Pennsylvania lawthat a person walking along a railroad right of way was a trespasser to whom the railroad was not liable for negligence unless the negligence was "wanton" or "wilful"had been correct. The judges concluded that Tompkins had neither alleged nor shown any evidence that Erie Railroad's negligence had been "wanton", and they therefore held that Erie Railroad was entitled to a directed verdict. This forced the district court to enter a new judgment in favor of Erie Railroad. Tompkins lost his $30,000 damages award and received nothing.
Subsequent jurisprudence
Later opinions limited the application of Erie to substantive state law; federal courts can generally use the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure while hearing state law claims.
It can be a problem for federal courts to know what a state court would decide on an issue of first impression (i.e., one not previously considered by state courts).  In such circumstances, federal courts engage in what is informally called an "Erie guess."  This "guess," actually a carefully reasoned attempt to anticipate what the state's courts would decide, is not binding on state courts themselves, which may adopt the federal court's reasoning if and when the issue reaches them in some other case, or may decide the issue differently.  In the latter case, future federal courts would be required to follow the state's precedents, although a final judgment in the "guessed" case would not be reopened.
Alternatively, federal courts can certify questions to a state supreme court, so long as the state itself has a procedure in place to allow this.  For example, some federal district (trial) courts can certify questions to state supreme courts, but other states allow only federal courts of appeal (circuit) courts to do so.  In the latter situation, an Erie guess would be the only option available for the federal court attempting to apply state law.
Erie Railroad is considered one of the major examples where the Supreme Court has exceptionally gone against the principle of party presentation, as neither party had suggested a need to review Swift but the Court took it up themselves to review and ultimately overturn it.
See also
 Erie Doctrine
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 304
References
Footnotes
Citations
Works cited
External links
Summary of Erie Railroad Co. v. Tompkins
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:1938 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Federal common law case law
Category:Erie Railroad
Category:Luzerne County, Pennsylvania
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Conflict of laws case law
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Erie Doctrine
Category:Railway litigation in 1938
Category:Railway safety
"""

From "Erznoznik v. City of Jacksonville" ==> """
Erznoznik v. City of Jacksonville, 422 U.S. 205 (1975), is a United States Supreme Court case concerning a city ordinance prohibiting the showing of films containing nudity by a drive-in theater located in Jacksonville, Florida.
Opinion
The Supreme Court issued a ruling invalidating the ordinance and held:
(a) The ordinance by discriminating among movies solely on the basis of content has the effect of deterring drive-in theaters from showing movies containing any nudity, however innocent or even educational, and such censorship of the content of otherwise protected speech cannot be justified on the basis of the limited privacy interest of persons on the public streets, who if offended by viewing the movies can readily avert their eyes. Pp. 208–212.
(b) Nor can the ordinance be justified as an exercise of the city's police power for the protection of children against viewing the films. Even assuming that such is its purpose, the restriction is broader than permissible since it is not directed against sexually explicit nudity or otherwise limited. Pp. 212–214.
(c) Nor can the ordinance be justified as a traffic regulation. If this were its purpose, it would be invalid as a strikingly under-inclusive legislative classification since it singles out movies containing nudity from all other movies that might distract a passing motorist. Pp. 214–215.
(d) The possibility of a narrowing construction of the ordinance appears remote, particularly where appellee city offered several distinct justifications for it in its broadest terms. Moreover, its deterrent effect on legitimate expression in the form of movies is both real and substantial. Pp. 215–217.
 References 
See also
 Film censorship in the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 422
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 Nudity in film
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:History of Jacksonville, Florida
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Drive-in theaters
Category:Nudity in the United States
Category:1975 in Florida
"""

From "Escobedo v. Illinois" ==> """
Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U.S. 478 (1964), was a United States Supreme Court case holding that criminal suspects have a right to counsel during police interrogations under the Sixth Amendment.. The case was decided a year after the court had held in Gideon v. Wainwright that indigent criminal defendants have a right to be provided counsel at trial..
Background
Danny Escobedo's brother-in-law, Manuel Valtierra, was shot and killed on the night of January 19, 1960. Escobedo was arrested without a warrant early the next morning and interrogated.  However, Escobedo made no statement to the police and was released that afternoon.
Benedict DiGerlando, who was in custody and considered to be another suspect, later told the police that Escobedo had indeed fired the fatal shots because the victim had mistreated Escobedo's sister. On January 30, the police again arrested Escobedo and his sister, Grace. While transporting them to the police station, the police explained that DiGerlando had implicated Escobedo and urged him and Grace to confess. Escobedo again declined, and he asked to speak to his attorney, but the police refused by explaining that although he was not formally charged yet, he was in custody and could not leave. His attorney went to the police station and repeatedly asked to see his client but was repeatedly refused access.
Police and prosecutors proceeded to interrogate Escobedo for fourteen-and-a-half hours and repeatedly refused his request to speak with his attorney. While being interrogated, Escobedo made statements indicating his knowledge of the crime. After conviction for murder, Escobedo appealed on the basis of being denied the right to counsel.
Decision
Escobedo appealed to the Illinois Supreme Court, which initially held the confession inadmissible and reversed the conviction. Illinois petitioned for rehearing, and the court then affirmed the conviction. Escobedo appealed to the US Supreme Court, which overturned the conviction in a 5–4 decision. The majority opinion was written by Justice Arthur Goldberg. The ACLU had argued before the Court as amicus curiae in favor of Escobedo. 
Later developments
This holding was later implicitly overruled by Miranda v. Arizona in 1966, and the Supreme Court held that pre-indictment interrogations violate the Fifth Amendment, not the Sixth Amendment.  As Escobedo was questioned during a custodial interrogation, the result for the appellant would have been the same.
In the years following the 1964 decision by the Supreme Court of the United States, Escobedo received 12 felony convictions, including federal charges of selling.  He was also convicted of taking indecent liberties with children.  While free on an appeal bond with respect to those charges, Escobedo pleaded guilty to attempted murder, and he was sentenced to 11 years in prison.Myers, “Escobedo Sentenced to 11 Years for Murder Attempt,” Chicago Tribune (March 5, 1987).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 378
Gideon v. Wainwright
R. v. Brydges
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:Massiah doctrine case law
Category:Cook County, Illinois
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Espinoza v. Farah Manufacturing Co." ==> """
Espinoza v. Farah Mfg. Co., 414 U.S. 86 (1973), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that an employer's refusal to hire a person because he is not a United States citizen does not constitute employment discrimination on the basis of "national origin" in violation of §703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Espinoza, a Mexican national admitted to residence in the United States and married to a U.S. national, brought suit after exhausting her administrative remedies with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, alleging that Farah Mfg. Company's refusal to hire her in its San Antonio, Texas division because of her Mexican citizenship violated §703 of the Civil Rights Act, which makes it an unlawful employment practice for an employer to fail or refuse to hire any individual because of his race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
The District Court granted Espinoza's motion for summary judgment, relying primarily on an EEOC guideline providing that a lawful alien resident may not be discriminated against on the basis of citizenship. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reversed, and the Supreme Court affirmed this decision.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 414
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue" ==> """
Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue, 591 U.S. ___ (2020), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that a state-based scholarship program that provides public funds to allow students to attend private schools cannot discriminate against religious schools under the Free Exercise Clause of the Constitution..
Background
right|thumb|Kendra Espinoza, primary plaintiff, on Reason TV in 2020
The state of Montana passed a special income tax credit program in 2015 to help fund non-profit scholarship organizations to help low-income families pay for private schools. For tax payers, they were able to pay up to  into the program and receive a dollar-for-dollar state tax credit to support it. This type of tax-credit scholarship program for private school selection is similar to ones in eighteen other states as of 2019.
Montana, as with 37 other states, have so-called Blaine amendments in their constitutions which were originally designed to prevent funding Catholic schools in the 19th century. Jonathan A. Greenblatt, chief executive of the Anti-Defamation League, said that the continued purpose of these Blaine amendments "serve significant government interests — leaving the support of churches to church members, while also protecting houses of worship against discrimination and interference from the government." 
Montana's constitution bars the uses of "any direct or indirect appropriations or payment" to any religious organizations or schools affiliated with religious organizations, also known as the "no-aid" provision. The Montana Department of Revenue (DoR) developed the program's rules around the no-aid provision and disallowed religious-affiliated schools from receiving any of the scholarship money, otherwise known as "Rule 1". Rule 1 was controversial even within the state government, as both state legislators and the attorney general had asserted it was not needed, but the DoR implemented it against their cautions, asserting that the scholarship funds were equivalent to appropriations and thus covered by the no-aid provision.
Three low-income families who had children attended Stillwater Christian School in Flathead County and would have been eligible for scholarships through the program outside of their school choice filed a lawsuit against the state and sought an injunction against the program, asserting that Rule 1 unnecessary against the no-aid provision and that it discriminated against them due to their religion under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. Their lawsuit was supported by the Institute for Justice, a non-profit organization that has fought against state laws that enforce the Blaine amendments in their constitutions. They obtained the injunction to block the DoR from enforcing the rule in April 2016. The state began to appeal this ruling, but otherwise continued the program with the ordered injunction, which allowed additional scholarships to be granted for several children attending Stillwater.
The state's appeal to the Montana Supreme Court was decided in December 2018, which ruled in a 5–2 decision that the entire program was unconstitutional because it benefited religious schools.Espinoza v. Montana Dep't of Revenue,  The Court majority stated that the "[Constitution of Montana] more broadly prohibits 'any' state aid to sectarian schools and draws a more stringent line than that drawn by [the U.S. Constitution]." Further, the Court found that even with the DoR's Rule 1 in place, the program still could not prevent any type of aid from the program from ending up at a religious school, and thus nullified the entire program.
Supreme Court
The families petitioned to the United States Supreme Court for review, seeking review of the Montana Supreme Court's decision to terminate the program on the basis of the Religion Clauses or Equal Protection Clause. The Supreme Court granted certiorari in June 2019.
Oral arguments were heard on January 22, 2020. The Justices focused on whether the Montana Supreme Court's decision to shut down the entire program was discriminatory towards the secular schools, as well as trying to resolve this case with recent decision related to the Free Exercise Clause, such as Trinity Lutheran Church of Columbia, Inc. v. Comer,. in which the Court previously ruled that blocking public funds to be used by a church to improve playground safety was a violation of the Free Exercise Clause.
Majority opinion
The Court issued its decision on June 30, 2020. The 5–4 decision reversed the Montana Supreme Court's ruling and remanded the case. Chief Justice John Roberts wrote for the majority, joined by Justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch, and Brett Kavanaugh. Roberts wrote in his opinion that the no-aid provision (Rule 1) in the program violated the Free Exercise clause, as it "bars religious schools from public benefits solely because of the religious character of the schools" and "also bars parents who wish to send their children to a religious school from those same benefits, again solely because of the religious character of the school." Roberts also asserted that the Montana Supreme Court was wrong to invalidate the entire program on the basis of the no-aid provision in the state constitution. Roberts wrote that "A state need not subsidize private education. But once a state decides to do so, it cannot disqualify some private schools solely because they are religious." Roberts based part of the majority's opinion on the previous Trinity case where the public funds were used for a non-secular purpose (church playground improvement), while contrasting it from the decision of Locke v. Davey,. where the Court found that preventing the use of public scholarship funds for students entering into theology studies was constitutional.
Concurrences
Justice Thomas wrote his own concurrence which was joined by Gorsuch. While he agreed with the judgement, Thomas believed the court should have relied on the Establishment Clause, in which the scholarship program, without Rule 1, would not have established any government-backed support of any specific religion.
thumb|right|Alito's concurrent discussed the history of the Blaine amendments, including mention of the 1871 political cartoon by Thomas Nast "The American River Ganges". 
Justice Alito also concurred. Alito cited the Court's earlier decision in Ramos v. Louisiana,. in which judgement was partially based on the motivation of outdated Jim Crow laws in the nature of jury verdicts. Alito wrote that the no-aid provision in Montana's constitution must be considered the same way: "Montana's no-aid provision was modeled on the failed Blaine Amendment to the Constitution, which was prompted by virulent prejudice against Catholic immigrants. Montana's claim that the provision merely reflects a state interest in preserving public schools ignores that the public-school (or common-school) movement at the time was itself anti-Catholic. It is also not clear that the anti-Catholic animus was scrubbed from the no-aid provision when it was re-adopted at Montana's constitutional convention in 1972."
Justice Gorsuch also wrote a concurrence, emphasizing that the Free Exercise Clause "protects not just the right to be a religious person, holding beliefs inwardly and secretly; it also protects the right to act on those beliefs outwardly and publicly. Our cases have long recognized the importance of protecting religious actions, not just religious status."
Dissents
Separate dissents were written by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, and Sonia Sotomayor, with Justice Elena Kagan joining on both Ginsburg and Breyer's dissents. Ginsburg, in her dissent, acknowledged to Roberts' point that states are not required to subsidize private education and in the case of Montana, their court discontinued the program, which does not affect the Free Exercise Clause. She wrote, "Petitioners may still send their children to a religious school... There simply are no scholarship funds to be had."Espinoza, slip op., at *3 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting). Sotomayor called the majority's ruling "perverse" in requiring Montana "to reinstate a tax-credit program that the Constitution did not demand in the first place."Espinoza, slip op., at *11 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting).
Impact
The Espinoza decision was considered likely to impact subsequent rules in the 38 states with Blaine amendments. At the time of the decision, 17 states had scholarship programs similar to Montana's. However, some of these, including Florida and Indiana, had already found ways to permit such funds to be used for selection of religious schools, despite no-aid clauses in their constitutions. The Institute for Justice, which represented the parents, planned to use the ruling to challenge programs in Maine and Vermont which blocked such use of funds. Then-Secretary of Education Betsy DeVos, a proponent of school choice and of a federal-level tax-credit program, also praised the decision.
 References 
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Esquivel-Quintana v. Sessions" ==> """
Esquivel-Quintana v. Sessions, 581 U.S. ___ (2017), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled 8–0 that in the context of statutory rape offenses that criminalize sexual intercourse based solely on the ages of the participants, the generic federal definition of “sexual abuse of a minor” requires the age of the victim to be less than 16.Esquivel-Quintana v. Sessions, No. 16–54, 581 U.S. ___ (2017), slip op. at 1, 12. Justice Clarence Thomas delivered the majority opinion.Esquivel-Quintana, slip op. at 1.
Background
Petitioner, a citizen of Mexico and lawful permanent resident of the United States, pleaded no contest in a California court to a statutory rape offense criminalizing “unlawful sexual intercourse with a minor who is more than three years younger than the perpetrator.”Esquivel-Quintana, slip op. at 1-2. For purposes of that offense, California defines “minor” as “a person under the age of 18.”Esquivel-Quintana, slip op. at 2 (citing Cal. Penal Code Ann. § 261.5(c) (West 2014)). Based on this conviction, the Department of Homeland Security initiated removal proceedings under the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), which makes removable “[a]ny alien who is convicted of an aggravated felony,” 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii),. including “sexual abuse of a minor,” § 1101(a)(43)(A)..Esquivel-Quintana, slip op. at 2. An Immigration Judge ordered petitioner removed to Mexico. The Board of Immigration Appeals agreed that petitioner's crime constituted sexual abuse of a minor and dismissed his appeal.Esquivel-Quintana, slip op. at 2 ("In its view, the 3-year age difference required by Cal. Penal Code § 261.5(c) was meaningful."). A divided Court of Appeals denied his petition for review.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court examined whether a conviction under a state statute criminalizing consensual sexual intercourse between a 21-year-old and a 17-year-old qualifies as sexual abuse of a minor under the INA.Esquivel-Quintana, slip op. at 4-11. The Court held that it did not.Esquivel-Quintana, slip op. at 12.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2017 in United States case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Age of consent
Category:Sex case law
"""

From "Mitchell v. Helms" ==> """
Mitchell v. Helms, 530 U.S. 793 (2000), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that it was permissible for loans to be made to religious schools under Chapter 2 of the Education Consolidation and Improvement Act of 1981.
 Background 
Chapter 2 of the Education Consolidation and Improvement Act of 1981 gave federal funds via state educational agencies to local educational agencies.  In turn, educational materials and equipment were lent to public and private elementary and secondary schools to implement "secular, neutral, and non ideological" programs..
In an average year, about 30% of Chapter 2 funds spent in Jefferson Parish, Louisiana, were distributed to Catholic or religious private schools. Taxpayers filed suit, arguing that this violated the First Amendment's Establishment Clause.“Mitchell v. Helms (2000)". "atheism.about.com". Retrieved 2011-04-12.
Lee Boothby, representing parents who opposed the aid program in Louisiana, said the issue at stake was "our historic commitment that taxpayers not be required to subsidize religious schools."
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court voted 6-3 and found that the program was constitutional, and aid could be provided to religious schools. There was no majority opinion, only a plurality of 4, with 2 justices concurring in part.“U.S. Constitution: First Amendment". "caselaw.lp.findlaw.com". Retrieved 2011-04-12.
Mary Helms and other public school parents file suit alleging that Chapter 2, as applied in Jefferson Parish, violated the First Amendment's Establishment Clause. The District Court initially agreed, finding that Chapter 2 had the primary effect of advancing religion because the materials and equipment loaned to the Catholic schools were direct aid and that the schools were pervasively sectarian. However, after the presiding judge who made the initial ruling retired, the case was reviewed by a new judge, who reversed that decision. Thereafter, based on different precedent, the court upheld Chapter 2. In reversing, the Court of Appeals held Chapter 2 unconstitutional.“Mitchell v. Helms". "oyez.org". Retrieved 2011-04-12.
The Court used the two relevant criteria of the Lemon test to make a ruling: 
 Does the program have a secular purpose?
 Does the program have a primary effect of advancing or inhibiting religion?
 Does the program create an excessive entanglement between government and religion?
The third criterion of the Lemon test was held in Agostini v. Felton not to be relevant when considering distributing aid to religious schools.
The Court ruled that the loans were acceptable because they did not represent a governmental indoctrination or advancement of religion. The loans were made in a nondiscriminatory and constitutional fashion to both secular and non-secular schools.“Mitchell v. Helms". "religiousfreedom.lib.virginia.edu". Retrieved 2011-04-12.
Since the loans were suitable for both religious and public schools, the government was not serving to advance religion.
This decision expressly overruled Meek v. Pittenger (1975), and Wolman v. Walter (1977), as those decisions conflicted with its chosen analysis in this case. Both of those cases invalidated aid in the form of instructional materials to sectarian schools.
Accordingly, the government could provide aid to religious groups as long as such aid advances some legitimate non-religious purpose and is granted in the same manner to non-religious groups.
See also
 Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971)
Notes
External links
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:History of religion in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:2000 in religion
Category:2000 in United States case law
"""

From "Salazar v. Buono" ==> """
Salazar v. Buono, 559 U.S. 700 (2010), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States regarding the establishment clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The case concerned the legality of the Mojave Memorial Cross, a Latin cross which was placed atop a prominent rock outcropping by the Veterans of Foreign Wars foundation in 1934 to honor war dead. The location is known as "Sunrise Rock" in the Mojave National Preserve in San Bernardino County in southeastern California. The Supreme Court ruled that the cross may stay, but also sent the case back to a lower court, making the issue currently unresolved.High court says Mojave cross in Calif. can stay, Washington Post, 2010-4-28.
Background
The cross
Currently, there is a cross atop Sunrise Rock that is between  tall and is constructed out of  metal pipes painted white. Historical records reflect that a wooden cross was built on that location as early as 1934 by the Veterans of Foreign Wars as a memorial to veterans who died in World War I. Photographs depict the wooden cross and signs near it stating: “The Cross, Erected in Memory of the Dead of All Wars,” and “Erected 1934 by Members of Veterans of Foreign Wars, Joshua Tree post 2884.” The wooden signs are no longer present, and the original wooden cross, which is no longer standing, has been replaced by private parties several times since 1934. The cross has been an intermittent gathering place for Easter religious services since as early as 1935, and regularly since 1984. The current version of the cross was built by Henry Sandoz, a local resident, sometime in 1998. When the National Park Service (NPS) investigated the history of the cross, Sandoz explained that he drilled holes into Sunrise Rock to bolt the cross in place, making it difficult to remove. Sandoz did not receive a permit from NPS to construct the cross. No sign indicates that the cross was or is intended to act as a memorial for war veterans.
Action by the National Park Service and Congress
In 1999, NPS received a request from an individual seeking to build a stupa (a dome-shaped Buddhist shrine) on a rock outcropping at a trailhead located near the cross. NPS denied that request, citing 36 C.F.R. § 2.62(a)The regulation provides that: “The installation of a monument, memorial, tablet, structure, or other commemorative installation in a park area without the authorization of the Director is prohibited.” 36 C.F.R. § 2.62(a). as prohibiting the installation of a memorial without authorization. A handwritten note on the denial letter warned that “[a]ny attempt to erect a stupa will be in violation of Federal Law and subject you to citation and/or arrest.” The letter also indicates that “ there is a cross on [a] rock outcrop located on National Park Service lands. . . . It is our intention to have the cross removed.”
In 1999, NPS undertook a study of the history of the cross. NPS determined that neither the cross nor the property on which it is situated qualifies for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places. Specifically, NPS recognized that the cross itself “has been replaced many times and the plaque that once accompanied it (even though it is not known if it is original) has been removed.” Also, the property does not qualify as an historical site because, among other things, “the site is used for religious purposes as well as commemoration.” Following the announcement by NPS of its intention to remove the cross, the United States Congress passed a series of laws to preserve the Sunrise Rock cross. The first piece of legislation, enacted in December 2000, provided that no government funds could be used to remove the cross.Pub. L. No. 106-554 § 133, 114 Stat. 2763A-230 (2000)
Lawsuit and injunction
Frank Buono, a former NPS employee, filed suit in March 2001 against the Secretary of the Department of the Interior, the Regional Director of NPS, and the Superintendent of the Preserve. The district court concluded that the presence of the cross in the Preserve violates the Establishment Clause. In July 2002, the court entered a permanent injunction ordering that the “Defendants, their employees, agents, and those in active concert with Defendants, are hereby permanently restrained and enjoined from permitting display of the Latin cross in the area of Sunrise Rock in the Mojave National Preserve.”
Further congressional action
In January 2002, while this matter was pending in district court, Congress passed a defense appropriations bill, which included a section designating the Sunrise Rock cross as a “national memorial.”Pub.L. No. 107-117 § 8137, 115 Stat. 2278-79 (2002), codified at 16 U.S.C. § 410aaa-56 (note)
In October 2002, less than three months after the district court's injunction, in legislation aimed at the Sunrise Rock cross, Congress passed a defense appropriations bill that included a provision barring the use of federal funds “to dismantle national memorials commemorating United States participation in World War I.”Pub. L. No. 107-248 § 8065(b), 116 Stat.1551 (2002)
In September 2003 Congress enacted another defense appropriations bill that included a land exchange agreement regarding the Sunrise Rock cross in which an acre of land containing the cross was conveyed to the Veterans Home of California— Barstow, Veterans of Foreign Wars Post #385E in consideration for  of land.Pub. L. No. 108-87 § 8121(a)-(f), 117 Stat. 1100 (2003), codified at 16 U.S.C. § 410aaa-56 (note) The government retained a reversionary interest in the property subject to a condition that the recipient maintain the conveyed property as a memorial commemorating United States participation in World War I and honoring the American veterans of that war.
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals decisions
In June 2004, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's permanent injunction, holding that the presence of the cross in the Preserve violates the Establishment Clause. Despite the injunction against display of the cross in the Preserve, the government began moving forward with the mechanics of the land exchange under § 8121. Buono moved to enforce the district court's prior injunction, or modify it to prohibit the land exchange as a violation of the Establishment Clause. In April 2005, the district court granted Buono's motion to enforce the injunction, and denied as moot the request to amend the permanent injunction.Buono v. Norton, 364 F. Supp. 2d 1175, 1177, 1182 & n.8 (C.D. Cal. 2005). According to the district court, “the transfer of the Preserve land containing the Latin Cross which as [a] sectarian war memorial carries an inherently religious message and creates an appearance of honoring only those servicemen of that particular religion is an attempt by the government to evade the permanent injunction enjoining the display of the Latin Cross atop Sunrise Rock.”Buono, 364 F. Supp. 2d at 1182 (citation and quotation marks omitted). The district court deemed the exchange “invalid” and permanently enjoined the government “from implementing the provisions of Section 8121 of Public Law 108-87” and ordered the government “to comply forthwith with the judgment and permanent injunction entered by th[e] court on July 24, 2002.” The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed. The United States Supreme Court then granted the government's petition for a writ of certiorari.
United States Supreme Court ruling
On April 28, 2010, the United States Supreme Court ruled 5-4 that the cross may stay but also sent the case back to a lower court.  Writing for the plurality of the court, Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote, "The goal of avoiding governmental endorsement [of religion] does not require eradication of all religious symbols in the public realm".Supreme Court Keeps Mojave Cross Case Alive
Aftermath
Only eleven days after the Supreme Court decision, the cross was stolen during the overnight of May 9–10, 2010; its theft is believed  to be related to those who opposed the cross, but no arrests have been made to date (as the cross was filled with concrete, it would have been worthless for resale).Caretakers of Stolen Mojave Desert Cross Vow to Replace ItVandals tear down cross that justices would not National Park Service spokeswoman Linda Slater said a $25,000 reward has been offered for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the thieves; the reward was later increased to $100,000. The VFW promised that the memorial will be rebuilt. "This was a legal fight that a vandal just made personal to 50 million veterans, military personnel and their families," National Commander Thomas J. Tradewell said.   On May 20, a replica cross was discovered to have been erected in place of the original.  Park officials said it was erected overnight, but because of the court ruling park employees would have to remove the replica. Another lawsuit was filed to expedite the land transfer.
In April 2012, a land exchange to remove Sunrise Rock from the Mojave National Preserve was approved by the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California.
See also
 Mount Soledad Cross lawsuits, lengthy legal battle also related to the First Amendment regarding the cross located near San Diego, California
 , legal challenges to the Mount Davidson Cross in San Francisco
 , legal challenge to the cross atop the mountain
 Serra Cross (Ventura, California), cross on public land in Ventura, California, which was the subject of litigation
References
External links
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals Opinion
Salazar v. Buono at Scotuswiki
Category:Christianity and law in the 18th century
Category:United States legislation about religion
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:Mojave Desert
Category:2010 in religion
Category:Veterans of Foreign Wars
"""

From "Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc." ==> """
Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc., 472 U.S. 703 (1985), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a state statute providing employees with an absolute right not to work on their chosen Sabbath violates the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.
Background
The case concerned the constitutionality of a Connecticut state statute, which provided that "[n]o person who states that a particular day of the week is observed as his Sabbath may be required by his employer to work on such day. An employee's refusal to work on his Sabbath shall not constitute grounds for his dismissal."
Donald E. Thornton begin working as a store department manager for Caldor, Inc., a chain of retail stores, in 1975. At that time, Connecticut's blue laws required retail stores to close on Sunday, but the law was changed in 1977. As a result, Caldor required Thornton to work one Sunday out of each four. Thornton complied for several months but in 1978, he advised Caldor that he observed Sunday as his Sabbath and would no longer work on Sundays. Caldor told Thornton that it could not accommodate his unwillingness to work Sundays in his current job. It offered either to transfer him to a comparable management job at a store in Massachusetts that was closed on Sunday, or to transfer him to a non-management position in his current store at a lower salary. Although Thornton did not accept either suggestion, in 1980 Caldor transferred Thornton to a clerical position that was not assigned to work Sundays.
Thornton resigned and filed a complaint with a Connecticut state agency, asserting that Caldor had illegally discharged him for refusing to work on his Sabbath. Caldor responded that Thornton had not been "discharged" for purposes of the statute, and also contended that the statute was unconstitutional under the religion clauses of the United States and Connecticut Constitutions.
The agency sided with Thornton, ordering Caldor to reinstate Thornton to his prior position with back pay and benefits, and the Connecticut Superior Court affirmed the agency's determination. On appeal, however, the Connecticut Supreme Court reversed, holding that because the statute lacked a "clear secular purpose" and its "primary effect" was to confer a religious benefit, it was unconstitutional under the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.
Thornton sought review by the United States Supreme Court, which granted certiorari. While the case was pending, Thornton died, and his estate was substituted as a party. At argument, Thornton's estate was represented by Nathan Lewin, and Caldor by Paul Gewirtz.
Opinion
Chief Justice Burger wrote the opinion of the Court, which was joined by seven other Justices. The Court affirmed the Connecticut Supreme Court's holding that the statute in question violated the First Amendment. In a relatively brief opinion, Burger explained that it was unconstitutional under the Establishment Clause for a state to require employers to relieve an employee of work on his or her Sabbath, as "an absolute and unqualified right" that applied "no matter what burden or inconvenience this imposes on the employer or fellow workers." The Court concluded that "[t]his unyielding weighting in favor of Sabbath observers over all other interests contravenes a fundamental purpose of the Religion Clauses."
Concurring opinion
Justice O'Connor filed a three-paragraph concurring opinion, joined by Justice Marshall emphasizing that the Court's ruling was based on the "special and absolute protection" that the Connecticut statute provided to Sabbath observers. However, she concluded that more broadly worded religious accommodation requirements, such as those contained in the Civil Rights Act of 1964, would not be similarly invalid. In O'Connor's view, a statute requiring "reasonable rather than absolute accommodation" and applying to all religious beliefs and practices "serves the valid secular purpose of securing employment opportunity to all groups in our pluralistic society."
Dissent
Justice Rehnquist dissented from the Court's judgment, but did not write an opinion.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 472
Blue laws in the United States had earlier been upheld by the court in 1961 cases Gallagher v. Crown Kosher Super Market of Massachusetts, Inc., McGowan v. Maryland, compelling business to close on Sundays.
Meanwhile, keepers of seventh-day sabbath were denied equal employment opportunity protection of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII in 1977's Trans World Airlines, Inc. v. Hardison.
It is being challenged again in 2022's Groff v. DeJoy.
 External links 
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Establishment Clause case law
"""

From "Estelle v. Gamble" ==> """
__NOTOC__
Estelle v. Gamble, 429 U.S. 97 (1976), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States established the standard of what a prisoner must plead in order to claim a violation of Eighth Amendment rights under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. Specifically, the Court held that a prisoner must allege acts or omissions sufficiently harmful to evidence deliberate indifference to serious medical needs. Though the Court credited Gamble's complaint that doctors had failed to provide appropriate care, it held that medical malpractice did not rise to the level of "cruel and unusual punishment" simply because the victim is a prisoner.
History
J. W. Gamble was a state prisoner within the Texas Department of Corrections who was given a prison labor assignment loading and unloading cotton bales from a truck.  On November 9, 1973, he injured his back when a cotton bale fell on him.  Over the next three months, he complained of back and chest pains, was subject to administrative segregation for refusing to work, and ultimately was treated for an irregular heartbeat. 
On February 11, 1974, Gamble initiated his lawsuit pro se by submitting a handwritten document.
The Court found for the defendant because it viewed his failure to receive proper medical care as "inadvertent". The case nevertheless established the principle that the deliberate failure of prison authorities to address the medical needs of an inmate constitutes "cruel and unusual punishment". It held that "deliberate indifference to serious medical needs of prisoners constitutes the 'unnecessary and wanton infliction of pain'...proscribed by the Eighth Amendment."
Helling v. McKinney
The Supreme Court in 1993 extended the requirement that inmates receive required medical care beyond what it established in Estelle. In Helling v. McKinney, the Court considered the case of a Nevada prisoner, "the cellmate of a five-pack-a-day smoker," who sought to be housed in an environment free of second-hand smoke. McKinney suffered from no ailment and sought no medical treatment. Justice Byron White wrote for a 7−2 majority of the Court that McKinney's claim that prison officials "have, with deliberate indifference, exposed him to levels of ETS [second hand smoke] that pose an unreasonable risk of serious damage to his future health" raised a valid claim under the Eighth Amendment. He wrote that McKinney would have to prove both the scientific facts of the dangers of exposure to second-hand smoke and prove that community standards supported him, that "it violates contemporary standards of decency to expose anyone unwillingly to such a risk. In other words, the prisoner must show that the risk of which he complains is not one that today's society chooses to tolerate." He would also have to prove that prison officials acted with deliberate indifference.Helling v. McKinney, 509 U.S. 25 (1993)
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving mental health
 DeShaney v. Winnebago County
 Farmer v. Brennan
 Davis v. City of Las Vegas (9th Cir. 2007)
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:Medical lawsuits
Category:Medical malpractice
Category:Penal system in the United States
"""

From "Estelle v. Smith" ==> """
Estelle v. Smith, 451 U.S. 454 (1981), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that, per Miranda v. Arizona (1966), the state may not force a defendant to submit to a psychiatric examination solely for the purposes of sentencing. Any such examination violates the defendant's Fifth Amendment rights against self-incrimination as well as  the Sixth Amendment right to counsel, and is therefore inadmissible at sentencing.
 Background 
Ernest Benjamin Smith was indicted for murder for taking part in the armed robbery of a grocery store during which his accomplice fatally shot a clerk.  The State of Texas announced its intention to seek the death penalty and the trial judge ordered  a competency evaluation of Smith after Smith's indictment and after he had obtained counsel. The evaluation was conducted in the jail by Dr. James P. Grigson who determined that Smith was competent to stand trial. Defense counsel were aware after the fact  that Dr. Grigson interviewed Smith when they saw the  psychiatric report in the form of a letter filed with the court. In this letter,  Dr. Grigson termed Smith "a severe sociopath," but no more specific statements as to Smith's future dangerousness.
Smith was tried by a jury and convicted. The same jury heard a separate sentencing proceeding as required by Texas law. One of the three issues the jury had to determine was the future dangerousness of the defendant and whether he would continue to pose a threat to society. Over the defense counsel's objections, the doctor who conducted the pretrial competency evaluation was allowed to testify and his opinion was that Smith continued to be dangerous and thus would continue to constitute a danger to society. The jury determined the issue of the defendant's dangerousness as well as the  other two issues against the defendant,  making  the death penalty mandatory under Texas law.
 Appeals 
Smith appealed to the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals  which affirmed the conviction and death sentence. Smith's writs of habeas corpus to the state courts were denied so he petitioned  Federal District Court for relief. The Federal District Court vacated the death sentence, finding that the trial court erred constitutionally  by admitting the doctor's testimony at the penalty phase. The United States Court of Appeals affirmed this decision.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court held that the admission of the doctor's testimony at the penalty phase of the trial violated Smith's Fifth Amendment privilege against forced self-incrimination as he was not told before the pretrial psychiatric examination that he had a right to remain silent and that any statement he made could be used against him at any phase of the trial, including the sentencing phase. Thus the reliance by the State on the pretrial statements made to the doctor in the competency evaluation  violated his Fifth Amendment rights in the same manner as forcing Smith to testify against his will at any phase of the trial would do so. The fact that Smith made such statements in the context of a competency does not automatically prevent such statements from being used. If Smith had been warned prior to the evaluation, his Fifth Amendment rights would not have been violated. Warnings at this stage in the interrogation process "apply with no less force" than at other stages. "An accused who neither initiates a psychiatric evaluation nor attempts to introduce any psychiatric evidence may not be compelled to respond to a psychiatrist if his statements can be used against him at a capital sentencing proceeding."
Smith's Sixth Amendment right to the assistance of counsel also was violated when the State introduced  doctor's testimony at the penalty phase. Smith already had that right when the doctor examined respondent in jail. As it turned out the competency evaluation was a "critical stage" of the total proceedings against Smith and his attorneys  were not notified prior to that evaluation that it would include an estimation  of Smith's future dangerousness. Thus Smith was denied the assistance of counsel in making the important decision whether to submit to the examination and to what use the evaluation  findings could be employed against him.
 Subsequent developments 
The prisoner in question, Ernest Smith, had his conviction reduced in June 1981 to 'murder with malice aforethought' and was resentenced to life imprisonment.
Although the court did not address the issue directly,  it seemed to implicitly condone the practice of imposing sanctions on defendants who refuse to cooperate with state-order mental health evaluators if the defense gives notice that it intends to raise the question of the defendant's mental health as a defense. In Buchanan v. Kentucky the court found that if the defendant had raised a psychiatric defense and joined in the motion for a psychiatric evaluation, the Constitution was not violated if the prosecution used the examination results to rebut defense claims. The later ruling could be interpreted as meaning  that if the defendant requests a competency evaluation, the Fifth Amendment protection is forfeited on any psychiatric issue raised as a defense.
 See also 
 Barefoot v. Estelle
 Footnotes 
External links
Harvard - Opinion of the Court -  Barefoot v. Estelle463 U.s. 880 (1983)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment assistance of counsel case law
Category:Psychiatry controversies
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Estelle v. Williams" ==> """
Estelle v. Williams, 425 U.S. 501 (1976), is a Supreme Court case involving Harry Lee Williams' conviction of assault on his former landlord in Harris County, Texas.  While awaiting trial Williams was unable to post bail.  He was tried in his prison uniform, and later was found guilty.  He sought a writ of habeas corpus saying being tried in a prison uniform violated his Constitutional rights in accordance with the 14th Amendment.  The Court of Appeals ruled that the accused does not have to stand trial in identifiable prison clothes and Williams’ right to due process was violated. The Supreme Court reversed, reinstating the conviction, on June 21, 1976.
Background
Section one of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution states “No state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws”.   Williams argued that being tried in clearly identifiable prison clothes gave a perception of guilt and therefore undermined his due process right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty.
Historical context
In the case of Chapman v. California. the court ruled that some mistakes and errors could be made that do not require reversal.  The defendants in the case invoked the 5th Amendment privilege against self-incrimination and chose not to testify.  They were eventually found guilty, but appealed on the basis that their silence created negative publicity which skewed the views of the jurors and undermined their trial.  The court agreed that negative media attention was severe, but concluded that this occurrence had no effect on the outcome of the trial, and therefore did not require any modification.  However, the court went on to say each case is particular and the stances should be viewed individually.  The error would have to be found insignificant to the overall outcome of the trial in order to not be overturned.  The court must find the error to be harmless without a doubt in order for the verdict to be considered final.  If the appeal happens to be upheld, the defendant can be awarded a retrial.
In Hernandez v. Beto, the accused Hernandez appealed to the court for being tried in prison clothes.  Hernandez had not requested to be tried in his civilian clothes and therefore the prosecutor maintains that if there was an error made it was harmless.  The District Court referenced Brooks v. Texas (1967) and set the precedent that it is implicitly wrong to try a defendant in prison attire especially when civilian clothing is at hand.  The appearance of the prison uniform should not be able to affect the jurors’ decision making, which should be on the hard evidence alone.  The judge at Hernandez's trial referenced the decision in Brooks v. Texas and agreed that the situation is applicable to the case at hand. The Court of Appeals, however, found that, as no objection had been made by the defendant to wearing prison clothes,  his appeal for retrial would be denied.
In Turner v. Louisiana,. the appeal allowed the defendant, Turner, to have the decision reversed and remanded. During Turner's three-day trial for murder, the two deputy sheriffs who had custody of the jury and closely interacted with them during this time were the two main witnesses in his case. The appeal on a writ of habeas corpus was upheld on the basis that Turner's fourteenth amendment rights were violated because of his right to an impartial jury under due process.
Central conflict
The accused Williams went to his former residence to visit a female friend. While there he got into a confrontation with his former landlord in respect to his failed payments. Williams ended up stabbing the landlord multiple times in the back and abdomen. He was brought up on charges of assault with intent to murder with malice.  Williams was unable to post bail and stayed in jail until his court date on October 7, 1975.  Williams requested his civilian clothes from a jail guard, but he was denied. He was tried in Harris County, Texas, and the jury found him guilty. After, he sought for a writ of habeas corpus for being forced to stand trial in prison clothing. The District Court denied relief but the Court of Appeals took up his case which was eventually brought in front of the Supreme Court.
Opinion of the Court
The Court ruled that Harry Lee Williams was not denied due process. While the Court concluded that no person could be compelled to stand trial in prison garb without their consent, wearing jail clothes could be a strategy to obtain sympathy from a jury. Accordingly, in the absence of a timely objection, there is no error in having a trial where the defendant appears in prison attire.  Justice Stevens took no part in the decision of this particular case.
Concurrence
Justice Powell said, "'Courts [also] have required an accused to object to being tried in jail garments, just as he must invoke or abandon other rights.' Here, '[t]he record is clear that no objection was made to the trial judge concerning the jail attire either before or at any time during the trial. This omission plainly did not result from any lack of appreciation of the issue, for respondent had raised the question with the jail attendant prior to trial. At trial, defense counsel expressly referred to respondent's attire during voir dire. The trial judge was thus informed that respondent's counsel was fully conscious of the situation'". The Court ruled 6-2 that Williams wearing his prison clothes was considered harmless because of a failure to make a timely objection. Williams' appeal was rejected and a retrial was denied due to his lack of an objection to the judge despite clearly being aware of his appearance. Justices Powell and Stewart agreed that Williams' attorney made "an inexcusable procedural default" or "tactical choice" which allowed for Williams' appearance and therefore was liable on his own accord despite being denied due process..
Dissenting opinion
The two votes in favor of Williams came from the Justices Marshall and Brennan. Since Williams was in prison garb he gave the appearance of guilt.  In Coffin v. United States it is stated “the principle that there is a presumption of innocence in favor of the accused is the undoubted law, axiomatic and elementary, and its enforcement lies at the foundation of the administration of our criminal law”. The appearance of Williams in prison garments corrupted the court process and therefore the error in the court cannot be considered “harmless beyond a doubt.” Justice Marshall said, “the Court could not rest the reversal on a finding that respondent knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently consented to be tried in such attire, and thus had waived his due process right”.  The defendant never conceded to wearing his prison clothes while on trial and a retrial should be awarded because of the violation of his fourteenth amendment rights under due process.
Historical significance
The court's decision upheld the previous decisions regarding defendants wearing prison uniforms without objection in a timely manner.  The opinion of the court was that Williams’ due process rights had been violated since he had not consented to wearing the clothing while on trial.   In relation to other trials, the justices went on to agree that the waiving of due process rights must be done consciously and intelligently.  If the defendant does not knowingly waive his rights then the court must rule the error harmless beyond a doubt or the accused can be awarded a retrial.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:Uniforms
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Estep v. United States" ==> """
Estep v. United States, 327 U.S. 114 (1946), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a draft board's refusal to classify a Jehovah's Witness as minister is, after exhausting administrative remedies, subject to judicial review.. 
 Background 
According to the judicial opinion itself:
References
External links
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:Conscription in the United States
Category:Conscription law
Category:1946 in religion
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Estes v. Texas" ==> """
Estes v. Texas, 381 U.S. 532 (1965), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court overturned the fraud conviction of petitioner Billy Sol Estes, holding that his Fourteenth Amendment due process rights had been violated by the publicity associated with the pretrial hearing, which had been carried live on both television and radio. News photography was permitted throughout the trial and parts of it were broadcast as well.
There was no doubt that the Court was displeased with the intensive pretrial and trial coverage, but its biggest concern was the presence of cameras at the two-day-long pretrial hearing. It included at least 12 still and television photographers, three microphones on the judge's bench, and several aimed at the jury's box and attorney's table. When it was time for the trial to be held, it was moved about 500 miles away and the judge had imposed rather severe restrictions on press coverage. However, the justices did mark the notion that cameras would return to courtrooms eventually: 
It is said that the ever-advancing techniques of public communication and the adjustment of the public to its presence may bring about a change in the effect of telecasting upon the fairness of criminal trials. But we are not dealing here with future developments in the field of electronics. Our judgment cannot be rested on the hypothesis of tomorrow but must take the facts as they are presented today." The Supreme Court ruled in Chandler v. Florida, 449 U.S. 560 (1981) that a state could allow the broadcast and still photography coverage of criminal trials.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 381
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:1965 in United States case law
"""

From "Ethyl Gasoline Corp. v. United States" ==> """
Ethyl Gasoline Corp. v. United States, 309 U.S. 436 (1940),.  was a decision of the United States Supreme Court that limited the doctrine of the Court's 1938 decision in General Talking Pictures Corp. v. Western Electric Co., affirmed on rehearing, . Beginning with the 1926 decision in United States v. General Electric Co.,. the Supreme Court made a sharp distinction between (i) post-sale restraints that a patentee imposed on purchasers of a patented product and (ii) restrictions (limitations) that a patentee imposed on a licensee to manufacture a patented product: the former being illegal and unenforceable under the exhaustion doctrine while the latter were generally permissible under a lenient "rule of reason." Thus, under the General Talking Pictures doctrine, a patent holder may permissibly license others to manufacture and then sell patented products in only a specified field (market), such as only a particular type of product made under the patent or only a particular category of customer for the patented product. The Ethyl decision held, however, that a patent licensing and distribution program based on both the sale of a patented product and licenses to manufacture a related product was subject to ordinary testing under the antitrust laws, and accordingly was illegal when its effect was to "regiment" an entire industry.
Background
thumb|upright|Sign on an antique gasoline pump advertising tetra-ethyl lead
Ethyl owned several patents on tetra-ethyl lead, an anti-knock fuel additive, and on its utilization: two patents on the chemical itself, a patent on a motor fuel—gasoline containing tetra-ethyl lead, and a patent on a method of using the fuel in an automobile engine.309 U.S. at 446.
Ethyl established an elaborate licensing program under its several patents: Ethyl sold the fuel additive, and licensed purchasers to use it to practice the other patents. The licensing program fixed prices for the motor fuel and strictly limited the types of customer (i.e., no price-cutters) to which given licensees could sell the motor fuel. Ethyl's program "controls the business of the major part of those engaged in manufacturing and distributing [gasoline] in the United States." Ethyl licensed almost every US refiner and its licensees refined 88% of the gasoline in the US.309 U.S. at 449. It was Ethyl's "long established practice . . . to refuse to grant licenses to jobbers who cut prices or refuse to conform to the marketing policies and posted prices of the major refineries or the market leaders among them."309 U.S. at 450. 
The United States sued Ethyl for violating the antitrust laws, and Ethyl claimed that its patents exempted its conduct.
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|right|200px|Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone
Ethyl emphasized to the Supreme Court the fact that, while it sold the fuel to refiners subject to a post-sale restraint, it licensed the other patents, which covered the manufacture of the fuel (by adding tetra-ethyl lead to ordinary gasoline) and the method of using the fuel in automobile engines. Ethyl argued that the licensed patents and the manufacturing brought the case within the shelter of the General Talking Pictures doctrine. Ethyl urged that the various restrictions were "all reasonably necessary for the commercial development of [its] patents and for insuring a financial return from them, and are therefore within its patent monopoly." Further, they "are appropriate and reasonably adapted to the maintenance of the quality of the product and for the protection of the public in its use of a product containing a dangerous poison."309 U.S. at 451.
The Supreme Court, in an opinion written by Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone, refused without dissent to make any distinctions among the different patents and struck the whole program down for improperly “regimenting” the industry in violation of the antitrust laws.
The Court said that Ethyl used its patents and licensing program to obtain
the power to exclude at will from participation in the nationwide market for lead-treated motor fuel all of the 12,000 motor fuel jobbers of the country, by refusing to license any of the 1,000 unlicensed jobbers, or by cancelling, as it may at will, the licenses of any of the 11,000 licensed jobbers.309 U.S. at 452. 
It then unlawfully 
exercise[d] that power in such manner as to control the patented commodity in the hands of the licensed jobbers who had purchased it, [and] their actions with respect to it in ways not within the limits of the patent monopoly, and conspicuously among such controls which the Sherman law prohibits and the patent law does not sanction is the regulation of prices and the suppression of competition among the purchasers of the patented articles.309 U.S. at 452. 
Relying on the exhaustion doctrine and citing Adams v. Burke,. the Court stated:
By its sales to refiners, it relinquishes its exclusive right to use the patented fluid and it relinquishes to the licensed jobbers its exclusive rights to sell the lead-treated fuel by permitting the licensed refiners to manufacture and sell the fuel to them. And, by the authorized sales of the fuel by refiners to jobbers, the patent monopoly over it is exhausted, and, after the sale, neither [Ethyl] nor the refiners may longer rely on the patents to exercise any control over the price at which the fuel may be resold.309 U.S. at 457.
The Court found this violative of the antitrust laws:
[Ethyl] has established the marketing of the patented fuel in vast amounts on a nationwide scale through the 11,000 jobbers and, at the same time, by the leverage of its licensing contracts resting on the fulcrum of its patents, it has built up a combination capable of use, and actually used, as a means of controlling jobbers' prices and suppressing competition among them. It seems plain that this attempted regulation of prices and market practices of the jobbers with respect to the fuel purchased, for which [Ethyl] could not lawfully contract, cannot be lawfully achieved by entering into contracts or combinations through the manipulation of which the same results are reached by the exercise of the power which they give to control the action of the purchasers. Such contracts or combinations, which are used to obstruct the free and natural flow in the channels of interstate commerce of trade even in a patented article, after it is sold by the patentee or his licensee, are a violation of the Sherman Act.309 U.S. at 457-58.
The Court found it particularly objectionable that Ethyl exploited its patents by fixing the prices on which gasoline was sold, which was not the product that Ethyl manufactured and sold. "The licensing conditions are thus not used as a means of stimulating the commercial development and financial returns of the patented invention which is licensed, but for the commercial development of the business of the refiners and the exploitation of a second patent monopoly not embraced in the first."309 U.S. at 459. 
References
External links
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1940 in United States case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
"""

From "Evans v. Cornman" ==> """
Evans v. Cornman, 398 U.S. 419 (1970), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that to deny people living in federal enclaves the right to vote is a violation of their right to Equal Protection under the Fourteenth Amendment.
 Background 
Article One of the United States Constitution, Section 8, Clause 18, allows Congress "to exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever, over such District (not exceeding ten miles square) as may, by cession of particular states, and the acceptance of Congress, become the seat of the government of the United States, and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by the consent of the legislature of the state in which the same shall be, for the erection of forts, magazines, arsenals, dockyards, and other needful buildings."
The rights of residents of such federal enclaves was argued in Howard v. Commissioners of Sinking Fund of Louisville when the residents of an enclave sued to be exempted from certain taxation by the City of Louisville by arguing that the annexation of the enclave by the city violated the "exclusive legislation" clause and so the city's claim to the area was unconstitutional. That was rejected, and it was ruled that the enclaves continue to be part of the states of which they were a part: "A state may conform its municipal structures to its own plan, so long as the state does not interfere with the exercise of jurisdiction within the federal area by the United States."
In 1963, a Maryland Appeals Court ruled, in Royer v. Board of Election Supervisors, that residents of federal jurisdictions were not entitled to vote in Maryland.
Land in Montgomery County, Maryland, was purchased for the National Cancer Institute in the 1930s and was officially made a US jurisdiction in 1953. Both before and after the cession of the land, residents of the complex registered and voted in Montgomery County without incident.  Then, in October 1968, the Permanent Board of Registry of Montgomery County, Maryland, citing Royer v. Board of Elections Supervisors, announced that persons living on the National Institutes of Health (NIH) federal reservation or enclave located within its geographical boundaries did not meet the residency requirement of Article 1 of the Maryland Constitution. The people were thus not qualified to vote as residents of Maryland. Several residents of the enclave sued the Permanent Board for a three-judge Federal District Court to be convened to enjoin as unconstitutional the application of the Maryland voter residency law.
The Federal District Court issued a temporary injunction allowing residents to vote in the 1968 elections. In the actual argument of the case, the District Court held that to deny the residents the right to vote was to deny them equal protection of the laws, but the case was appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court, in a decision written by Justice Marshall, joined by Justices Black, Douglas, Harlan, Brennan, Stewart, White, and Chief Justice Burger, ruled that the precedent of Howard meant that the complex was part of Maryland and so its residents counted as residents of Maryland in every other way and had substantial interest in the governance of the enclave. As it was subject the legislation of the state and county, they could not be denied the vote without violating their constitutional right to equal protection. Justice Blackmun did not take part, and there were no dissensions or concurrences.
 Subsequent developments 
Evans v. Cornman  is often cited, usually among other precedents, in cases concerning violations of the Fourteenth Amendment, as it pertains to voting rights and representation, especially in cases concerning residency requirements (Oregon v. Mitchell, Mobile v. Bolden, Whatley v. Clark, Dunn v. Blumstein, etc.).  The case has recently been cited in arguments in favor of national representation for the District of Columbia.Sen. Orrin Hatch on District of Columbia House Voting Rights Act of 2009
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1970 in United States case law
Category:Montgomery County, Maryland
"""

From "Evans v. Eaton (1818)" ==> """
Evans v. Eaton, 16 U.S. (3 Wheat.) 454 (1818), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a patent disclosing an improved method of manufacture by means of several different improved machines should be construed to claim both the method and the improvements to the machines, but not to include the machines apart from the inventor's improvements.
It was the third published Supreme Court decision on patents,Malla Pollack, The Owned Public Domain: The Constitutional Right Not to Be Excluded - or the Supreme Court Chose the Right Breakfast Cereal in Kellogg v. National Biscuit Co., 22 Hastings Comm. & Ent L.J. 265, 291 n119 (2000).  and the first to deal with substantive patent law.Harold C. Wegner, Post-Merck Experimental Use and the "Safe Harbor", 15 Fed. Circuit B.J. 1, 37 (2005).  It was the first Supreme Court case to deal with the question of when an invention is patentably distinct from the prior art.N. Scott Pierce, A Great Invisible Crashing: The Rise and Fall of Patent Eligibility Through Mayo v. Prometheus, 23 Fordham Intell. Prop. Media & Ent. L.J. 186, 211-15 (2012) It was also the second of four successive Supreme Court cases related specifically to the Oliver Evans flour mill patent.
In addition to its legal significance, the opinion is notable for containing in its appendix a transcript of the Evans patent and patent application, otherwise unavailable to the modern reader.
Background
thumb|Evans' hopperboy and automated bolting process.
In the 1780s, inventor Oliver Evans developed a system for an automated flour mill that would revolutionize milling technology.  After keeping his invention a secret while he reduced it to practice, he initially obtained protection for it through individual state statutes, for example in Maryland and New Hampshire, because the patent system did not yet exist.  When the Patent Act of 1790 took effect, Evans obtained the third United States patent ever issued. No copies of this original patent are extant.
As all patents at the time had 14-year terms, his patent lapsed in 1804, and the invention entered the public domain.  Immediately upon the expiration of his patent, he sought a private bill that would allow him to renew it, the first such request ever made. He was unsuccessful until 1808, when the Tenth Congress passed a law authorizing the Secretary of State to grant him a new patent on the same terms as the original one."An Act for the Relief of Oliver Evans", 6 Stat. 70.  Evans obtained his new patent the day after the law took effect.Evans v. Jordan, 8 F. Cas. 872, 872 (C.C.D. Va. 1813). 
Under the Patent Act of 1793, which was in effect at the time of the 1808 grant, patents were not required to have claims.  In the case of complex patent such as Evans', which included both a general improved method of manufacturing flour and specific improved machines for achieving that method, this created confusion as to the actual scope of grant.  By the same token, it also created confusion as to the kind of prior art that would suffice to invalidate the patent on the basis of anticipation.
In the district court for Pennsylvania, the defendant Eaton did not dispute having used Evans' improved hopperboy, but sought to show either that the patent only covered the improved method as a whole (and not the hopperboy specifically),  or alternatively that the patent had been anticipated by earlier machines. In particular, the defendant introduced evidence of a crude kind of hopperboy that was in use at some mills in Pennsylvania in the 1760s.  Persuaded that the patent could only cover the improved method as a whole, rather than any of the improved machines, the court instructed the jury in such a way that the jurors had no choice but to return a verdict for the defendant, as they did.  The court also declined to admit the plaintiff's proffered evidence that the defendant had initially offered to pay a license fee to Evans.  
The case was then appealed to the Supreme Court on a writ of error, with Evans alleging the following errors:
 That the district court should have admitted the plaintiff's evidence that the defendant's witnesses had paid the license fee, thus implicitly conceding the validity of the patent;
 That the district court should not have admitted evidence of the use of the hopperboy in other locations not specified in the defendant's pleading;
 That the district court should not have instructed the jury that Evans was not entitled to damages for infringement unless he was the original inventor of the hopperboy.
Opinion of the Court
The Court unanimously rejected the district court's judgment, and remanded the case for a new trial under a venire facias de novo.  The opinion was authored by Chief Justice Marshall.  
The Court accepted the first ground of error and rejected the second, in both cases preferring to put the evidence before the jury.  The Court noted however that the evidence of witnesses having paid the license fee was entitled to "very little weight."16 U.S. at 505.
On the main issue, regarding the district court's instructions to the jury, the Court agreed that the district court had erred in two respects: first, in opining that the patent covered only the improvement in manufacture "produced by the general combination of all his machinery", and not the individual machines used; and second, in instructing the jury that Evans could not recover unless he was the original inventor of the hopperboy rather than an improver.16 U.S. at 519.  Fatefully, however, the Court observed that 
In all cases where his claim is for an improvement on a machine, it will be encumbent on him to show the extent of his improvement, so that a person understanding the subject may comprehend distinctly in what it consists.16 U.S. at 518.
Subsequent developments
The case was retried in the district court of Pennsylvania, with the jury once again returning a verdict for the defendant.  The verdict turned on the judge's instruction that the jury should not find for the plaintiff unless there was clear evidence within the patent (including the annexed schedule and application) as to the exact nature of Evans' improvements on the prior art.  Since the patent had not been drafted with such a requirement in mind, and merely described his invention without distinguishing it from the prior art, there was essentially no question left for the jury to decide.  The next year, Evans published a pamphlet arguing his side of the case, with particular attention to the court rejecting his evidence on novel grounds. He also once again appealed to the Supreme Court on a writ of error, but his appeal was rejected by a closely divided Court in Evans v. Eaton (1822) -- although by that time, he was dead and the patent had expired.
The confusion arising about the scope of the claimed invention in this case led in part to the Patent Act of 1836, which introduced the requirement of a separate claims section for all patents.Westlaw, Patent Claims § 4:1 (3rd ed.)  That requirement in turn made the specific legal analysis in this case largely obsolete.  However, the case continued to be cited for the general principle that a patentee need not be aware of a previous use in order for that previous use to render the patent invalid.Gayler v. Wilder, 51 U.S. 477, 488, 13 L. Ed. 504 (1850).John Burke, Examining the Constitutionality of the Shift to "First Inventor to File" in the Leahy-Smith America Invents Act, 39 J. Legis. 69, 87 (2013).
The case was most recently cited by the Supreme Court in 1934, to support the general principle that "the prize of an exclusive patent falls to the one who had the fortune to be first."Radio Corp. of Am. v. Radio Eng'g Labs., 293 U.S. 1, 55 S. Ct. 928, 79 L. Ed. 163 (1934).
Works cited
References
External links
Category:1818 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
"""

From "Evans v. Eaton (1822)" ==> """
Evans v. Eaton, 20 U.S. (7 Wheat.) 356 (1822), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held, chiefly, that a patent on an improved machine must clearly describe how the machine differs from the prior art.
It was the fourth published Supreme Court decision on patents,Malla Pollack, The Owned Public Domain: The Constitutional Right Not to Be Excluded - or the Supreme Court Chose the Right Breakfast Cereal in Kellogg v. National Biscuit Co., 22 Hastings Comm. & Ent L.J. 265, 291 n119 (2000).  and the second to deal with substantive patent law.Harold C. Wegner, Post-Merck Experimental Use and the "Safe Harbor", 15 Fed. Circuit B.J. 1, 37 (2005).   It was also the third of four successive Supreme Court cases related specifically to the Oliver Evans flour mill patent. 
Background
thumb|Evans' hopperboy and automated bolting process.
In the 1780s, inventor Oliver Evans developed a system for an automated flour mill that would revolutionize milling technology.  After keeping his invention a secret while he reduced it to practice, he initially obtained protection for it through individual state statutes, for example in Maryland and New Hampshire, because the patent system did not yet exist.  When the Patent Act of 1790 took effect, Evans obtained the third United States patent ever issued. No copies of this original patent are extant.
As all patents at the time had 14-year terms, his patent lapsed in 1804, and the invention entered the public domain.  Immediately upon the expiration of his patent, he sought a private bill that would allow him to renew it, the first such request ever made. He was unsuccessful until 1808, when the Tenth Congress passed a law authorizing the Secretary of State to grant him a new patent on the same terms as the original one."An Act for the Relief of Oliver Evans", 6 Stat. 70.  Evans obtained his new patent the day after the law took effect.Evans v. Jordan, 8 F. Cas. 872, 872 (C.C.D. Va. 1813). 
Under the Patent Act of 1793, which was in effect at the time of the 1808 grant, patents were not required to have claims.  In the case of complex patent such as Evans', which included both a general improved method of manufacturing flour and specific improved machines for achieving that method, this created confusion as to the actual scope of grant.  By the same token, it also created confusion as to the kind of prior art that would suffice to invalidate the patent on the basis of anticipation.
In the district court for Pennsylvania, the defendant Eaton did not dispute having used Evans' improved hopperboy, but sought to show either that the patent only covered the improved method as a whole (and not the hopperboy specifically),  or alternatively that the patent had been anticipated by earlier machines. In particular, the defendant introduced evidence of a crude kind of hopperboy that was in use at some mills in Pennsylvania in the 1760s.  Persuaded that the patent could only cover the improved method as a whole, rather than any of the improved machines, the court instructed the jury in such a way that the jurors had no choice but to return a verdict for the defendant, as they did.  The court also declined to admit the plaintiff's proffered evidence that the defendant had initially offered to pay a license fee to Evans.  
The case was then appealed to the Supreme Court on a writ of error, and then remanded to the district court after a determination that the patent was not valid unless it was distinct from the prior art. On retrial, the district court found that the patent was invalid, on two grounds: (1) that if the patent was on the hopperboy as such, it was anticipated because there had been other hopperboys in use before Evans' invention; and (2) that if the patent was on Evans' improvements to the hopperboy, it was invalid for lack of written description, because the patent did not clearly set forth the ways in which Evans' hopperboy differed from hopperboys of the prior art.  
Evans then appealed once again to the Supreme Court.  Two of Evans' objections were procedural: that evidence was admitted from the testimony of a miller who stood to benefit from the patent being declared invalid, and that the trial court had unjustly excluded a deposition taken according to established state procedure rather than federal procedure.20 U.S. at 424-426.  The others were more substantive: that the trial court erred in telling the jury that if the patent was on the hopperboy as such, it would be invalidated by any use of a hopperboy operating on the same principle as Evans' hopperboy; and that the trial court erred in ruling that if the patent was only on the improvements to the hopperboy, the patent was invalid for failing to describe precisely what the improvements were.
Evans died two years before the Supreme Court ruled on this second appeal; his factory had been destroyed by fire in 1819.  
Opinion of the Court
Writing for the four-justice majority, Justice Story rejected each of Evans' appeals:
 The trial court's admission of the miller's testimony was acceptable, because the miller did not have a direct interest in the outcome of the specific case, and excluding everyone who had even a general interest in the subject matter of a patent case would effectively exclude everyone in the industry.20 U.S. at 425-426.
 The trial court's exclusion of the deposition was proper because no amount of established local practice could overturn federal procedural rules.20 U.S. at 426.
 The trial court properly left the question of whether the Evans hopperboy was anticipated by the prior art to the jury.20 U.S. at 431-432
 The trial court properly ruled that if the Evans patent was only on the improvement to the hopperboy, it was void as a matter of law because the patent did not set forth how the invention differed from the hopperboys of the prior art.
Dissent
Three justices dissented: Johnson, Livingston, and Duvall.20 U.S. at 452.  The recorded dissenting opinion was however authored by Justice Livingston alone.  Livingston took particular issue with the Supreme Court's willingness to accept English precedents on patent law despite the growing differences between the British and American patent systems.
Skipping over Evans' procedural objections,20 U.S. at 452. Justice Livingston dissented on three points:20 U.S. at 438. 
 He contended that the specification of the Evans patent was not defective in the first place, because it provided sufficient information to "distinguish [the invention] from all other things before known", as required by the Patent Act of 1793, section 11.20 U.S. at 439  Even though the specification did not elaborate on the distinctions between the invention and the prior art, any person of ordinary skill in the art would be able to see how it differed from previous hopperboys, and would be on notice of what kind of hopperboy would infringe the patent. 
 He contended that a patent should not be entirely invalidated merely because its claims are overbroad.20 U.S. at 446.  Although there were English precedents for such an action, the American law did not require it, and there was no basis for imposing such a "very high penalty" when the patent had been filed in good faith without any intention to over-claim.  
 Even if such a penalty was proper, Livingston argued, it was based on a question of fact and should be assessed only by a jury.20 U.S. at 449.
Subsequent developments
The case was the culmination of a long series of previous decisions holding that an invention had not only to set forth how to implement the invention, but also how the invention differed from the prior art.  This doctrine ultimately gave rise to the requirement for separate, distinct claims, as adopted in the Patent Act of 1836.  It also gave rise to the written description requirement as distinct from the enablement requirement.Robert A. Matthews, Jr. (2015), 3 Annotated Patent Digest § 22:8. However, in modern jurisprudence the written description requirement did not re-emerge as a distinct issue  until the passage of the Patent Act of 1952.Shraddha A. Upadhyaya, The Postmodern Written Description Requirement: An Analysis of the Application of the Heightened Written Description Requirement to Original Claims, 4 Minn. Intell. Prop. Rev. 65, 71-72 (2002). It first entered modern jurisprudence as a distinct requirement when the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals issued its In re Ruschig decision in 1965.Stephen M. Maurer, Ideas into Practice: How Well Does U.S. Patent Law Implement Modern Innovation Theory?, 12 J. Marshall Rev. Intell. Prop. L. 644, 690 (2013).  This historical connection notwithstanding, authorities including Judge Rader have argued that Evans v. Eaton in fact supports considering enablement and written description as a single requirement, because the need for distinction from the prior art was addressed by the requirement for a separate claims section.Michael A. Greene, Gilding the Lilly: The S 112 Written Description Requirement Separate from Enablement, 52 B.C.L. Rev. E-Supplement 213, 220-21 (2011).
The case has also been noted as an early antecedent to the modern doctrine of obviousness,A New Way to Determine Obviousness: Applying the Pioneer Doctrine to 35 U.S.C. 103 (a), 29 AIPLA Q.J. 375, 429 (2001). and the doctrine of equivalents.Robert N. Young, Judge Versus Jury on the Scales of Justice: 35 U.S.C. S 112, P 6 "Equivalents" in the Balance, 32 J. Marshall L. Rev. 833, 848 (1999).Prosecution History Estoppel: The Choice Between Public Interests and Inventor's Property Rights, 36 Val. U. L. Rev. 239, 245-46 (2001).
Because the case is specific to the state of patent law before 1836, it has seldom been cited since the mid-19th century.  The most recent citation in a Supreme Court case is in the 1906 case of Burton v. United States, in which the case was cited as authority for the admissibility of testimony from witnesses with a general interest in the outcome of a case.202 U.S. 344, 393-94, 26 S. Ct. 688, 704, 50 L. Ed. 1057 (1906).  Before that, it was cited in Phoenix Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Raddin in 1887, as an early example of the court's objections to including unnecessarily lengthy quotations in the text of an appeal.120 U.S. 183, 193, 7 S. Ct. 500, 504, 30 L. Ed. 644 (1887).  It was also sometimes cited in cases over land patents, regarding the necessity for any grant to be clearly distinguished from other grants, for example in the 1837 case of Proprietors of Charles River Bridge v. Proprietors of Warren Bridge.36 U.S. 420, 650, 9 L. Ed. 773.
Works cited
References
External links
Category:1822 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
"""

From "Evans v. Hettich" ==> """
Evans v. Hettich, 20 U.S. (7 Wheat.) 453 (1822), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a witness's testimony could not be objected to merely because the witness suffered from "fits of derangement", as long as the witness was sane when he testified.
The case was the last of four successive Supreme Court cases related specifically to the Oliver Evans flour mill patent, and the second such case to be decided on the same day, following Evans v. Eaton.  Altogether the Evans patent generated twelve reported decisions from 1807 to 1822, making it "one of the most litigated patents in U.S. history".Tyler T. Ochoa, Patent and Copyright Term Extension and the Constitution: A Historical Perspective, 49 J. Copyright Soc'y U.S.A. 19, 58 (2001).
Because the arguments in the case addressed the same substantive issues of law as in Evans v. Eaton, the opinion in the case dealt only with certain procedural objections that Evans raised against the proceedings in the trial court.  In particular, the Supreme Court focused on the trial court's refusal to allow Evans to raise the question of whether one of the defendant's witnesses was subject to fits of derangement.
The case is among several from the Marshall Court in which, when ruling on questions of evidence law, the Court "[wrote] magisterial opinions that cited no authority at all."Kenneth W. Graham, Jr., Law and Equity: Caselaw and Rules of Civil Procedure, 21 Fed. Prac. & Proc. Evid. § 5002 (2d ed.).
Background
thumb|Evans' automated flour mill.
In the 1780s, inventor Oliver Evans developed a system for an automated flour mill that would revolutionize milling technology.  After keeping his invention a secret while he reduced it to practice, he initially obtained protection for it through individual state statutes, for example in Maryland and New Hampshire, because the patent system did not yet exist.  When the Patent Act of 1790 took effect, Evans obtained the third United States patent ever issued. No copies of this original patent are extant.
As all patents at the time had 14-year terms, his patent lapsed in 1804, and the invention entered the public domain.  Immediately upon the expiration of his patent, he sought a private bill that would allow him to renew it, the first such request ever made. He was unsuccessful until 1808 when the Tenth Congress passed a law authorizing the Secretary of State to grant him a new patent on the same terms as the original one."An Act for the Relief of Oliver Evans", 6 Stat. 70.  Evans obtained his new patent the day after the law took effect.Evans v. Jordan, 8 F. Cas. 872, 872 (C.C.D. Va. 1813).
In Evans v. Jordan, 13 U.S. 199 (1815), the Supreme Court ruled that millers who had installed Evans' invention after the expiration of the original patent but before it was reinstated were liable for infringement if they continued to use the technology.Edward C. Walterscheid, Patents and the Jeffersonian Mythology, 29 J. Marshall L. Rev. 269, 302-03 (1995).  This led to a national firestorm of litigation and controversy between Evans and numerous millers, of which this case and Evans v. Eaton were two examples.
In the district court for Pennsylvania, the defendant Hettich claimed that he did not use Evans' hopperboy, but instead used the earlier Stouffer hopperboy. The trial was presided over by Justice Bushrod Washington, who had a history of hostility to Evans' patent litigation.  Persuaded that the patent could only cover the improved method as a whole, rather than any of the improved machines, Justice Washington instructed the jury in such a way that the jurors had no choice but to return a verdict for the defendant, as they did.
Evans then appealed to the Supreme Court on a writ of error.  He alleged the same substantive errors as in Evans v. Eaton, and also alleged procedural errors in admitting and refusing to admit certain testimony.
Evans died two years before the Supreme Court ruled on either this case or his second appeal in Evans v. Eaton.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Joseph Story wrote for the court majority. No dissenting opinion is recorded. Since the questions of substantive patent law had been dealt with in Evans v. Eaton (1822), Justice Story confined himself to Evans' procedural objections.  Evans' first objection, that the trial court had improperly admitted the testimony of a witness who would benefit from the patent being invalidated, was rejected on the same grounds as in Evans v. Eaton, namely, that simply having a stake in the underlying legal issue was not enough to disqualify a witness.20 U.S. at 468-469.  Justice Story also upheld Justice Washington's decision to bar questions regarding whether Daniel Stouffer (the inventor of the Stouffer hopperboy) had paid Evans for a license since Stouffer was not on trial.20 U.S. at 470.  He additionally upheld the decision to refuse to allow Evans to object to an affidavit submitted by the defendant, on the same grounds that the court had subsequently allowed the defendant to challenge an affidavit submitted by Evans because Evans had already allowed the affidavit to be entered into evidence.
On the final objection, that the trial court had improperly prevented Evans from asking whether Stouffer (who may or may not have been a witness) was subject to "fits of derangement", Justice Story made the one widely cited pronouncement in the case:
[T]he question was properly overruled, because a person is subject to fits of derangement, is no objection either to his competency or credibility if he is sane at the time of giving his testimony.
 Subsequent developments 
Evans v. Hettich has been cited by only one subsequent Supreme Court opinion, in the 1850 case of Grove v. Brien.49 U.S. 429, 437, 12 L. Ed. 1142 (1850).
Works cited
 References 
External links
Category:1822 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
"""

From "Evans v. Jordan" ==> """
Evans v. Jordan, 13 U.S. (9 Cranch) 199 (1815), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that someone who had copied a patented invention after the patent had expired, and before the patent was restored by a private bill, would be liable for damages for patent infringement for any use continuing after the patent was restored.  It was the second published Supreme Court decision on patent law,Malla Pollack, The Owned Public Domain: The Constitutional Right Not to Be Excluded - or the Supreme Court Chose the Right Breakfast Cereal in Kellogg v. National Biscuit Co., 22 Hastings Comm. & Ent L.J. 265, 291 n119 (2000). and the first of four Supreme Court cases dealing with the Oliver Evans flour mill patent. Like other Supreme Court patent cases prior to Evans v. Eaton, however, this case did not deal with substantive patent law,Harold C. Wegner, Post-Merck Experimental Use and the "Safe Harbor", 15 Fed. Circuit B.J. 1, 37 (2005). but only with issues of statutory construction and infringement liability.
Background
thumb|Evans' automated flour mill.
In the 1780s, prolific inventor Oliver Evans developed a system for an automated flour mill that would revolutionize milling technology.  Initially keeping his invention a secret, he obtained protection for it through individual state statutes, for example in Maryland and New Hampshire, because the federal patent system did not yet exist.  When the Patent Act of 1790 took effect, Evans obtained the third United States patent ever issued. No copies of the patent are extant today.
As all patents at the time had 14-year terms, Evans' patent lapsed in 1804, and the invention entered the public domain.  Immediately upon the expiration of his patent, he sought a federal private bill that would allow him to renew it, the first such request ever made. He was unsuccessful until 1808, when the Tenth Congress passed a law authorizing the Secretary of State to grant him a new patent on the same terms as the original one."An Act for the Relief of Oliver Evans", 6 Stat. 70.
Crucially for this case, however, the law contained a proviso to protect those who had used the invention since the original patent expired:
provided [...] that no person who shall have used the said improvements, or have erected the same for use before the issuing of said patent shall be liable for damages therefor.13 U.S. at 200.
Evans obtained his new patent on January 22, 1808, the day after the law took effect.Evans v. Jordan, 8 F. Cas. 872, 872 (C.C.D. Va. 1813). But in the intervening years, the defendants Jordan and Morehead had constructed a mill using Evans' invention.
Evans sued Jordan and Morehead for patent infringement in the District Court of Virginia in 1810, seeking treble damages under the Patent Act amendments of 1800.  Jordan and Morehead defended on the basis that they had constructed the mill while the patent was expired, and the proviso to the 1808 law specifically excluded damages for using or building the invention while the patent was expired.  Therefore, the defendants urged, they should not be liable even for the continued use of the mill, since (1) such a reading would vitiate the purpose of the statute's exemption for use between 1804 and 1808, since it would effectively penalize them for having built the invention during that period, and (2) such legislation would be an unconstitutional taking, because it would effectively deprive them of the use of their lawfully constructed mill.
The circuit court was divided.  Justice Marshall as circuit judge authored an opinion in favor of Evans, reasoning that the language of the statute was plain on its face: it exempted only damages for use or construction of the invention that occurred while the patent was expired, and did not give any exemption for continuing use after the patent was renewed.  In particular, Marshall observed that "the act for the relief of Oliver Evans, considered independent of any former patent, would authorize him to sustain an action for the use of his invention, after the date of his patent, although the machinery itself had been constructed before its date."Evans v. Jordan, 8 F. Cas. 872, 874 (C.C.D. Va. 1813) aff'd, 13 U.S. 199, 3 L. Ed. 704 (1815).
However, the district judge Tucker did not agree with Marshall's reasoning.  Therefore, the case went to the Supreme Court on a certificate of division.
Opinion of the Court
The Court, minus Justice Todd who was absent, unanimously affirmed Justice Marshall's judgment in the district court.  The opinion was authored by Justice Washington.
The court held, first, that the statute plainly did not exempt infringers from damages for a continuing infringement after the patent was renewed,13 U.S. at 202. and second, that any hardship caused by this result could not justify construing the statute in a way that would be at odds with its plain meaning.13 U.S. at 203.
The opinion followed an emerging principle in the judicial decisions of the time on statutory construction: that a statute should never be construed in such a way as to thwart the legislature's policy intent.William N. Eskridge, Jr., All About Words: Early Understandings of the "Judicial Power" in Statutory Interpretation, 1776-1806, 101 Colum. L. Rev. 990, 1078, n444 (2001)
 Subsequent developments 
In the 21st century, the Supreme Court has cited the case in connection with Congressional manipulations of copyright terms.  It was cited to support both the 2003 opinion in Eldred v. Ashcroft,Eldred v. Ashcroft, 537 U.S. 186, 202, 123 S. Ct. 769, 779-80, 154 L. Ed. 2d 683 (2003) which upheld the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act, and the 2012 Supreme Court opinion in Golan v. Holder, which examined the long tradition of upholding legislative grants of intellectual property that had previously passed into the public domain.Golan v. Holder, 33 ITRD 1769, 132 S. Ct. 873, 886, 181 L. Ed. 2d 835 (2012).
 Works cited 
 References 
External links
Category:1815 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States Supreme Court patent case law
"""

From "Evans v. Michigan" ==> """
Evans v. Michigan, 568 U.S. 313 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that if a person accused of a crime receives a directed acquittal, the Double Jeopardy Clause bars a second trial of that person for the same crime, even if the person was acquitted in error..Evans v. Michigan www.scotusblog.com  Retrieved February 27, 2013
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
"""

From "Evenwel v. Abbott" ==> """
Evenwel v. Abbott, 136 S. Ct. 1120 (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the principle of one person, one vote, under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution allows states to use total population, not just total voting-eligible population, to draw legislative districts.Evenwel v. Abbott, No. 14-940, 578 U.S. ___, slip op. at 1 (2016).
 Background 
The suit originated when Sue Evenwel and Edward Pfenninger filed suit in the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, arguing that districts drawn based on total population dilute their vote compared to those in other Texas Senate districts. The district court dismissed the complaint for lack of a claim on which relief could be granted.Evenwel, slip op. at 6.
The question presented to the Court was the following: "Whether the 'one-person, one-vote' principle of the Fourteenth Amendment creates a judicially enforceable right ensuring that the districting process does not deny voters an equal vote."14-940 EVENWEL V. ABBOTT. Jurisdiction Noted
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court affirmed the District Court and held that total population may be used in redistricting. It did not rule on whether states are permitted to base districts on the number of eligible voters, instead of the total population.
See also
Edward Blum – director of Project on Fair Representation
Reynolds v. Sims – a United States Supreme Court case that ruled that state legislature districts had to be roughly equal in population.
 References 
External links
Analysis by Social Explorer
Category:United States One Person, One Vote Legal Doctrine
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Congressional districts of Texas
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
"""

From "Everson v. Board of Education" ==> """
Everson v. Board of Education, 330 U.S. 1 (1947), was a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court that applied the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to state law..  Prior to this decision, the clause, which states, "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion",in the United States Bill of Rights imposed limits only on the federal government, while many states continued to grant certain religious denominations legislative or effective privileges.
It was the first Supreme Court case incorporating the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment as binding upon the states through the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Everson marked a turning point in the interpretation and application of disestablishment law in the modern era. 
The case was brought by a New Jersey taxpayer against a tax-funded school district that provided reimbursement to parents of both public and private schooled people taking the public transportation system to school. The taxpayer contended that reimbursement given for children attending private religious schools violated the constitutional prohibition against state support of religion, and the use of taxpayer funds to do so violated the Due Process Clause. The Justices were split over the question whether the New Jersey policy constituted support of religion, with the majority concluding that the reimbursements were "separate and so indisputably marked off from the religious function" that they did not violate the constitution."Everson v. Board of Education: Conclusion", OYEZ U. S. Supreme Court Media", 1946 Both affirming and dissenting Justices, however, were decisive that the Constitution required a sharp separation between government and religion, and their strongly-worded opinions paved the way to a series of later court decisions that taken together brought about profound changes in legislation, public education, and other policies involving matters of religion. Both Justice Hugo Black's majority opinion and Justice Wiley Rutledge's dissenting opinion defined the First Amendment religious clause in terms of a "wall of separation between church and state."See 
"Everson v. Board of Education Opinion of the Court" by Hugo Black -full text;
"Everson v. Board of Education Dissenting Opinion" by Wiley Blount Rutledge - full text
Background
After repealing a former ban, a New Jersey law authorized payment by local school boards of the costs of transportation to and from schools, including private schools. Of the private schools that benefited from this policy, 96 percent were parochial Catholic schools. Arch R. Everson, a taxpayer in Ewing Township, filed a lawsuit alleging that the indirect aid to religion through the mechanism of reimbursing parents and students for costs incurred as a result of attending religious schools violated both the New Jersey Constitution and the First Amendment of the US Constitution. After a loss in the New Jersey Court of Errors and Appeals, then the state's highest court, Everson appealed to the US Supreme Court, purely on federal constitutional grounds.
Decision
The 5–4 decision was handed down on February 10, 1947, and was based upon James Madison's Memorial and Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments and Thomas Jefferson's Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom. In a majority opinion written by Justice Hugo Black, the Supreme Court ruled that the state bill was constitutionally permissible because the reimbursements were offered to all students, regardless of religion, and because the payments were made to parents, not to any religious institution. Perhaps as important as the actual outcome, however, was the interpretation given by the Court to the Establishment Clause. It reflected a broad interpretation of the Clause that was to guide the Court's decisions for decades to come. Black's language was sweeping:
The 'establishment of religion' clause of the First Amendment means at least this: Neither a state nor the Federal Government can set up a church. Neither can pass laws which aid one religion, aid all religions or prefer one religion over another. Neither can force nor influence a person to go to or to remain away from church against his will or force him to profess a belief or disbelief in any religion. No person can be punished for entertaining or professing religious beliefs or disbeliefs, for church attendance or non-attendance. No tax in any amount, large or small, can be levied to support any religious activities or institutions, whatever they may be called, or whatever form they may adopt to teach or practice religion. Neither a state nor the Federal Government can, openly or secretly, participate in the affairs of any religious organizations or groups and vice versa. In the words of Jefferson, the clause against establishment of religion by law was intended to erect 'a wall of separation between Church and State.' [...] The First Amendment has erected a wall between church and state. That wall must be kept high and impregnable. 330 U.S. 1, 15-16 and 18.
Justice Jackson wrote a dissenting opinion in which he was joined by Justice Frankfurter. Justice Rutledge wrote another dissenting opinion in which he was joined by Justices Frankfurter, Jackson and Burton. The four dissenters agreed with Justice Black's definition of the Establishment Clause but protested that the principles that he laid down would logically lead to the invalidation of the challenged law.
In his written dissent, Justice Rutledge argued:
The funds used here were raised by taxation. The Court does not dispute nor could it that their use does in fact give aid and encouragement to religious instruction. It only concludes that this aid is not 'support' in law. But Madison and Jefferson were concerned with aid and support in fact not as a legal conclusion 'entangled in precedents.' Here parents pay money to send their children to parochial schools and funds raised by taxation are used to reimburse them. This not only helps the children to get to school and the parents to send them. It aids them in a substantial way to get the very thing which they are sent to the particular school to secure, namely, religious training and teaching. 330 U.S. 1, 45.
Aftermath
In its first 100 years, the United States Supreme Court interpreted the Constitution's Bill of Rights as a limit on federal government and considered the states bound only by those rights granted to its citizens by their own state constitutions. Because the federal laws were then remote influences on most on the personal affairs of its citizens, minimal attention was paid by the Court to how those provisions in the federal Bill of Rights were to be interpreted.
Following the passage of the Thirteenth to the Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution at the end of the American Civil War, the Supreme Court would hear hundreds of cases involving conflicts over the constitutionality of laws passed by the states. The decisions in those cases were often criticized as resulting more from the biases of the individual Justices than the applicable rule of law or constitutional duty to protect individual rights. However, by the 1930s, the Court began consistently reasoning that the Fourteenth Amendment guaranteed citizens First Amendment protections from even state and local governments, a process known as incorporation.
The 1940 decision in Cantwell v. Connecticut was the first Supreme Court decision to apply the First Amendment's religious protections to the states. The case focusing on the so-called Free Exercise Clause. Everson followed in 1947 and was the first decision that incorporated the Establishment Clause. Numerous state cases followed disentangling the church from public schools, most notably the 1951 New Mexico case of Zellers v. Huff.Pfeffer, Leo (1967) Church, state, and freedom Beacon Press, Boston, Massachusetts, pages 545-549MacDougall, Curtis Daniel (1952) Understanding public opinion: A guide for newspapermen and newspaper readers Macmillan, New York, page 532Holscher, Kathleen A. (2008) Habits in the classroom: A court case regarding Catholic sisters in New Mexico  Doctoral Dissertation, Department of Religion, Princeton University, page iii, Abstract and Introduction  from Scribd
Similar First Amendment cases have flooded the courts in the decades following Everson. Having invoked Jefferson's metaphor of the wall of separation in the Everson decision, lawmakers and courts have struggled how to balance governments' dual duty to satisfy the Establishment Clause and the Free Exercise Clause, both of which are contained in the language of the amendment. The majority and dissenting Justices in Everson split over the very question, with Rutledge in the minority by insisting that the Constitution forbids "every form of public aid or support for religion."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 330
References
Sources
External links
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:1947 in United States case law
Category:Education in Mercer County, New Jersey
Category:Ewing Township, New Jersey
Category:Religion and education
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States education case law
Category:1947 in religion
Category:1947 in education
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Religious policy
"""

From "Ewing v. California" ==> """
Ewing v. California, 538 U.S. 11 (2003), is one of two cases upholding a sentence imposed under California's three strikes law against a challenge that it constituted cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment..  As in its prior decision in Harmelin v. Michigan,. the United States Supreme Court could not agree on the precise reasoning to uphold the sentence.  But, with the decision in Ewing and the companion case Lockyer v. Andrade, the Court effectively foreclosed criminal defendants from arguing that their non-capital sentences were disproportional to the crime they had committed.
Ewing was represented in the Court by Quin Denvir.  The Attorney General of California argued for the State of California. Michael Chertoff argued on behalf of the United States as amicus curiae.
Facts
Viewed separately from his criminal history, the crime Gary Ewing committed in this case is relatively benign.  In 2000, he stole three golf clubs worth $399 each from the pro shop of the El Segundo Golf Course in El Segundo, California.  He slipped them down the leg of his pants, and a shop employee called the police when he noticed Ewing limping out of the pro shop.Ewing, 538 U.S. at 17-18.
Ewing was charged with and convicted of felony grand theft of personal property.Ewing, 538 U.S. at 19.  Under California law, felony grand theft is a "wobbler," meaning that both the prosecutor and the trial judge have discretion to reduce classification of the seriousness of the crime to a misdemeanor.Ewing, 538 U.S. at 17. Although Ewing asked the trial court to exercise its discretion in this way, thus making him ineligible for sentencing under the three strikes law, the trial judge declined to do so, in part based on Ewing's extensive criminal history:Ewing, 538 U.S. at 19-20.
Ewing committed his first crime in 1984 when he was 22 years old. He pleaded guilty to theft, and received a six-month suspended sentence.
In 1988 Ewing was convicted of felony grand theft auto and sentenced to a year in jail and three years' probation.
In 1990, Ewing was convicted of petty theft and sentenced to 60 days in jail and three years' probation.
In 1992, Ewing was convicted of battery and sentenced to 30 days in jail.
Sometime in the first nine months of 1993, Ewing was convicted of burglary, possession of drug paraphernalia, appropriating lost property, unlawful possession of a firearm, and trespassing.
In October and November 1993, Ewing committed his most serious crimes to date—a string of burglaries and robbery at apartment complexes in Long Beach, California, where he made off with money, electronics, and credit cards.
In December 1993 Ewing was arrested on the premises of another Long Beach apartment complex. Police found on his person a knife used in the prior robbery, along with a glass cocaine pipe.  He was convicted of one count of first-degree robbery and three counts of residential burglary, and sentenced to nine years in prison.
Ewing was paroled in 1999, ten months before he stole the golf clubs from the pro shop in El Segundo.Ewing, 538 U.S. at 18-19.
At sentencing on the golf club theft, the judge classified the 1993 burglaries and robbery as "two strikes" and imposed the 25-to-life sentence under California's three strikes law.Ewing, 538 U.S. at 20.
Ewing appealed his conviction to the California Court of Appeal, which rejected his challenge that the 25-year sentence was grossly disproportional to the crime of stealing $1200 worth of goods in a non-violent incident.  The California Supreme Court denied review.
Plurality decision
Justice O'Connor wrote an opinion for herself, Chief Justice Rehnquist, and Justice Kennedy.  Under the Eighth Amendment, a narrow proportionality principle applies to non-capital sentences.  Before Ewing, the Court had from time to time examined lengthy sentences imposed for relatively minor crimes.  In Rummel v. Estelle, . the Court upheld a life sentence for obtaining $120.75 by false pretenses imposed on a three-time offender under Texas's recidivist statute.  In Solem v. Helm, . the Court struck down a life without parole (LWOP) sentence imposed on a defendant who had committed a seventh non-violent felony.  Most recently, in Harmelin v. Michigan,  the Court upheld a life without parole sentence imposed on a first-time offender convicted of possession of more than 650 grams of cocaine.  Against this backdrop of case law, O'Connor said that the gross disproportionality principle contained in the Eighth Amendment would require striking down only an extreme noncapital sentence, such as a life sentence for overtime parking.
Three-strikes laws, O'Connor observed, represented a new trend in criminal sentencing.  "These laws respond to widespread public concerns about crime by targeting the class of offenders who pose the greatest threat to public safety: career criminals."  Such laws were a "deliberate policy choice" on the part of legislatures to isolate those who have "repeatedly engaged in serious or violent criminal behavior" from the rest of society in order to protect public safety.  For O'Connor, the desire to punish repeat criminals more harshly was "no pretext" for the legitimate policy choice that the three-strikes law implemented.  Such laws serve the valid penological goals of incapacitation and deterrence.  Although California's three-strikes law may have generated some controversy, "we do not sit as a superlegislature to second-guess" the policy choices made by particular states.  "It is enough that the State of California has a reasonable basis for believing that dramatically enhanced sentences for habitual felons advances the goals of its criminal justice system in any substantial way."
She noted that Ewing's crime was not simply that of stealing three golf clubs—it was stealing three golf clubs after being convicted of two violent or serious felonies.  "In weighing the gravity of Ewing's offense, we must place on the scales not only his current felony, but also his long history of felony recidivism.  Any other approach would fail to accord proper deference to the policy judgments that find expression in the legislature's choice of sanctions."  Ewing's sentence might be long, but it "reflects a rational judgment, entitled to deference, that offenders who have committed serious or violent felonies and who continue to commit felonies must be incapacitated."  For this reason, O'Connor reasoned that Ewing's 25-years-to-life sentence did not violate the Eighth Amendment.
Justice Scalia was willing to accept that the Eighth Amendment contained a gross disproportionality requirement "if I felt I could intelligently apply it."  However, because a criminal sentence can have many justifications—not simply retribution, a goal to which proportionality is inherently linked— he thought it was impossible to intelligently apply a proportionality requirement to non-capital sentences.  Even so, Justice Scalia concurred in the judgment that Ewing's sentence was constitutional.
Justice Thomas believed that the Eighth Amendment contained no proportionality principle at all, and concurred in the judgment.
Dissents
Justice Stevens explained that a proportionality principle for non-capital sentences was compatible with the Eighth Amendment.  After all, judges must determine the proportionality of fines, bail, and death sentences.  There should be no reason why these lesser and greater forms of punishment should be subject to a proportionality requirement, but not the length of a prison sentence.
Judges have historically exercised much discretion in criminal sentencing.  Much of this discretion had been conferred by legislatures, who fixed criminal penalties over very broad ranges.  "It was not unheard of for a statute to authorize a sentence ranging from one year to life, for example."  In order to exercise this discretion, judges had to take into account all the goals of punishment in fixing a proportional sentence.  Stevens believed that the Eighth Amendment could support such determination of proportionality. "I think it clear that the Eighth Amendment's prohibition of cruel and unusual punishments expresses a broad and basic proportionality principle that takes into account all of the justifications for penal sanctions."
Justice Breyer conceded that successful proportionality challenges to criminal sentences should be rare, but argued that Ewing's sentence could be successfully challenged as disproportional.  For Breyer, three characteristics of a sentence bear on whether it is proportional: the length of the sentence in real time, the conduct that triggered the sentence, and the offender's criminal history.  Although Ewing was a recidivist, his present crime was not violent, and so he should not have been sentenced as harshly as a recidivist who had committed yet another violent crime.  The experience of some federal judges, as described by data aggregated by the United States Sentencing Commission, suggested that Ewing would not have been treated so harshly under federal sentencing law.  Finally, the fact that Ewing's sentence would have been the same if he had been convicted of a violent crime, like rape or murder, suggested it was too harsh a sentence for a shoplifter, even a recidivist shoplifter like Ewing.  "Outside the California three strikes context, Ewing's recidivist sentence is virtually unique in its harshness for his offense of conviction, and by a considerable degree."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 538
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Notes
External links
  Amicus brief of the Criminal Justice Legal Foundation
   Collection of documents from the American Bar Association
  Audio of oral argument -- OYEZ project, Northwestern University
  Transcript of oral argument
  Witkin project on California law
  Press release of ACLU
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:2003 in California
Category:Legal history of California
"""

From "Ex parte Bain" ==> """
Ex parte Bain, 121 U.S. 1 (1887), was a United States Supreme Court case involving grand jury indictments.
 Background 
George M. Bain, Jr. was indicted by a federal criminal grand jury and subsequently convicted for making a false report or statement as cashier of the Exchange National Bank of Norfolk, Virginia under U.S. Rev. Stat. § 5209. Post conviction, Bain filed a writ of habeas corpus, which the Supreme Court granted.Ex parte Bain, 121 U.S. 1, 2 (1887).
The Supreme Court granted Bain's motion after he produced evidence proving that the criminal grand jury indictment he was arrested under had been changed and was not resubmitted to the grand jury prior to his arrest. The Court found that even though the changes may have been negligible, federal courts lose jurisdiction to even make that determination once an indictment by a grand jury has been changed and not resubmitted.Ex parte Bain, 121 U.S. 1, 2 (1887) at 9. The grand jury indictment was changed, therefore there was no valid grand jury indictment as required for federal arrests under the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution.Ex parte Bain, 121 U.S. 1, 2 (1887) at 14.
 Holding 
When an indictment is filed with the court no change can be made in the body of the instrument by order of the court, or by the prosecuting attorney, without a resubmission of the case to the grand jury.  Even though a court may deem a change immaterial, it makes no difference. The instrument, as changed, is no longer the indictment of the grand jury which presented it.
 Subsequent developments 
The U.S. Supreme Court in Bain set a rigid standard for federal law enforcement officials to follow when obtaining a federal grand jury indictment. The Court sent the message that grand jury indictments, as required per the Fifth Amendment, would be held to a strict standard. In Bain, the Court concluded that any change in a grand jury indictment, no matter how mundane, would require resubmission to the grand jury. In 1985, upon returning to the issue of grand jury indictments in the case of United States v. Miller (1985), the Court decided on a somewhat looser interpretation of the Fifth Amendment requirements as set forth in Bain. Now, modifications to a grand jury indictments, if only to reduce charges, make simple changes, or remove text, are allowed.See United States v. Miller, 471 U.S. 130 (1985).
Bain has been overruled in part by United States v. Cotton, 535 U.S. 625 (2002).
 References 
 External links 
Category:1887 in United States case law
Category:Grand Jury Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Criminal cases in the Waite Court
Category:History of Norfolk, Virginia
"""

From "Ex parte Bigelow" ==> """
Ex parte Bigelow, 113 U.S. 328 (1885), was an application for a writ of habeas corpus to release the petitioner from imprisonment in the District of Columbia jail where he was held, as he alleges, unlawfully by John S. Crocker, the warden of the jail. He presents with the petition the record of his conviction and sentence in the Supreme Court of the District to imprisonment for five years under an indictment for embezzlement, and this record and the petition of the applicant present all that could be brought before the court on a return to the writ, if one were awarded..
Background
The petitioner relies on a single point from the facts which occurred at the trial. Pending before the court, there were fourteen indictments against the petitioner for embezzlement as an officer of the Bank of the Republic; and an order of the court had directed that they be consolidated under the statute and tried together. A jury was then impaneled and sworn, and the district attorney had made a statement of his case to the jury, when the court took a recess. When the court reconvened a short time later, it decided that the indictments could not be  tried together and so directed the jury to be discharged from further consideration of them, and rescinded the order of consolidation. The prisoner was thereupon tried before the same jury on one of those indictments and found guilty. All of this was against his protest and without his consent. The judgment was taken by appeal to the supreme court in general term, where it was affirmed.
It was argued that the impaneling and swearing the jury and the statement of his case by the district attorney put the prisoner in jeopardy with regard to all the offenses charged in the consolidated indictments, within the meaning of the Fifth Amendment of the Constitution, so that he could not be again tried for any of those offenses.
That amendment declares, among other things, that no person
It is said, that the court below exceeded its jurisdiction, and that this Court has the power, in such case and for that reason, to discharge the prisoner from confinement under a void sentence. The proposition itself is sound if the facts justify the conclusion that the court of the district was without authority in the matter.
But that court had jurisdiction of the offense described in the indictment on which the prisoner was tried. It had jurisdiction of the prisoner, who was properly brought before the court. It had jurisdiction to hear the charge and the evidence against the prisoner. It had jurisdiction to hear and to decide upon the defenses offered by him. The matter now presented was one of those defenses. Whether it was a sufficient defense was a matter of law on which that court must pass so far as it was purely a question of law, and on which the jury under the instructions of the court must pass if we can suppose any of the facts were such as required submission to the jury.
Article V of the Amendments, and Articles VI and VII, contain other provisions concerning trials in the courts of the United States designed as safeguards to the rights of parties. Do all of these go to the jurisdiction of the courts? And are all judgments void where they have been disregarded in the progress of the trial? Is a judgment of conviction void when a deposition has been read against a person on trial for crime because he was not confronted with the witness, or because the indictment did not inform him with sufficient clearness of the nature and cause of the accusation?
Decision
The high court confessed that it is not always very easy to determine what matters go to the jurisdiction of court so as to make its action when erroneous a nullity. But the general rule is that when the court has jurisdiction by law of the offense charged, and of the party who is so charged, its judgments are not nullities.
There are exceptions to this rule, but when they are relied on as foundations for relief in another proceeding, they could be clearly found to exist. In this case, no verdict nor judgment was rendered, no sentence enforced, and it remained with the trial court to decide whether the acts on which he relied were a defense to any trial at all.
The court was of the opinion that what was done by that court was within its jurisdiction. That the question thus raised by the prisoner was one which it was competent to decide, which it was bound to decide, and that its decision was the exercise of jurisdiction. Ex Parte Watkins, 3 Pet. 202; Ex Parte Parks, 93 U. S. 23; Ex Parte Yarbrough, 110 U. S. 653; Ex Parte Crouch, 112 U. S. 178.
Without giving an opinion as to whether that decision was sound or not, the court decided it could not grant the writ being asked for, and it was denied.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:United States jury case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of the District of Columbia
"""

From "Ex parte Bollman" ==> """
Ex parte Bollman, 8 U.S. (4 Cranch) 75 (1807), was a case brought before the United States Supreme Court. Bollman held that the constitutional definition of treason excluded mere conspiracy to levy war against the United States.
Erick Bollman and Samuel Swartwout were civilians who became implicated in the Burr-Wilkinson Plot. This plot supposedly consisted of Aaron Burr and James Wilkinson attempting to create an empire in the United States, ruled by Burr. In 1806, Wilkinson informed President Thomas Jefferson of the plot, ending whatever may have actually been planned. Bollman and Swartwout attempted to recruit others into the plot, but these individuals informed the military, which promptly arrested them.
The Supreme Court decided that "To constitute a levying of war, there must be an assemblage of persons for the purpose of effecting by force a treasonable purpose. Enlistments of men to serve against government is not sufficient."
See also
 Cramer v. United States: a later treason case before the high court.
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 8
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:Criminal cases in the Marshall Court
Category:Suspension Clause case law
Category:1807 in United States case law
Category:Treason Clause case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three venue case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:Original habeas cases
"""

From "Ex parte Crow Dog" ==> """
Ex parte Crow Dog, 109 U.S. 556 (1883), is a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States that followed the death of one member of a Native American tribe at the hands of another on reservation land.{{refn|The phrase ex parte, meaning for or by one side only, has traditionally been used in the captions of petitions for the writ of habeas corpus, although such proceedings were not ex parte in any significant sense. This is because a writ of habeas corpus is a "prerogative writ" issued in the name of the monarch, the title appearing as R v (Defendant), ex parte (Claimant); in the US, this has been reduced to Ex parte (Claimant).|group=fn}} Crow Dog was a member of the Brulé band of the Lakota Sioux. On August 5, 1881 he shot and killed Spotted Tail, a Lakota chief; there are different accounts of the background to the killing. The tribal council dealt with the incident according to Sioux tradition, and Crow Dog paid restitution to the dead man's family. However, the U.S. authorities then prosecuted Crow Dog for murder in a federal court. He was found guilty and sentenced to hang.
The defendant then petitioned the Supreme Court for a writ of habeas corpus, arguing that the federal court had no jurisdiction to try cases where the offense had already been tried by the tribal council.Ex parte Crow Dog, . The court found unanimously for the plaintiff and Crow Dog was therefore released. This case was the first time in history that an Indian was held on trial for the murder of another Indian. The case led to the Major Crimes Act in 1885, which placed some major crimes (initially seven, now 15) under federal jurisdiction if committed by an Indian against another Indian on a reservation or tribal land. This case was the beginning of the plenary power legal doctrine that has been used in Indian case law to limit tribal sovereignty.
Background
thumb|left|200px|alt=map of Great Sioux Reservation|Great Sioux Reservation
Treaties and statutes
Crow Dog was a Brulé subchief who lived on the Great Sioux Reservation, in the part that is now the Rosebud Indian Reservation in south-central South Dakota on its border with Nebraska. The tribe had made several treaties with the United States, the most significant being the 1868 Treaty of Fort Laramie.2  998 (Charles J. Kappler, ed.,1904).  This treaty provided that Indians agreed to turn over those accused of crimes to the Indian agent, a representative of the U.S. government in Indian affairs. The treaty also stipulated that tribal members would stay on the reservation provided (which included the Black Hills) unless three-fourths of the adult male tribal members agreed otherwise.Kappler, at 1002. In 1874, Colonel George Armstrong Custer led a party into the Black Hills to investigate rumors of gold. Once he announced the discovery of gold on French Creek, the Black Hills Gold Rush brought prospectors into that area in violation of the Fort Laramie treaty.2  998 (Charles J. Kappler, ed.,1904). The Lakota protested in 1875 to no avail, as the United States demanded that the Lakota sell the Black Hills.,  79-80 (1999). The United States then declared the Lakota as hostile, which started the Black Hills War.Lazarus, at 84.  The war included the Battle of the Rosebud, the Battle of the Little Bighorn and the Battle of Slim Buttes, among others.  The war ended in 1877. Crow Dog fought in this war, while the man he later killed, Spotted Tail, did not. 25 (1995). Congress passed a law later in 1877 () that took the Black Hills away from the tribe, contrary to the language of the treaty.  166 (Charles J. Kappler, ed., 1904) ().
Murder of Spotted Tail
thumb|right|200px|alt=photograph of Chief Crow Dog|The shooter, Chief Crow Dog (Kangi Sunká)
On August 5, 1881, Crow Dog shot and killed Spotted Tail, who was the uncle of Oglala Lakota war leader Crazy Horse.,  83 (2d ed. 1976).  Spotted Tail had not been selected as a chief by the tribe, but instead had been appointed by General George Crook in 1876, which hurt him in the view of many of the tribe.,  40 (1919). He was viewed as an accommodationist and the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) referred to him as the "great peace chief."Michael A. Powell, Crow Dog and the Issue of Tribal Jurisdiction,  283 (Gordon Morris Bakken, ed., 2000). He also supervised the tribal police of about 300 men.Hyde, at 293. In contrast, Crow Dog was a traditionalistPowell, at 283. and although he had been a captain in the tribal police, he was fired by Spotted Tail sometime after a July 4, 1881, confrontation during which Crow Dog pointed a rifle at Spotted Tail.,  198-99 (2004).
On August 5, tensions further escalated at a tribal meeting where a number of tribal members criticized Spotted Tail for taking Light-in-the-Lodge, the wife of Medicine Bear, a crippled man, into his household as his second wife., at 40; , at 108-09; Gaylen L. Box, Crow Dog: Tribal Sovereignty & Criminal Jurisdiction In Indian Country,  13 (2007). It was believed that the killing occurred that day as the result of Crow Dog and Spotted Tail meeting, both armed, and mistaking the other man's intentions., at 201. In another version of the story, Crow Dog was appointed by the tribal council to head the tribal police, which undermined the authority of Spotted Tail. Crow Dog discovered that Spotted Tail was taking money from ranchers for "grazing rights" and he denounced him for it, while Spotted Tail defended the practice., at 40; , at 313-14. A later conflict with the Indian agent forced the tribal police to disband, and Crow Dog lost his position., at 331. This version makes no mention of another man's wife being the reason for the killing, and states that Crow Dog ambushed Spotted Tail to gain power in the tribe., at 334. There is no consensus among historians as to which events happened as described.
In either case, the matter was settled within the tribe, following longstanding tribal custom, by Crow Dog making a restitution payment of $600, eight horses, and one blanket to Spotted Tail's family., at 1194; ,  46-66 (1993); ,  135 (2003); ,  4 (1998); , at 110.
Trial
thumb|right|200px|alt=photograph of Chief Spotted Tail|The victim, Chief Spotted Tail (Siŋté Glešká)
Following the killing and the settlement under tribal customs, the Indian agent had Crow Dog arrested and taken to Fort Niobrara, Nebraska., at 4; , at 110-11. Within 20 days, the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of the Interior concluded that the Federal Enclave Act of 1854Now codified at . as modified by the Assimilative Crimes Act allowed the territorial death penalty to be applied to Crow Dog., at 113-15.  In September 1881, Crow Dog was indicted by a federal grand jury for murder and manslaughter under the laws of the Dakota Territory. In March 1882 the case was heard by Judge Gideon C. Moody at the First Judicial District Court of Dakota, located in Deadwood, South Dakota., at 125-28. The court appointed A. J. Plowman to represent Crow Dog,, at 135; , at 121. who claimed that he had been punished and made reparations according to the customs of the Brulé Sioux tribe. According to a contemporary news report of the Deadwood Times it was the first time "in the history of the country, [that] an Indian is held for trial for the murder of another Indian.", at 1193. The trial was viewed at the time as a sham, and despite testimonies from Indian witnesses stating that Spotted Tail had killed a rival once before, that Spotted Tail drew a pistol on Crow Dog, and that Spotted Tail's intention was to kill Crow Dog,,  271 (1877); , at 122.  Crow Dog was convicted and sentenced to be hanged on May 11, 1882., at 125.  The prosecution had presented five Indian witnesses who stated that Spotted Tail was ambushed, and some witnesses stated he was unarmed. In an unusual move for a death penalty case, Moody released Crow Dog, allowing him to go home pending his appeal to the territorial Supreme Court. Surprising many of the white citizens of the area, Crow Dog returned to court as required. In May 1882, the territorial Supreme Court affirmed the conviction, and the execution was rescheduled for May 11, 1883.United States v. Crow Dog, 14 N.W. 437 (Dak. 1882).  Crow Dog then petitioned the United States Supreme Court for a writ of habeas corpus and the Supreme Court accepted the case.Crow Dog, 109 U.S. at 557; , at 1195; , at 136; ,  168-70 (1983); Powell, at 284.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|left|200px|alt=photograph of Justice T. Stanley Matthews|Justice T. Stanley Matthews, author of the unanimous opinion
Justice Stanley Matthews delivered the opinion of the unanimous court.  Matthews noted that Crow Dog was indicted for murder under a statute prohibiting murder on federal land.. Matthews then looked at the federal laws dealing with Indians, including a statute that applied the prohibition on murder to Indian reservations. and another covering exceptions to prosecution.. The first statute prohibited murder on federal land, the second statute applied the first statute to reservations, and the last had specific exceptions to prosecution. Matthews felt that this last section was the most critical one in the case, with the section stating unequivocally that federal law: "shall not be construed to extend to [crimes committed by one Indian against the person or property of another Indian, nor to] any Indian committing any offense in the Indian country who has been punished by the local law of the tribe". (brackets in original). Matthews rejected the contention of the United States that the 1868 Treaty of Fort Laramie implicitly repealed the exceptions to prosecution. He stated that since the law had not been amended or changed, and since implied repeals are not favored unless the implication is necessary, to allow such a repeal would be to reverse the general policy of the United States. Matthews said that such a repeal required a "clear expression of the intention of Congress," which was not present in the case. In a clear evocation of the principle of tribal sovereignty,Robert N. Clinton, There Is No Federal Supremacy Clause For Indian Tribes  113 (2002). Matthews stated:
It tries them, not by their peers, nor by the customs of their people, nor the law of their land, but by superiors of a different race, according to the law of a social state of which they have an imperfect conception, and which is opposed to the traditions of their history, to the habits of their lives, to the strongest prejudices of their savage nature; one which measures the red man's revenge by the maxims of the white man's morality.Crow Dog, 109 U.S. at 571; , at 26.; Kevin K. Washburn, Federal Criminal Law and Tribal Self-Determination 84  779 (2006).
As a result, the Court concluded, the First Judicial District Court of Dakota was without jurisdiction to hear the case.  The writ of habeas corpus was issued, discharging Crow Dog from federal custody.Crow Dog, 109 U.S. at 572; , at 129.
Subsequent developments
Major Crimes Act of 1885
Shocked by the Supreme Court's decision and under strong pressure from the BIA,Clinton, at 113. Congress passed the Major Crimes Act in response., at 4, 29; Powell, at 286. The Major Crimes Act placed seven serious felony offenses (with amendments over the years, now fifteen) under the jurisdiction of the federal government.  Those wishing to assimilate Indians into mainstream white society wanted to do away with the "heathen" tribal laws and apply white laws to the tribes., at 136-37;  66 (Kermit L. Hall, ed., 2001).  The BIA had also been attempting since 1874 to extend federal jurisdiction over major crimes to reservations, without any success., at 115-16, 134-35. Beginning in 1882, the Indian Rights Association (IRA) also tried to extend federal jurisdiction, but in a different manner. 40-50 (Carrie E. Garrow & Sarah Deer, eds., 2004); , at 134. The IRA believed that the tribes would be better served by a completely separate court system, modeled after U.S. courts and called agency courts. The only appeal would be to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.Garrow, at 40-50.  The BIA opposed that approach, preferring to try only major crimes in the nearest federal court. Ex parte Crow Dog provided the BIA a perfect example of why this was needed, along with an incident involving Spotted Tail's son, Spotted Tail, Jr., in which the younger Spotted Tail participated in a fight during which three Brulé were killed., at 133. The younger Spotted Tail was also confined pending murder charges, and it took a direct order of the Secretary of the Interior for the local BIA agents to comply with the Supreme Court decision before he was released., at 133; Washburn, at 779. The BIA also implemented regulations in 1883 criminalizing traditional tribal practices such as war dances and polygamy.Box, at 14.  Between the BIA's efforts and the IRA efforts, the law was passed in 1885, making seven offenses federal crimes., at 136-40.  Many members of the Indian tribes were bitter with this outcome for decades afterwards. Wayne Ducheneaux, president of the National Congress of American Indians, testified before Congress on the matter in 1968:Robert D. Probasco, Indian Tribes, Civil Rights, and Federal Courts, 7  119 (2001).
Before all this came about we had our own method of dealing with law-breakers and in settling disputes between members. That all changed when Crow Dog killed Spotted Tail. Of course, our method of dealing with that was Crow Dog should go take care of Spotted Tail's family, and if he didn't do that we'd banish him from the tribe. But that was considered too barbaric, and thought perhaps we should hang him like civilized people do, so they passed the Major Crimes Act that said we don't know how to handle murderers and they were going to show us.Probasco, at 119.
In 2000, Larry Echo Hawk, a Pawnee who had been the Attorney General of Idaho and was later the Assistant Secretary of the Interior for Indian Affairs, noted that: "The Major Crimes Act was designed to give the federal government authority to criminally prosecute seven specific major crimes committed by Indians in Indian Country. It was a direct assault on the sovereign authority of tribal government over tribal members."Larry Echo Hawk, Review: Justice for Native Americans Requires Returning to Our Constitutional Origins Vine Deloria, Jr. & David E. Wilkins Tribes, Treaties, and Constitutional Tribulations, 4  101 (2000).
Tribal sovereigntyCrow Dog had a tremendous impact on tribal sovereignty., at 219.  The decision recognized two distinct concepts in addition to those related to criminal law. First, Justice Matthews had noted that under Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, (1831)Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, . the Brulé tribe had a right to its own law in Indian country.Anthony G. Gulig & Sidney L. Harring, An Indian cannot get a morsel of pork...": A retrospective on Crow Dog, Lone Wolf, Blackbird, Tribal Sovereignty, Indian Land and writing Indian history, 38  87 (2002). Part of this ruling was based on American constitutional tradition – at that time, not all Indians were U.S. citizens and according to Matthews did not have a "voice in the selection of representatives and the framing of the laws."Crow Dog, 109 U.S. at 569; Clinton, at 113.  The case held that Indian tribes retain sovereignty, and is still valid law. For example, United States v. Lara, (2004)United States v. Lara, . cited Crow Dog when holding that both a tribe and the federal government could prosecute Lara, as they were separate sovereigns. Subsequent cases have supported the concept "that tribal Indians living in Indian country are citizens of the United States first (under the plenary power doctrine), the tribes second, and the states third, and then only to the extent that Congress chooses."Philip P. Frickey, Congressional Intent, Practical Reasoning, And The Dynamic Nature Of Federal Indian Law, 78  1137 (1990).
Currently the tribes are authorized to operate their own courts, not as a right of tribal sovereignty, but under a federal law.Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, Jun. 18, 1934, ch. 576 ; Box, at 15-16. As of 2007, about half of the federally recognized tribes have tribal courts.Box, at 14. The power of these courts was limited to minor crimes with a maximum punishment of a $5,000 fine and imprisonment of no more than one yearIndian Civil Rights Act of 1968, April 11, 1968, . until the passage of the Tribal Law and Order Act of 2010. Under this new act, tribes may sentence offenders for up to three years per offense and a $15,000 fine.Tribal Law and Order Act of 2010, Jul. 29, 2010, . As a result of Crow Dog and ensuing legislation, jurisdiction in Indian country is complex, as shown by the following table:Matthew Handler, Tribal Law And Disorder: A Look at a System of Broken Justice in Indian Country and the Steps Needed to Fix It,  (2009).
 Offender  Victim  Crime  Criminal Jurisdiction  Law  Authority Indian Indian Non-major  Tribal Tribal Indian Any  Major  Federal/Tribal concurrent Federal/Tribal concurrent Major Crimes Act Indian Non-Indian Non-major  Federal/Tribal concurrent State General Crimes Act Non-Indian Indian Any  Federal Federal General Crimes Act Non-Indian Non-Indian Any  State State
Plenary power doctrine
The court also created the plenary power doctrine, holding that the federal court did not have jurisdiction because Congress had not passed a law giving jurisdiction to the federal courts or taking away the rights of the tribe.Gulig, at 87. Crow Dog was the last in a line of sovereignty cases that began with Cherokee Nation; the next major case, United States v. Kagama'' (1886),United States v. Kagama, . upheld the plenary power of Congress to enact the Major Crimes Act.Gulig, at 87. The plenary power doctrine allowed Congress to enact any law that it wanted to pass, over the opposition of the tribe or tribes affected. Congress subsequently used this power to breach the Medicine Lodge Treaty with the Kiowa by reducing the size of the Kiowa reservation without their consent.,  29 (2000). The use of this power led to complaints of being subject to a lawmaking body without representation, especially prior to being granted U.S. citizenship in 1924.Jack Blair, Demanding a Voice in Our Own Best Interest: A Call for a Delegate of the Cherokee Nation to the United States House of Representatives,  (1996).
See also
 Criminal law in the Waite Court
Notes
References
External links
Category:1883 in United States case law
Category:Criminal cases in the Waite Court
Category:Lakota leaders
Category:Native American history of South Dakota
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Ex parte Curtis" ==> """
Ex parte Curtis, 106 U.S. 371 (1882), is an 8–1 ruling by the United States Supreme Court that the Act of August 15, 1876 was a constitutional exercise of the enumerated powers of the United States Congress under Article I, Section 8 of the United States Constitution.
The petitioner had been convicted of receiving money for political purposes in violation of the Act. The petitioner asked the Supreme Court for a writ of habeas corpus.
Majority opinion
Chief Justice Morrison Waite wrote the opinion for the majority. The constitutional grounds under which the petitioner challenged the Act were not discussed by the Court. Waite noted that Congress had a lengthy history of passing laws restricting the rights and privileges of civil servants, and the constitutionality of such laws had never before been challenged. 
Next, Waite affirmed that Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution clearly gave Congress the power to determine for itself what was proper in the realm of reining in political corruption:
The evident purpose of Congress in all this class of enactments has been to promote efficiency and integrity in the discharge of official duties, and to maintain proper discipline in the public service. Clearly such a purpose is within the just scope of legislative power, and it is not easy to see why the act now under consideration does not come fairly within the legitimate means to such an end..
Waite refused to pass judgment on the validity of the writ of habeas corpus, concluding that the Supreme Court's "jurisdiction is limited to the single question of the power of the court to commit the prisoner for the act of which he has been convicted."Ex parte Curtis, 106 U.S. at 375.
Dissenting opinion
Associate Justice Joseph P. Bradley dissented. He concluded that the Act impermissibly infringed on First Amendment rights of freedom of speech and freedom of association:
The offices of the government do not belong to the Legislative Department to dispose of on any conditions it may choose to impose.... To deny to a man the privilege of associating and making joint contributions with such other citizens as he may choose, is an unjust restraint of his right to propagate and promote his views on public affairs. The freedom of speech and of the press, and that of assembling together to consult upon and discuss matters of public interest, and to join in petitioning for a redress of grievances, are expressly secured by the Constitution. The spirit of this clause covers and embraces the right of every citizen to engage in such discussions, and to promote the views of himself and his associates freely, without being trammelled by inconvenient restrictions. Such restrictions, in my judgment, are imposed by the law in question.Ex parte Curtis, 106 U.S. at 376-377.
Justice Bradley also concluded that the Act was overbroad and that the same positive ends (ending political corruption) could have been achieved by alternative, narrower means.Ex parte Curtis, 106 U.S. at 377.
Assessment
One of the interesting aspects of the majority's decision is that it believed Congress prohibited not civil servants from making political donations on their own but making such donations through their supervisors.Rabin, Jack; Vocino, Thomas; Hildreth, W. Bartley; and Miller, Gerald J. Handbook of Public Personnel Administration. Washington, D.C.: CRC Press, 1994, p. 77. Justice Bradley dissented, in part, by arguing that the law banned even voluntary contributions made through superiors (a ban that he felt was unconstitutional).
At least one commentator has concluded that Ex parte Curtis is still "good law."
References
External links
Category:Campaign finance in the United States
Category:Civil service in the United States
Category:United States election law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1882 in United States case law
"""

From "Ex parte Endo" ==> """
Ex parte Mitsuye Endo, 323 U.S. 283 (1944), was a United States Supreme Court ex parte decision handed down on December 18, 1944, in which the Justices unanimously ruled that the U.S. government could not continue to detain a citizen who was "concededly loyal" to the United States..  Although the Court did not touch on the constitutionality of the exclusion of people of Japanese ancestry from the West Coast, which it had found not to violate citizen rights in its Korematsu v. United States decision on the same date, the Endo ruling nonetheless led to the reopening of the West Coast to Japanese Americans after their incarceration in camps across the U.S. interior during World War II.
The Court also found as part of this decision that if Congress is found to have ratified by appropriation any part of an executive agency program, the bill doing so must include a specific item referring to that portion of the program.
Background
The plaintiff in the case, Mitsuye Endo, had worked as a clerk for the California Department of Motor Vehicles in Sacramento prior to the war. After the attack on Pearl Harbor had soured public sentiment toward Japanese Americans, Endo and other Nisei state employees were harassed and eventually fired because of their Japanese ancestry.Brian Niiya. "Ex parte Endo" Densho Encyclopedia (accessed 5 June 2014). Civil rights attorney and then-president of the Japanese American Citizens League Saburo Kido, with the San Francisco attorney James Purcell, began a legal campaign to assist these workers, but the mass removal authorized by Executive Order 9066 in early 1942 complicated their case. Endo was selected as a test case to file a writ of habeas corpus because of her profile as an Americanized, "assimilated" Nisei. She was a practicing Christian, had never been to Japan, spoke only English and no Japanese, and had a brother in the US Army.Fred T. Korematsu Institute, "Ex parte Mitsuye Endo " (accessed 5 June 2014).
On July 13, 1942, Purcell filed the habeas corpus petition for Endo's release from the Tule Lake concentration camp, where she and her family were being held. Judge Michael J. Roche heard Endo's case in July 1942 but did not issue a ruling until July 1943, when he denied her petition without explanation. An appeal was perfected to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in August 1943, and in April 1944, Judge William Denman sent the case to the Supreme Court, rather than issuing a ruling himself. By then, Endo had been transferred to Topaz, Utah—Tule Lake having been converted to a segregated detention center for "disloyal" Japanese American inmates.
In an effort to halt her case, the War Relocation Authority had offered to release her from camp if she agreed not to return to the West Coast, but Endo refused and so remained in confinement.
Endo, Korematsu, and end of internment
The unanimous opinion ruling in Endo's favor was written by Justice William O. Douglas, with Justices Frank Murphy and Owen Roberts concurring. It stopped short of addressing the question of the government's right to exclude citizens based on military necessity but instead focused on the actions of the WRA: "In reaching that conclusion [that Endo should be freed] we do not come to the underlying constitutional issues which have been argued.... [W]e conclude that, whatever power the War Relocation Authority may have to detain other classes of citizens, it has no authority to subject citizens who are concededly loyal to its leave procedure."
Because of that avoidance, it is very difficult to reconcile Endo with Korematsu, which was decided the same day. As Justice Roberts pointed out in his Korematsu dissent, distinguishing the cases required a reliance on the legal fiction that Korematsu dealt with only the exclusion of Japanese Americans, not their detention, and that Fred Korematsu could have gone anywhere else in the United States, when in reality he would have been subject to the detainment found illegal in Endo.Paul Finkelman, "The Japanese Internment Cases." Historic U.S. Court Cases: An Encyclopedia, Vol. 2, ed. John W. Johnson (Taylor & Francis, 2001) pp722-31. In short, Endo determined that a citizen could not be imprisoned if the government was unable to prove disloyalty, but Korematsu allowed the government a loophole to punish that citizen criminally for refusing to be illegally imprisoned.Shiho Imai. "Korematsu v. United States" Densho Encyclopedia (accessed 5 June 2014).
The Roosevelt administration, having been alerted to the Court's decision, issued Public Proclamation No. 21 the day before the Endo and Korematsu rulings were made public, on December 17, 1944. It rescinded the exclusion orders and declared that Japanese Americans could begin returning to the West Coast in January 1945.
See also
 Hirabayashi v. United States
 Yasui v. United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 323
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Internment of Japanese Americans
Category:1944 in United States case law
Category:Suspension Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
"""

From "Ex parte Fisk" ==> """
Ex parte Fisk, 113 U.S. 713 (1885), was a case in which Francis B. Fogg brought suit in the Supreme Court of the State of New York against Fisk to recover the sum of $63,250 on the allegation of false and fraudulent representations made by Fisk in the sale of certain mining stocks.. Fisk was held in contempt when he declined to answer questions his attorney believed violated the Fifth Amendment.
Background
From that suit, the plaintiff obtained the following court order:
A motion to vacate this order was overruled, and the judgment affirmed by the Court of Appeals.
The defendant then appeared before the court and submitted to a partial examination, answering some questions and objecting to others, until, pending one of the adjournments of the examination, he procured an order removing the case to the circuit court of the United States. In that court, an order was made to continue the examination before a master, to whom the matter was referred. The defendant refusing to be sworn and declining to be examined, he was brought before the circuit court on an application for attachment for a contempt in refusing to obey the order.
Without disposing of this motion, the circuit court made another order, to-wit:
It is hereby ordered and adjudged that the motion to punish the said defendant for such contempt stand adjourned to the next motion day of this court, to-wit, on the 28th day of March, 1884."
It is further ordered that the defendant Clinton B. Fisk, be, and he is hereby, directed and required to attend personally on the 14th day of March, 1884, before the Honorable Addison Brown, one of the judges of this court at a stated term thereof at his chambers in the post office building in said City of New York at eleven o'clock in the forenoon of that day, then and there, and on such other days as may be designated, to be examined and his testimony and deposition taken, and continued as a party before trial, pursuant to section 870 et seq. of the Code of Civil Procedure, and for the purposes mentioned in said order of January 12, 1883, and February 12, 1884, heretofore made in this action."
The defendant appeared before the court in pursuance of this order and, stating that he was advised by counsel that the court had no jurisdiction to require him to answer in this manner to the questions propounded to him by the counsel for plaintiff, he refused to do so to avoid self incrimination. For this, on further proceeding, he was held by the court to be in contempt and fined $500 and committed to the custody of the marshal until it was paid. It is to be relieved of this imprisonment that he prays here the writ of habeas corpus.
Decision
Justice Miller delivered the opinion of the court. He stated the facts as above recited and continued:
Justice Miller went on to give an illustration from act of Congress prescribing rules of evidence in § 858 of the Revised Statutes, which read:
Specifically the following sections of the Revised Statutes, in chapter XVII, on evidence:
SEC. 861. The mode of proof, in the trial of actions at common law, shall be by oral testimony and examination of witnesses in open court, except as hereinafter provided.
SEC. 863. The testimony of any witness may be taken in any civil cause, pending in a district or circuit court, by deposition de bene esse when the witness lives at a greater distance from the place of trial than one hundred miles, or is bound on a voyage to sea, or is about to go out of the United States, or out of the district in which the case is to be tried, and to a greater distance than one hundred miles from the place of trial, before the time of trial, or when he is ancient or infirm.
The remainder of this section and §§ 864 and 865 are directory as to the officer before whom the deposition may be taken, the notice to the opposite party, and the manner of taking, testifying, and returning the deposition to the court.
SEC. 866. In any case where it is necessary, in order to prevent a failure or delay of justice, any of the courts of the United States may grant a dedimus potestatum to take depositions according to common usage, and any circuit court, upon application to it as a court of equity, may, according to the usages of chancery, direct depositions to be taken in perpetuam rei memoriam, if they relate to any matter that may be cognizable in any court of the United States.
Section 867 authorizes the courts of the United States, in their discretion and according to the practice in the state courts, to admit evidence so taken, and §§ 868, 869, and 870 prescribe the manner of taking such depositions, and of the use of the subpoena duces tecum, and how it may be obtained. No one can examine these provisions for procuring testimony to be used in the courts of the United States and have any reasonable doubt that, so far as they apply, they were intended to provide a system to govern the practice in that respect in those courts. They are, in the first place, too complete, too far-reaching, and too minute to admit of any other conclusion. But we have not only this inference from the character of the legislation, but it is enforced by the express language of the law in providing a defined mode of proof in those courts, and in specifying the only exceptions to that mode which shall be admitted.
This mode is "by oral testimony and examination of witnesses in open court, except as hereinafter provided."
Justice Miller continued: 
The court found that if the acts of Congress forbid the use of this kind of testimony in the courts of the United States, no order for taking it made in the state court while the case was pending in that court, with a view to its use on a trial there, can change the law of evidence in the federal court. In that case, after it had been once heard on appeal in the Supreme Court of Illinois, it was removed into the circuit court of the United States.
A writ would be issued on application to the clerk.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:Fraud trials
"""

From "Ex parte Garland" ==> """
Ex parte Garland, 71 U.S. (4 Wall.) 333 (1866), was an important United States Supreme Court case involving the disbarment of former Confederate officials.
Background
In January 1865, the US Congress passed a law that effectively disbarred former members of the Confederate government by requiring a loyalty oath to be recited by any federal court officer that affirmed that the officer had never served in the Confederate government.
Augustus Hill Garland, an attorney and a former Confederate Senator from Arkansas, subsequently received a pardon from US President Andrew Johnson. Garland then came before the court and pleaded that the act of Congress was a bill of attainder and an ex post facto law, which unfairly punished him for the crime for which he had been pardoned, and so was unconstitutional.
Decision
In a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that the law was both a bill of attainder and an ex post facto law. The court also ruled that the president can exercise the pardon power at any time after the commission of the crime, and that Garland was beyond the reach of punishment of any kind because of his prior presidential pardon.On limitations to the president's pardon power, see: 
The court also stated that counselors are officers of the court, not officers of the United States, and that their removal was an exercise of judicial power, not legislative power. The law was struck down as unconstitutional, which opened the way for former Confederate government officials to return to positions in the federal judiciary.
Notes
External links
Category:1866 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:United States clemency case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States ex post facto case law
Category:Reconstruction Era
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Ex parte Grossman" ==> """
Ex parte Grossman, 267 U.S. 87 (1925), was a US Supreme Court case that held that the US President may pardon criminal contempt of court. Grossman had been convicted of criminal contempt but was pardoned by the President. The district court subsequently sent him back to prison.
Background
During the time of Prohibition, Philip Grossman owned a business in Chicago that sold alcoholic drinks. Charged under the Volstead Act, the enforcement mechanism for Prohibition, a judge placed an injunction on him that forbade him from selling alcohol. Grossman violated the order and was found guilty of criminal contempt of court in district court. Sentenced to one year in prison and a fine of $1,000 (), he was pardoned by President Calvin Coolidge in December 1923, on the condition that the fine be paid. Grossman's prison sentence was removed after he paid the fine, and he was released.
The district court, claiming the pardon would subvert the independence of the judiciary, ordered Grossman back to prison on May 15, 1924 to serve out the rest of his sentence.
Before the Supreme Court, lawyers for Grossman requested the release of their client. He was opposed by lawyers for the Department of Justice, who supported the district court. The United States Attorney General, who appeared before the Court supporting the President's power to pardon, was Harlan Fiske Stone, who would go on to replace Justice McKenna within a few months of oral argument.
Decision
Chief Justice William Howard Taft, writing for a unanimous Court, rejected the arguments of the district court and ordered Grossman to be freed.
Firstly, examining the history of the pardon power, Taft looked to the common law and the monarchy of England, where, he noted, monarchs "had always exercised the power to pardon contempts of court," just like ordinary crimes, and, just as in the United States, civil and criminal contempt existed. A distinction between civil and criminal contempt was made: civil contempt was remedial for the contemnor, and pardons cannot stop it. While criminal contempt is punitive, serving a deterring effect against transgression of court orders.
He next looked at the proceedings of the Constitutional Convention and how the pardon clause had originated in the Committee of Detail, was refined by the Committee on Style, and was ultimately added to the Constitution, as it now stands: "And he shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons for offenses against the United States except in cases of impeachment."
Referring to United States v. Hudson, Taft then rejected the idea that the offenses covered by the pardon clause extended only to those for which the Congress had defined as crimes, and he instead looked at the plain meaning of the words "offenses against the United States:"
Taft further determined that the pardon power had been exercised many times with regard to criminal contempt (over 85 years, the pardoning power had been used 27 times) and cited opinions by Attorneys General Henry D. Gilpin, John Nelson, John Y. Mason, and William H. H. Miller; along with statements by Attorneys General Philander C. Knox and Harry M. Daugherty. The weight of longstanding practice could not be ignored, stated Taft, and served to bolster the argument that the usage of the pardon power was not incorrect.
Finally, Taft turned to the argument about judicial independence and that the usage of the power of pardon here would undermine a functioning judiciary. Cognizant that the Constitution allowed for separation of powers, he determined that the system of checks and balances allowed for the discretion of the President in determining the use of the pardon power insofar as it pertained to criminal contempt. After all, criminal contempt does not require the restraint of a jury, and as such, it is possible that a mistake could creep in. and While a president could pardon all criminal contempt, such a thing would be an improbable absurdity. Nevertheless, limits still existed: the pardon can be issued only for contempt that has already occurred, and a capricious President could face impeachment.
Nevertheless, in light of the weight of history, precedent, Constitutional function, and justice, Taft concluded:
See also
 Ex parte Garland
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States clemency case law
Category:Pardons
Category:1925 in United States case law
"""

From "Ex parte Hennen" ==> """
Ex Parte Hennen, 38 U.S. 225 (1839), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the removal power under the Appointments Clause. 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1839 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "Ex parte Jackson" ==> """
Ex parte Jackson, 96 U.S. 727 (1878), was a United States Supreme Court ex parte decision.. The case decided that the United States Post Office may open and inspect mail to limit the transmission of circulars on lotteries. It also extended Fourth Amendment protections to private letters, holding that letters and sealed packages sent through the mail required warrants to be searched through.
 Notes 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1878 in United States case law
"""

From "Ex parte Joins" ==> """
Ex parte Joins, 191 U.S. 93 (1903), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a request for a writ of prohibition was moot, as the lower court case had already been completed prior to the petition being heard at the Supreme Court.Ex parte Joins, 
Background
In 1893, Congress created the Dawes Commission to break up the Five Civilized Tribes by allotting individual tribal members sections of land that previously had been held by the tribe.  The tribes resisted this process and in 1896 Congress gave the commission the additional power to determine who were tribal members and allot tribal land to these members based on the tribal rolls that the commission prepared.  An appeal of the decision of the commission was permitted to the United States district court for the Indian Territory and the court's decision was final.
Both the Choctaw and Chickasaw tribes prepared their own tribal rolls and presented these rolls to the commission.  After arguments presented by tribal attorneys, the commission placed 2,075 on the rolls of the Five Civilized Tribes, out of approximately 75,000 applicants.  At this point, tribal citizenship appeals moved to the federal courts.  By 1902 Congress, in an effort to resolve the situation, created a new court, known as the Choctaw-Chickasaw Citizenship Court to determine the citizenship issues for the tribes.  This court was also given the power to hear a bill in equity to vacate the decisions of the district courts, which it immediately did.
One of the claimants, Joins, then filed for a writ of prohibition to stop the Citizenship Court from hearing any cases.  The Supreme Court granted certiorari to hear the case.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. delivered the opinion of the court.  Holmes stated that since the Citizenship Court had already completed its work on the case, a writ of prohibition could not and would not issue.  The petition was dismissed.
References
External links
Category:1903 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Choctaw
Category:Chickasaw
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:Legal history of Oklahoma
"""

From "Ex parte Levitt" ==> """
Ex parte Levitt, 302 U.S. 633 (1937), is a United States Supreme Court case that dismissed objections to the appointment of Justice Hugo Black for lack of standing.
 Background 
In March 1937, Congress passed an act that increased the pension paid to a Supreme Court justice who retired when 70 years or older. Hugo Black was a member of the Senate when the legislation was enacted. The ineligibility clause of the U.S. Constitution bars members of the Senate and House from being "[a]ppointed to any civil Office under the Authority of the United States, which shall have been created, or the Emoluments whereof shall have been increased during such time..."
In August 1937, President Franklin D. Roosevelt nominated Black to the Supreme Court, and the U.S. Senate confirmed Black's appointment.
On Black’s first day on the court, October 4, 1937, Albert Levitt, a former U.S. assistant attorney general, rose and addressed Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes. He said he wanted to file a brief asking the Court to order Black to show cause why he should be allowed to take the seat of an Associate Justice. Hughes told Levitt to do so in writing, and Levitt then filed a pro se motion in the Supreme Court requesting leave to petition for an order requiring Black to show cause why he should be permitted to serve as an associate justice of the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a brief per curiam opinion, the court dismissed the case for want of standing:
The grounds of this motion are that the appointment of Mr. Justice Black by the President and the confirmation thereof by the Senate of the United States were null and void by reason of his ineligibility under Article I, Section 6, Clause 2, of the Constitution of the United States, and because there was no vacancy for which the appointment could lawfully be made.  The motion papers disclose no interest upon the part of the petitioner other than that of a citizen and a member of the bar of this Court.  That is insufficient.  It is an established principle that to entitle a private individual to invoke the judicial power to determine the validity of executive or legislative action he must show that he has sustained or is immediately in danger of sustaining a direct injury as the result of that action and it is not sufficient that he has merely a general interest common to all members of the public. Tyler v. Judges, 179 U.S. 405, 406; Southern Ry. Co. v. King, 217 U.S. 524, 534; Newman v. Frizzell, 238 U.S. 537, 549, 550; Fairchild v. Hughes, 258 U.S. 126, 129; Massachusetts v. Mellon, 262 U.S. 447, 488. The motion is denied.
 See also 
 Saxbe fix
 Schlesinger v. Reservists Comm. to Stop the War, 418 U.S. 208, 219 (1974)
References
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1937 in United States case law
Category:Presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt
Category:Conflict of interest mitigation
Category:History of the Supreme Court of the United States
"""

From "Ex parte Madrazzo" ==> """
Ex parte Madrazzo, 32 U.S. (7 Pet.) 627 (1833), was a US Supreme Court case involving the suit of Juan Madrazo, a Spanish citizen, against the State of Georgia.
 Background 
Madrazo was on his second encounter with the US court system. His ship Isabelita was originally captured by a ship flying under the flag of Amelia, a colony in revolt from the Kingdom of Spain that had received no international recognition and was run mainly by Americans.
A court in that country deemed the capture of the Isabelita and her cargo of slaves to be legal booty and sold them to William Bowen. Bowen later transported the slaves to the Creek nation, where they were captured in Georgia. After their capture, Georgia Governor John Clark ordered some of them to be sold, and the others remained in his possession.
After a round of suits in the district court of Georgia, Madrazo filed a suit in the circuit court on appeal. It was argued whether the district court had jurisdiction of the case. The circuit court ruled that to be the case and restored the slaves to Madrazo. Georgia appealed to the Supreme Court on the basis that the case was not one of admiralty but against the state, which would give Madrazo no grounds for a case because of the Eleventh Amendment.
Marshall wrote in his opinion of Governor of Georgia v. Madrazo, 26 US (1 Pet.) 110 (1828) that Madrazo's claim against the governor was against a state because the governor was acting in his official office. Also, the claim did not have any basis because of the Eleventh Amendment, which forbids cases of law or equity against a state.
Marshall found a loophole that the Eleventh Amendment of the Constitution exempts cases of admiralty, which are of the Supreme Court's original jurisdiction.
 Decision 
The Supreme Court dismissed the case and found the property not to be in the jurisdiction of a court of admiralty or in the possession of a private person. The governor was not a private person but in possession of the State of Georgia. Therefore, Madrazo's case was a suit of law or equity and so could not stand.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 32
External links
Category:1833 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:Spain–United States relations
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:Amelia Island
"""

From "Ex parte McCardle" ==> """
Ex parte McCardle, 74 U.S. (7 Wall.) 506 (1869), is a United States Supreme Court decision that examines the extent of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to review decisions of lower courts under federal statutory law..
Case history
During the Civil War Reconstruction, newspaper publisher William McCardle printed some "incendiary" articles, advocating opposition to the Reconstruction laws enacted by Congress. He was jailed by a military commander under the Military Reconstruction Act of 1867. McCardle invoked habeas corpus in the Circuit Court of the Southern District of Mississippi. The judge sent him back into custody, finding the military actions legal under Congress' law. He appealed to the Supreme Court under the Habeas Corpus Act of 1867, which granted appellate jurisdiction to review denial of habeas corpus petitions.  After the case was argued but before an opinion was delivered, Congress suspended the Supreme Court's jurisdiction over the case, exercising the powers granted under Article III, section 2 of the Constitution.
Issues
Two issues were raised by this case: Whether the Supreme Court had jurisdiction to hear the case, and if so, whether McCardle's imprisonment violated his Fifth Amendment Due Process rights.
Holdings
thumb|alt=The Chase Court in 1868.|The Chase Court in 1868.
Chief Justice Chase, writing for a unanimous court, validated congressional withdrawal of the Court's jurisdiction. The basis for this repeal was the exceptions clause of Article III, section 2."... the supreme Court shall have appellate Jurisdiction, both as to Law and Fact, with such Exceptions, and under such Regulations as the Congress shall make." But Chase pointedly reminded his readers that the 1868 statute repealing jurisdiction "does not affect the jurisdiction which was previously exercised." Since the Court held it lacked jurisdiction to hear the case, the second question was not answered. Since Congress withdrew jurisdiction to hear the case, McCardle had no legal recourse to challenge his imprisonment in federal court.
Rationale
Durousseau v. United States, 10  U.S. 307 (1810)  held that Congress's affirmative description of certain judicial powers implied a negation of all other powers. Creating such legislation was legitimate under the authority granted them by the United States Constitution. By repealing the act that granted the Supreme Court authority to hear the case,  Congress made a clear statement that they were using this Constitutional authority to remove the Supreme Court's jurisdiction. The court had no choice but to dismiss the case.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 74
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Notes
External links
 Ex parte McCardle Case Brief at Lawnix.com
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:1869 in United States case law
Category:Exceptions Clause case law
Category:Reconstruction Era
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment case law
Category:Criminal cases in the Chase Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Ex parte Milligan" ==> """
Ex parte Milligan, 71 U.S. (4 Wall.) 2 (1866), is a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court that ruled that the use of military tribunals to try civilians when civil courts are operating is unconstitutional. In this particular case, the Court was unwilling to give President Abraham Lincoln's administration the power of military commission jurisdiction, part of the administration's controversial plan to deal with Union dissenters during the American Civil War. Justice David Davis, who delivered the majority opinion, stated that "martial rule can never exist when the courts are open" and confined martial law to areas of "military operations, where war really prevails", and when it was a necessity to provide a substitute for a civil authority that had been overthrown. Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase and three associate justices filed a separate opinion concurring with the majority in the judgment, but asserting that Congress had the power to authorize a military commission, although it had not done so in Milligan's case.
The case stemmed from a trial by a military commission of Lambdin P. Milligan, Stephen Horsey, William A. Bowles, and Andrew Humphreys that convened at Indianapolis on October 21, 1864. The charges against the men included, among others, conspiracy against the U.S. government, offering aid and comfort to the Confederates, and inciting rebellion. On December 10, 1864, Milligan, Bowles, and Horsey were found guilty on all charges and sentenced to hang. Humphreys was found guilty and sentenced to hard labor for the remainder of the war. (The sentence for Humphreys was later modified, allowing his release; President Andrew Johnson commuted the sentences for Milligan, Bowles, and Horsey to life imprisonment.) On May 10, 1865, Milligan's legal counsel filed a petition in the Circuit Court of the United States for the District of Indiana at Indianapolis for a writ of habeas corpus, which called for a justification of Milligan's arrest. A similar petition was filed on behalf of Bowles and Horsey. The two judges who reviewed Milligan's petition disagreed about the issue of whether the U.S. Constitution prohibited civilians from being tried by a military commission and passed the case to the U.S. Supreme Court. The case was argued before the Court on March 5 and March 13, 1866; the decision was handed down on April 3, 1866.
Background
Suppression of dissenters
During the American Civil War, the administration of President Abraham Lincoln dealt with Union dissenters by declaring martial law; sanctioning arbitrary arrest and detention; suspending the writ of habeas corpus, which requires justification of any detention; and initiating trials by military commission rather than in conventional civil courts. The rationale for these actions was that Article 1, Section 9 of the U.S. Constitution authorizes the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus "when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion the public Safety may require it".Alan T. Nolan, "Ex Parte Milligan: A Curb of Executive and Military Power". In  Lincoln theorized that the civil courts in the United States were established to try individuals and small groups "on charges of crimes well defined in the law" and not to deal with large groups of dissenters, whose actions, though damaging to the war effort, did not constitute a "defined crime" in states loyal to the government.Nolan, p. 20. Lincoln believed his administration's plan would suppress anti-government agitators, but he was also optimistic that it would be rescinded after the war ended.Nolan, p. 30.
The first test of Lincoln's thesis for silencing dissenters occurred in the spring of 1863. Clement Vallandigham, an Ohio politician and antiwar Democrat, was placed under arrest on May 5, 1863, taken to Cincinnati for a trial before a military commission, and jailed. Vallandigham was found guilty and sentenced to prison for the remainder of the war, but Lincoln commuted the sentence and ordered him exiled to the Confederacy.Donald, David Herbert, Lincoln, Simon & Schuster (1995), p. 421. Vallandigham's petition to the U.S. Supreme Court, known as Ex parte Vallandigham, was denied.Nolan, pp. 32–33.
Trial by military commission
The next test began with trials by a military commission that led to the U.S. Supreme Court case of Ex parte Milligan. On September 17, 1864, General Alvin Peterson Hovey, commander of the Military District of Indiana, authorized a military commission to meet on September 19 at Indianapolis, Indiana, to begin trials of Harrison H. Dodd, "grand commander" of the Sons of Liberty in Indiana, and others placed under military arrest. These prisoners included Democrats Lambdin P. Milligan, a lawyer living in Huntington, Indiana, and an outspoken critic of President Lincoln and Indiana's Republican governor Oliver P. Morton; Joseph J. Bingham, editor of the Indianapolis Daily Sentinel and chairman of Indiana's Democratic State Central Committee; William A. Bowles of French Lick, Indiana; William M. Harrison, secretary of the Democratic Club of Marion County, Indiana; Horace Heffren, editor of the Washington (Indiana) Democrat; Stephen Horsey of Martin County, Indiana; and Andrew Humphreys of Bloomfield, Indiana.Nolan, pp. 37–38, Klement, Dark Lanterns, p. 130, and Harrison was arrested on August 20, 1864; Dodd, on September 3; Bowles, around September 17; and Milligan, Bingham, Heffren, Horsey and Humphreys, between October 5 and October 7. See Klement, Dark Lanterns, p. 176. Two other men, James B. Wilson and David T. Yeakel, were also seized. Dodd, who was the first to be tried, escaped from jail before his trial was completed and fled to Canada. On October 10, 1864, he was found guilty, convicted in absentia, and sentenced to hang. Charges against Bingham, Harrison, Yeakel, and Wilson were dismissed. Heffren was released before the proceedings against Milligan began.Nolan, pp. 38–39.
The military commission for the trial of Milligan, Horsey, Bowles, and Humphreys convened in Indianapolis on October 21, 1864. The commission considered five charges against the men: conspiracy against the U.S. government, offering aid and comfort to the Confederates, inciting insurrections, "disloyal practices", and "violation of the laws of war".Nolan, p. 39.. The defendants were alleged to have established a secret organization that planned to liberate Confederate soldiers from Union prisoner-of-war camps in Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio,  and then seize an arsenal, provide the freed prisoners with arms, raise an armed force to incite a general insurrection, and join with the Confederates to invade Indiana, Illinois, and Kentucky and make war on the government of the United States.Tredway, p. 182.
The military commission's decision on December 10, 1864, found Milligan, Bowles, and Horsey guilty. The men were sentenced to be hanged on May 19, 1865. Humphreys was found guilty and sentenced to hard labor for the remainder of the war.Nolan, pp. 40–41. With President Lincoln's support, General Hovey modified the sentence for Humphreys, allowing his release, but Humphreys was required to remain within two specific townships in Greene County, Indiana, and could not participate in any acts that opposed the war. Efforts were made to secure pardons for Milligan, Bowles, and Horsey, with the decision passing to President Johnson following Lincoln's assassination.Klement, Dark Lanterns, pp. 184–85.
Circuit Court petition
On May 10, 1865, Jonathan W. Gorden, Milligan's legal counsel, filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in the Circuit Court of the United States for the District of Indiana in Indianapolis. A similar petition was filed on behalf of Bowles and Horsey. The petitions were based on an act of the Congress titled "An Act Relating to Habeas Corpus and Regulation Judicial Proceedings in Certain Cases" that went into effect on March 3, 1863. The act was intended to resolve the question of whether Lincoln had the constitutional authority to suspend the writ of habeas corpus as authorized under Article 1 of the U.S. Constitution. Milligan's petition alleged that a federal grand jury had met in Indianapolis during January 1865, which it did, and it had not indicted him, which is also true, making him eligible for a release from prison under the congressional act.On January 2, 1865, the Circuit Court of the United States for Indiana met at Indianapolis, empanelled a grand jury, and adjourned on January 27, 1865, without indicting or charging Milligan with any offenses. See 
On May 16, three days before their scheduled execution, Horsey's sentence was commuted to life imprisonment and the executions of Milligan and Bowles were postponed to June 2. President Johnson approved commutation of the sentences for Milligan and Bowles to life imprisonment on May 30, 1865.Klement, Dark Lanterns, pp. 226–27. In the interim, Justice David Davis, an associate justice of the U.S. Supreme Court and a judge of the federal circuit that included Indiana, and Judge Thomas Drummond, another federal circuit court judge, reviewed Milligan's circuit court petition. The two judges disagreed about whether the U.S. Constitution prohibited civilians from being tried by a military commission and passed the case to the U.S. Supreme Court.Nolan, pp. 41–42.
Arguments
thumb|alt=Chase Court from 1865 to 1867|Chase Court from 1865 to 1867
The U.S. Supreme Court was asked to consider three questions in the Ex parte Milligan case: 
Should a writ of habeas corpus be issued based on Milligan's petition? 
Should Milligan be discharged from custody? 
Did the military commission have jurisdiction to try and sentence Milligan? 
The Court did not consider the charges or the evidence presented in the trial by the military commission. The only issues it considered were whether the military commission's proceedings were constitutional, and whether Milligan was entitled to a discharge.
The case was argued before the Court on March 5 and March 13, 1866. The team representing the United States was U.S. Attorney General James Speed, Henry Stanbery, and Benjamin F. Butler, a Civil War general who later became a congressman and governor of Massachusetts.Nolan, p. 43. General Butler delivered the argument for the United States. Among the members of Milligan's legal team were Joseph E. McDonald; David Dudley Field, who was a New York lawyer and brother of U.S. Supreme Court justice Stephen Johnson Field; James A. Garfield, a member of Congress in his first ever courtroom argument and a future U.S. president; and Jeremiah S. Black, who had been former President James Buchanan's U.S. Attorney General and U.S. Secretary of State.
Decision
left|thumb|Lambdin P. Milligan
On April 3, 1866, Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase handed down the Court's decision, which decreed that the writ of habeas corpus could be issued based on the congressional act of March 3, 1863; the military commission did not have the jurisdiction to try and sentence Milligan; and he was entitled to a discharge. Milligan, Bowles, and Horsey were discharged from prison on April 12, 1866.Klement, Dark Lanterns, pp. 227–28. The Court's opinion was read during the next Court session.
On December 17, 1866, Justice Davis delivered the majority opinion explaining that Milligan, who was a civilian not in military service and resident of a state in which civilian courts were still functioning, had a right, when charged with a crime, to be tried and punished according to the law. Under the U.S. Constitution this included security against unreasonable search and seizure, a warrant for probable cause before arrest, and if indicted, a speedy trial by jury. Justice Davis disagreed with the federal government's argument regarding the propriety of the military commission, stating that "martial rule can never exist when the courts are open" and confined martial law to areas of "military operations, where war really prevails," and when it became a necessity to provide a substitute for a civil authority that had been overthrown. This was not the situation in Indiana, where the civilian courts were still operating at the time of Milligan's arrest, trial, and incarceration.Nolan, p. 44. The majority opinion further observed that during the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, citizens may only be detained without charges, not "tried" or executed under the jurisdictions of military tribunals. The writ is not the right itself, but merely the ability to issue orders demanding the right's "enforcement."
In Ex parte Milligan, which was a case about governmental power and personal liberty, the Court's decision stood "on the side of personal liberty."Nolan, p. 49. In the case, the Court was unwilling to give President Lincoln's administration the power of military commission jurisdiction. The Court's decision avoided the risk of its abuse by future administrations in other situations. It is also important to note the political environment of the decision. Under a Republican Congress immediately after the Civil War, the Court was reluctant to hand down any decision that questioned the legitimacy of military courts, especially in the occupied South. The president's ability to suspend the writ of habeas corpus without congressional approval was not addressed in this case, most likely because it was a moot issue with respect to the case at hand.  President Lincoln had suspended the writ nationwide on September 24, 1862,Amnesty to Political or State Prisoners. and Congress had ratified this action on March 3, 1863, with the Habeas Corpus Suspension Act.  Milligan was detained in October 1864, more than a year after Congress formally suspended the writ.
Chief Justice Chase noted that, in the South, "courts might be open and undisturbed in the execution of their functions, and yet wholly incompetent to avert threatened danger, or to punish, with adequate promptitude and certainty, the guilty conspirators." In other words, state courts in the former Confederacy would not protect the former slaves from violence.Haggerty, Michael, "To Leave Behind the Law of Force: Salmon Chase and the Civil War Era," in Winger, Stewart L., and White, Jonathan W., eds. (2020). Ex Parte Milligan Reconsidered: Race and Civil Liberties From the Lincoln Administration to the War on Terror. Lawrence, Kansas: University of Kansas Press.
Three types of military jurisdiction
This case was also important in clarifying the scope of military jurisdiction under the U.S. Constitution. The Supreme Court held:
There are under the Constitution three kinds of military jurisdiction: one to be exercised both in peace and war, another to be exercised in time of foreign war without the boundaries of the United States, or in time of rebellion and civil war within states or districts occupied by rebels treated [71 U.S. 2, 142] as belligerents, and a third to be exercised in time of invasion or insurrection within the limits of the United States or during rebellion within the limits of states maintaining adhesion to the National Government, when the public danger requires its exercise. The first of these may be called jurisdiction under MILITARY LAW, and is found in acts of Congress prescribing rules and articles of war, or otherwise providing for the government of the national forces; the second may be distinguished as MILITARY GOVERNMENT, superseding, as far as may be deemed expedient, the local law and exercised by the military commander under the direction of the President, with the express or implied sanction of Congress, while the third may be denominated MARTIAL LAW PROPER, and is called into action by Congress, or temporarily, when the action of Congress cannot be invited, and, in the case of justifying or excusing peril, by the President, in times of insurrection or invasion or of civil or foreign war, within districts or localities where ordinary law no longer adequately secures public safety and private rights.
This distinction between martial law and military government was not commonly made before 1866. However, after the Supreme Court's clarification in this landmark case, it has continued to be referenced. Birkhimer describes the difference on page 1 of his opus Military Government and Martial Law (3rd edition, 1914): "Military jurisdiction is treated in the following pages in its two branches of Military Government and Martial Law. The former is exercised over enemy territory; the latter over loyal territory of the State enforcing it." According to the U.S. Army Field Manual FM 27-10, The Law of Land Warfare, paragraph 362: "Military government is the form of administration by which an occupying power exercises governmental authority over occupied territory. The necessity for such government arises from the failure or inability of the legitimate government to exercise its functions on account of the military occupation, or the undesirability of allowing it to do so."
 Concurrence 
Justices David Davis and four others (Nathan Clifford, Stephen Johnson Field, Robert Cooper Grier, and Samuel Nelson) signed the majority opinion. Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase and Justices James Moore Wayne, Noah Haynes Swayne, and Samuel Freeman Miller filed a separate opinion concurring with the majority in the judgment, but they disagreed with the majority's assertion that Congress did not have the power to authorize military commissions in Indiana. Chief Justice Chase asserted that Congress had the power to authorize a military commission, but it had not done so in Milligan's case.Nolan, p. 45. The separate opinion also stated that Congress could "authorize trials for crimes against the security and safety of the national forces," and its authority to do so "may be derived from its constitutional power to raise and support armies and to declare war;" while the civil courts "might be open and undisturbed in their functions, and yet wholly incompetent to avert threatened danger, or to punish, with adequate promptitude and certainty, the guilty conspirators." However, as Justice Davis described the status of the federal courts in Indiana at the time, "It needed no bayonets to protect it, and required no military aid to execute its judgments."
Aftermath
Ex parte Milligan became well known as the leading U.S. Supreme Court case that found the president exceeded his legal powers to suppress dissenters during the American Civil War. The decision also helped establish the tradition that presidential and military action based on war had limits.
After Milligan's release from prison, he returned to his home and law practice in Huntington, Indiana.Sharp, p. 44. In 1868 he filed a civil lawsuit in Huntington County, Indiana, seeking damages related to Ex parte Milligan.Klement, Dark Lanterns, p. 231. Milligan's civil case was referred to the U.S. Circuit Court for Indiana at Indianapolis. Milligan v. Hovey, a two-week jury trial held in May 1871, named as defendants several men involved in Milligan's treason trial, including Alvin P. Hovey and Oliver P. Morton. Milligan hired Thomas A. Hendricks as his legal counsel. The defendants hired Benjamin Harrison, later the 23rd president.Nolan, p. 45, and Klement, Dark Lanterns, p. 237. Milligan's civil suit was "the first major civil rights jury trial held before the federal courts."Sharp, p. 46. At issue was what damages, if any, Milligan had sustained relating to Ex parte Milligan. Harrison portrayed Milligan as a traitor, while Hendricks focused on the "malicious prosecution and false imprisonment" of Milligan. At the civil trial, Milligan refused to admit his affiliation or actions with a seditious organization. The jury issued its verdict in Milligan's favor on May 30, 1871. Although Milligan sought thousands of dollars in damages, state and federal statutes limited the claim to five dollars plus court costs.Sharp, p. 47, and Nolan, pp. 45–46.
See also
Ex parte Merryman (C.C.D. Md. 1861) 
Ex parte Quirin (1942)
Hamdi v. Rumsfeld (2004)
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 71
Martial law
Supreme Court cases of the American Civil War
Notes
References
 "The Law of Land Warfare." In  (Subscription needed) (This manual supersedes FM 27-10, 1 October 1940, including C 1, 15 November 1944. Changes required on 15 July 1976, have been incorporated within this document.)
 Nolan, Alan T., "Ex Parte Milligan: A Curb of Executive and Military Power." In 
Further reading
 Coleman, Elisheva Ruth (2005). "Call It Peace or Call It Treason: The Milligan Case and the Meaning of Loyalty in the Civil War." (senior thesis) Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
 Neely, Jr., Mark. E. (1991). The Fate of Liberty: Abraham Lincoln and Civil Liberties. New York: Oxford University Press.
 Winger, Stewart L., and White, Jonathan W., eds. (2020). Ex Parte Milligan Reconsidered: Race and Civil Liberties From the Lincoln Administration to the War on Terror. Lawrence, Kansas: University of Kansas Press.
External links
Category:1866 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:Criminal cases in the Chase Court
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Grand Jury Clause case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:Federal court cases involving Indiana
Category:Indiana in the American Civil War
Category:American Civil War prison camps
Category:Reconstruction Era
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Treason in the United States
"""

From "Ex parte Quirin" ==> """
Ex parte Quirin, 317 U.S. 1 (1942), was a case of the United States Supreme Court that during World War II upheld the jurisdiction of a United States military tribunal over the trial of eight German saboteurs, in the United States..  Quirin has been cited as a precedent for the trial by military commission of unlawful combatants.
It was argued July 29 and 30, and decided July 31, with an extended opinion filed October 29, 1942.
This decision states in part that:
Case
Background
thumb|Richard Quirin
The eight men involved in the case were Ernest Peter Burger, George John Dasch, Herbert Hans Haupt, Heinrich Heinck, Edward Kerling, Herman Neubauer, Richard Quirin and Werner Thiel. Burger and Haupt were U.S. citizens. (317 U.S. 1)
All were born in Germany and all had lived in the United States.  All returned to Germany between 1933 and 1941. After the declaration of war between the United States and Nazi Germany in December 1941 following the Japanese sneak attack on Pearl Harbor, they received training at a sabotage school near Berlin, where they were instructed in the use of explosives and in methods of secret writing.
Burger, Dasch, Heinck and Quirin traveled from occupied France by German submarine U-202 to Amagansett Beach, Long Island, New York, landing in the hours of darkness, on June 13, 1942. The remaining four boarded the German submarine U-584 which carried them from France to Ponte Vedra Beach, Florida. On June 16, 1942, they came ashore during the hours of darkness. All eight wore full or partial German military uniforms so that if they were captured upon landing, they would be entitled to prisoner-of-war status rather than being treated as spies. The Long Island group was noticed by Coast Guard beach patrolman John C. Cullen, whom the saboteurs attempted to bribe with $260. Cullen returned to his station and sounded the alarm. The two groups promptly disposed of uniforms and proceeded in civilian dress to New York City and Jacksonville, Florida, respectively, and from there to other points in the United States. All had received instructions in Germany from an officer of the German High Command to destroy war industries and other key targets in the United States, for which they or their relatives in Germany were to receive salary payments from the German government.
Upon landing, Dasch and Burger turned themselves in to the Federal Bureau of Investigation with some difficulty, since the FBI did not believe them immediately.  They convinced the FBI that they were telling the truth and the remaining six were taken into custody in New York and Chicago, Illinois by FBI agents. The FBI had no leads until Dasch gave his exaggerated and romanticized version in Washington, D.C.
Military tribunal
On July 2, 1942, President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued Executive Proclamation 2561 establishing a military tribunal to prosecute the Germans.Proclamation 2561 – Denying Certain Enemies Access to the Courts Placed before a seven-member military commission, the Germans were charged with:
 violating the law of war;
 violating Article 81 of the Articles of War, defining the offense of corresponding with or giving intelligence to the enemy;
 violating Article 82 of the Articles of War, defining the offense of spying;
 conspiracy to commit the offenses alleged in the first three charges.
From July 8 to August 1, 1942, the trial took place in Assembly Hall #1 on the fifth floor of the Department of Justice building in Washington D.C. On August 3, 1942, two days after the trial ended, all eight were found guilty and sentenced to death. Roosevelt later commuted the death sentence of Dasch to 30 years in prison and the sentence of Burger to life in prison, as they had both confessed and assisted in capturing the others. Indeed, it was Dasch who approached the FBI, offering to turn the men in, which he then did. Burger was part of the plot to turn on the others and cooperated with the FBI extensively. The remaining six were executed in the electric chair on the third floor of the District of Columbia jail on August 8 and buried in a potter's field called Blue Plains in the Anacostia area of Washington.
In 1948, Dasch and Burger were released by President Harry S. Truman and deported to the American Zone of occupied Germany. Dasch spent the remaining years of his life trying to return to the U.S. One time, a visa application was sent to J. Edgar Hoover by the State Department on Dasch's behalf. Hoover stated that the idea of giving Dasch a visa was "outrageous" and promptly denied it. Dasch died – still in Germany – in 1992.
Constitutionality of military tribunals
Throughout the trial, Roosevelt's decision of creating a military tribunal to prosecute the Germans was challenged by Lieutenant Colonel Kenneth Royall, who was appointed to defend the Germans. Royall said that Roosevelt had no right to create a military tribunal to try his clients, citing Ex parte Milligan (1866), a case in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the federal government could not establish military tribunals to try civilians in areas where civilian courts were functioning, even during wartime. Since civilian courts were functioning in Washington D.C., he argued that the case involving the Germans should be heard there. Attorney General Francis Biddle, who was appointed as a prosecutor of the case, responded that the clients who, acting on behalf of the German government, secretly entered into U.S. territory without proper uniforms in time of war for the purpose of committing hostile acts, were not entitled to have access to civilian courts. Biddle stated that, "This is not a trial of offenses of law of the civil courts, but is a trial of the offenses of the law of war, which is not recognizable by the civil courts. It is the trial, as alleged in the charges, of certain enemies who crossed our borders ... and who crossed in disguise and landed here ... They are exactly and precisely in the same position as armed forces invading this country."
Royall asserted that there was no evidence to prove that the Germans would have followed through with their plans. They had not been trained for espionage and sabotage, had only vague contacts through which to communicate with Germany, and had no plans to return home until after the war. Biddle rebutted this argument, citing the case of British Major John André, who was executed as a spy by the Continental Army for passing through American lines to meet with American officer Benedict Arnold during the American Revolutionary War.The Atlantic February 2002: The Keystone Kommandos Royall, along with his clients, then petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus demanding that the Germans were entitled to trial by jury guaranteed by the U.S. Fifth and Sixth Amendments. Though the U.S. Supreme Court had been adjourned for the summer, it convened to consider the matter in a special session on July 29, 1942. Justice Frank Murphy, an Army officer at the time, recused himself.
Royall argued that the German landings at New York and Florida could not be characterized as "zones of military operation" and contended that there was no combat there or plausible threat of invasion by approaching enemy forces. He argued that civilian courts were functioning, and under the circumstances, they were the appropriate venue for the case to be heard. Biddle responded that the U.S. and Germany were at war and cited the Alien Enemies Act of 1798 which stated:
On July 31, the Supreme Court unanimously denied Royall's appeal, writing, "The military commission was lawfully constituted ... petitioners are held in lawful custody for trial before the military commission and have not shown cause for being discharged by writ of habeas corpus."Military Tribunals
Supreme Court decision
The Supreme Court had issued its decision on July 31, 1942, but did not release a full opinion until October 29, 1942. In this decision, the Court held that (1) That the charges preferred against petitioners on which they are being tried by military commission appointed by the order of the President of July 2, 1942, allege an offense or offenses which the President is authorized to order tried before a military commission. (2) That the military commission was lawfully constituted. (3) That petitioners are held in lawful custody, for trial before the military commission, and have not shown cause for being discharged by writ of habeas corpus. The motions for leave to file petitions for writs of habeas corpus are denied.
The Court ruled that the German saboteurs had no right to be given access to civilian courts because they were "plainly within the ultimate boundaries of the jurisdiction of military tribunals, and were held in good faith for trial by military commission, charged with being enemies who, with the purpose of destroying war materials and utilities, entered or after entry remained in our territory without uniform – an offense against the law of war. Those particular acts constitute an offense against the law of war which the Constitution authorizes to be tried by military commission." It held that while lawful combatants may be captured and held as prisoners of war, unlawful combatants face harsher circumstances such as being sentenced to prison terms or put to death.
The Court also drew a distinction between the cases of Milligan and Quirin. In the Milligan case, Lambdin P. Milligan, although conspiring to commit sabotage in aid of the Confederate cause, was a civilian resident of Indiana, one of the many Union states engaged in a Civil War against the Confederacy, had not had a residence in a Confederate state, was not a part of or associated with the Confederate armed forces, and thus could not be tried by a military tribunal in areas where civilian courts were operating. On the other hand, in the Quirin case, the Germans were part of or associated with the German armed forces, entered into U.S. territory without proper uniforms in time of war for the purpose of gathering intelligence or waging war by destruction of life or property, and thus were liable to be tried by a military tribunal."Judicial Review for Enemy Fighters: The Court's Fateful Turn in Ex parte Quirin, the Nazi Saboteur Case". 
Haupt and Burger argued that as U.S. citizens, they should not have their writs of habeas corpus suspended, but the Court ruled that "[c]itizenship in the United States of an enemy belligerent does not relieve him from the consequences of a belligerency which is unlawful because in violation of the law of war."317 U.S. 1, 37. It also stated that "citizens who associate themselves with the military arm of an enemy government, and with its aid, guidance, and direction enter this country bent on hostile acts are enemy belligerents within the meaning of the Hague Convention and the law of war."317 U.S. 1, 38. Furthermore, the Court ruled that the president's proclamation was a lawful order because it was in fact recognized by Congress in Articles 15, 38, and 46 of the Articles of War. In explaining the role of Congress, Chief Justice Harlan Stone held that:
Decision controversy
Although the court issued a unanimous opinion in Quirin, the road to the final decision was marked by disagreement. Justice Douglas wrote that it was unfortunate that the court agreed to take the case. He stated that "while it was easy to agree on the original per curiam, we almost fell apart when it came to write the views."William O. Douglas, The Court Years, 1939–1975, at 138–39 (New York: Vintage Books,1981) Chief Justice Stone, for his part, was very concerned with the court's reputation, specifically because he did not want the court to be perceived as just standing by while six men were executed. He pushed for a unanimous opinion. Despite Stone's views, Justice Robert H. Jackson wrote a concurring draft opinion, expressing his disagreement with portions of the Court's opinion.  Over time, his concurring draft got longer and longer and evolved into a typewritten memorandum.Military Tribunal: Quirin Precedent by Louis Fisher in the March 22, 2002 "Congressional Research Report" for Congress. This memorandum was written two years before his dissent in Korematsu v. United States and a decade before his famous concurrence in Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer. (Jackson, J., concurring). It provides insight into Jackson's views on the scope of the President's constitutional war powers.
The controversy has been revived, and has had legal implications during the War on Terror of the first decade of the 21st century.Brief of Legal Scholars and Historians as Amici Curiae in Support of Petitioner, Salim Ahmed Hamdan, v Donald H. Rumsfeld, Secretary of Defense, et al., No. 05-184
Justice Jackson's draft opinion
In his draft opinion, Jackson attributed sweeping powers to the President. He concluded that (1) the President has the inherent authority to create military tribunals, (2) this authority could not be regulated by Congress, and (3) this power was by virtue of his power as Commander-in-Chief.
Jackson stated, "I think the Court's decision of the question whether it complied with the Articles of War is uncalled for. The history and the language of the Articles are to me a plain demonstration that they are clearly inapplicable to this case and it is abundantly clear to me that it is well within the war powers of the President to create a non-statutory military tribunal of the sort here in question." He further wrote "The right to convene such an advisory committee of his staff as a 'military commission' for the discharge of his duties toward prisoners of war is one that follows from his position as commander in chief." Nonetheless, Jackson maintained that the President's power should be "discharged, of course, in the light of any obligation undertaken by our country under treaties or conventions or under customs and usages so generally accepted as to constitute the laws of warfare."
More importantly, Jackson also questioned the Court's ability to review the President's actions. He concluded that dealing with enemy prisoners of war was a foreign policy issue that touched upon issues of national security and political questions that were wholly out of the province of the judiciary. Jackson also stated that granting enemy combatants individual rights against military authorities would not be reciprocated in other countries.
Jackson analyzed both the history and purposes of the Articles of War to conclude that the Articles are not applicable to enemy combatants – rather, they were meant to protect U.S. civilians in times of military government. Although it would seem that his draft opinion is at odds with his later views of the President's war powers, specifically in Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer in which he interpreted Congress's ability to restrict the President's powers rather generously, there are substantive differences between the two cases. Youngstown concerned an exercise of presidential power in a domestic matter against civilians in an undeclared war. It was very different from the scenario present in Quirin, in which the President seized enemy combatants and did not address the internal functioning of the government.
In Quirin, Jackson ultimately believed it was a mistake for the Court to review military judgments in times of war and he solidified this position in his dissent in Korematsu v. United States. In that case, he stated "in the very nature of things military decisions are not susceptible of intelligent judicial appraisal.". His dissent in Korematsu expresses his belief that bringing those affected by military orders under the protection of the constitution would be a dangerous precedent and that the court should neither execute nor review such orders. He was afraid that the "emergency that justified the classification (in Korematsu) would eventually be forgotten, leaving the constitutionality of the classification as the lesson of the case."Dennis J. Hutchinson, The Achilles Heel' of the Constitution: Justice Jackson and the Japanese Exclusion Cases", 2002 Sup. Ct. Rev. 455, 488. Jackson believed the court would never be able to perform its duty if it joined the executive in making constitutional shortcuts.
In the end, Justice Jackson withdrew his concurring opinion, perhaps in response to Chief Justice Stone, or perhaps in response to Justice Felix Frankfurter's Soliloquy. The Soliloquy was an unusual memo addressed to the saboteurs in which Frankfurter urged the court to issue a single opinion. Regardless of why he chose to withdraw the opinion, his memorandum offers insight into an issue which divided the Court and remains divisive today.
 Quirin and the Guantanamo Bay military commissions 
Guantanamo Bay cases
The week prior to the November 13, 2001 Military Order to try suspected terrorists detained at Guantanamo Bay before military commissions, the Office of Legal Counsel relied on Ex parte Quirin as a legal basis for the President's authority to issue the order. Upon the capture of the Quirin saboteurs, President Roosevelt had issued an executive order, upon which the order issued by President Bush was putatively modeled; this authorized military commissions to try the captives for, among other offenses, violations of the laws of war, providing the enemy with intelligence, and spying.
Quirin had held that extant legislation authorized the use of military commissions for the types of offenses in question. While in Quirin there had been a public law passed with the title "declaration of war" and three Articles (15, 81 and 82) of the Articles of War, President Bush's claim relied on the Authorization for Use of Military Force of 2001 and two provisions of the Uniform Code of Military Justice, the successor to the Articles of War.
The validity of Quirin as a basis for the use of military tribunals in the "War on Terrorism" as permitted by the Geneva Conventions has been disputed.George P. Fletcher, "War and the Constitution",  The American Prospect, January 1, 2002 (alternate URL ) and the response, "The Military Tribunal Debate""Revised ACLU Interested Person's Memo Urging Congress to Reject Power to Detain Suspected Terrorists Indefinitely Without Charge, Trial or a Right to Counsel". American Civil Liberties Union.Nicholas Cowdery AM QC, President, International Association of Prosecutors Director of Public Prosecutions, NSW, Australia.  "Terrorism and the Rule of Law".  International Association of Prosecutors 8th Annual Conference, Washington, D.C., 10–14 August 2003. A report by the American Bar Association commenting on this case, states: 
Since the 1942 Quirin case, the U.S. signed and ratified the 1949 Geneva Conventions, which were thus considered to be a part of U.S. municipal law, in accordance with Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Constitution of the United States (the Supremacy Clause).Ryuichi Shimoda et al. v. The State § II. Evaluation of the act of bombing according to municipal law Paragraph 2 – via Wikisource On February 7, 2002, President Bush adopted the view that Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions did not protect al Qaeda prisoners because the United States-al Qaeda conflict was not "not of an international character." The Supreme Court of the United States invalidated the Bush Administration view of Common Article 3, in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, by ruling that Common Article Three of the Geneva Conventions applies to detainees in the "War on Terror", and that the Guantanamo military commission process used to try these suspects was in violation of U.S. and international law.Michael Isikoff and Stuart Taylor Jr. (July 17, 2006), "The Gitmo Fallout: The fight over the Hamdan ruling heats up – as fears about its reach escalate".  Newsweek In response to Hamdan, Congress passed the Military Commissions Act of 2006, which President Bush signed into law on October 17, 2006. The Act's stated purpose was "To authorize trial by military commission for violations of the law of war, and for other purposes." Like the Military Commissions Act of 2006, its successor the Military Commissions Act of 2009 explicitly forbids the invocation of the Geneva Conventions "as a basis for a private right of action."10 U.S.C. § 948a(e)
See also
Ex parte Milligan (1866)
United States ex rel. Toth v. Quarles (1955)
Hamdi v. Rumsfeld (2004)
Hamdan v. Rumsfeld (2006)
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 317
References
Further reading
External links
 Story of Herbert Haupt
 The Facts Don't Matter An hour-long This American Life radio episode (original air date 3/12/2004) about the events leading up to Ex parte Quirin
 Homefront Confrontational: How the War on Terror Affects Access to Information and the Publics Right to Know a report issued by the Reporters Committee for the Freedom of the Press
 Fisher, Louis. Nazi Saboteurs on Trial: A Military Tribunal and American Law. 2nd ed. University Press of Kansas (2005)
 Nazi Saboteur Tribunal Transcript
Abella, Alex & Gordon, Scott, Shadow Enemies: Hitler's Secret Terrorist Plot Against the United States, Guilford, CT: Lyons Press, 2002. 
Rachlis, Eugene, They Came to Kill: The Story of Eight Nazi Saboteurs in America,  New York: Random House, 1961.
Category:1942 in United States case law
Category:1942 in international relations
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:World War II espionage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
"""

From "Ex parte Siebold" ==> """
Ex parte Siebold, 100 U.S. 371 (1879), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the Appointments Clause. 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1878 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "Ex parte Vallandigham" ==> """
Ex parte Vallandigham, 68 U.S. (1 Wall.) 243 (1864), is a United States Supreme Court case, involving a former congressman Clement Vallandigham of Ohio, who had violated an Army order against the public expression of sympathy for the Confederate States and their cause. Vallandigham was tried before a military tribunal by Major General Ambrose E. Burnside for treason after he delivered an incendiary speech at Mount Vernon; he then appealed the tribunal's verdict to the Supreme Court, arguing that he as a civilian could not be tried before a military tribunal.
In February 1864, the Supreme Court avoided ruling on the question by instead unanimously holding that they could not take appeals from military tribunals at all.
 Background 
Clement Vallandigham, a member of the United States House of Representatives, was the acknowledged leader of the pro-Confederate faction known as Copperheads in Ohio. After General Burnside, commander of the Military District of Ohio, issued General Order Number 38, warning that the "habit of declaring sympathies for the enemy" would not be tolerated, Vallandigham gave a major speech (May 1, 1863) charging the war was being fought not to save the Union but to free blacks and enslave whites. To those who supported the war he declared, "Defeat, debt, taxation [and] sepulchres – these are your trophies." He also called for "King Lincoln's" removal from the presidency.
Accordingly, on May 5, Vallandingham was arrested as a violator of General Order No. 38. Vallandigham's enraged supporters burned the offices of the Dayton Journal, the local Republican newspaper. He was tried by a military court on 6–7 May (the court adjourning to let him obtain a lawyer), convicted of "uttering disloyal sentiments" and attempting to hinder the prosecution of the war, and sentenced to two years' confinement in a military prison. A Federal circuit judge upheld Vallandigham's arrest and military trial as a valid exercise of the President's war powers.Mackey, Thomas C., Opposing Lincoln: Clement L. Vallandigham, Presidential Power, and the Legal Battle Over Dissent in Wartime, Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas, 2020.
Despite repeated petitions, President Lincoln refused to repudiate Burnside's actions or release Vallandigham. In a letter written in response to one meeting of Albany Democrats, Lincoln explained his position:
However, in late May, Lincoln commuted Vallandigham's sentence to banishment to the Confederacy, from where (in July) he went to Canada.
 Ruling 
Meanwhile, Vallandigham's lawyers appealed the military tribunal's decision to the Supreme Court. The Court issued a unanimous ruling in February 1864, refusing to address Vallandigham's main argument that the military tribunal lacked jurisdiction to try him. Instead, they said the Court was only authorized to take appeals as regulated by Congress – and Congress had never authorized them to take an appeal from a military tribunal. Accordingly, they denied Vallandigham's appeal for lack of jurisdiction.
After the war was over, the Court would again revisit this issue in Ex parte Milligan, a similar case where, instead of appealing his sentence by a military tribunal, Milligan would file for a writ of habeas corpus. Then, the court upheld Milligan and Vallandigham's claim that military tribunals lacked authority to try civilians when civil courts were open.
 See also 
 Supreme Court cases of the American Civil War
 Ex parte Milligan
 References 
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:Criminal cases in the Taney Court
Category:1863 in United States case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:Ohio in the American Civil War
Category:Original habeas cases
"""

From "Ex parte Wood" ==> """
Ex parte Wood, 22 U.S. (9 Wheat.) 603 (1824), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a patent could not be repealed based on summary proceedings without the opportunity for a jury trial.  The case exemplifies a tradition in early 19th century United States patent caselaw in which patents were regarded specifically as an absolute property right to exclusive use of the invention,Adam Mossoff, Exclusion and Exclusive Use in Patent Law, 22 Harv. J.L. & Tech. 321, 351-52 (2009). rather than requiring a balancing between public and private interests.Michael J. Meurer & Craig Allen Nard, Invention, Refinement and Patent Claim Scope: A New Perspective on the Doctrine of Equivalents, 93 Geo. L.J. 1947, 1957 (2005).
Background
thumb|Jethro Wood's moldboard plow.
In 1819, Jethro Wood patented a cast-iron moldboard plow with replaceable parts, which revolutionized American agriculture and laid the foundation for the later John Deere plow. His patent issued on September 1, 1819.    But despite his invention's success, and although he was born to a wealthy Quaker family, he would die impoverished in 1834, having exhausted his funds on patent infringement suits.
Among those suits was the action at issue here, in which Wood brought suit against Charles Wood and Gilbert Brundage in the Southern District of New York to invalidate their later patent on a similar plow, which had been issued on November 9, 1820.  (Because of the Patent Office fire of 1836, the actual patents at issue here are not extant.)  The Patent Act of 1793 allowed a suit for invalidity to be brought within three years of the contested patent being issued.
The district court issued a rule nisi, ordering Charles Wood and Gilbert Brundage to appear and show cause why their patent should not be invalidated.  They did so, but their arguments were not satisfactory to the court, which ordered the patent repealed immediately by a rule absolute. They moved for a scire facias proceeding, to have a jury trial on the validity of their patent, but the judge denied their motion.
Charles Wood and Gilbert Brundage then petitioned the Supreme Court for a writ of mandamus to require the district court to issue a scire facias and try the question by jury.
Opinion of the Court
The principal language at issue was section 10 of the Patent Act of 1793:
That upon oath or affirmation being made, before the judge of the district court, where the patentee, his executors, administrators or assigns reside, that any patent, which shall be issued in pursuance of this act, was  obtained  surreptitiously,  or  upon  false  suggestion,  and  motion  made  to  the  said  court,  within  three  years  after issuing the said patent, but not afterwards, it shall and may be lawful for the judge of the said district court, if the matter alleged shall appear to him to be sufficient, to grant a rule, that the patentee, or his executor, administrator or assign show cause, why process should not issue against him to repeal such patent. And if sufficient cause shall not be shown to the contrary, the rule shall be made absolute, and thereupon the said judge shall order process to be issued against such patentee, or his executors, administrators or assigns, with costs of suit. And in case no sufficient cause shall be shown to the contrary, or if it shall appear that the patentee was not the true inventor or discoverer, judgment shall be rendered by such court for the repeal of such patent; and if the party, at whose complaint, the process issued, shall have judgment given against him, he shall pay all such costs, as the defendant shall be put to, in defending the suit, to be taxed by the court, and recovered in due course of law.1 Stat. 323.
The issue before the Supreme Court was whether the "process" that the statute described being issued after the summary proceedings was simply a process to repeal the patent, or a process for a jury trial (or bench trial if the issue was a question of law rather than fact).  Justice Story held that the process had to be for a jury trial.  In so doing, he relied heavily on the importance of the patent as a property right, requiring due process of law before it can be taken away, and on the importance of jury trials in the Anglo-American system.  He reasoned that even if it might be constitutional for Congress to allow patents to be revoked by summary proceedings, that could not be assumed to be the case unless it was spelled out in the statute.
Wrote Justice Story:
The securing to inventors of an exclusive right to their inventions, was deemed of so much importance, as a means of promoting the progress of science and the useful arts, that the constitution has expressly delegated to Congress the power to secure such rights to them for a limited period. The inventor has, during this period, a property in his inventions; a property which is often of very great value, and of which the law intended to give him the absolute enjoyment and possession. In suits at common law, where the value in controversy exceeds 20 dollars, the constitution has secured to the citizens a trial by jury. [....] It is not lightly to be presumed, therefore, that Congress, in a class of cases placed peculiarly within its patronage and protection, involving some of the dearest and most valuable rights which society acknowledges, and the constitution itself means to favour, would institute a new and summary process, which should finally adjudge upon those rights, without a trial by jury, without a right of appeal, and without any of those guards with which, in equity suits, it has fenced round the general administration of justice.22 U.S. at 608.
Even if the statute was ambiguous, therefore, that ambiguity could not support eliminating the jury trial right on questions of patent validity.22 U.S. at 610.  However, on close reading of the statute Justice Story found it was not ambiguous, because the phrase regarding the "process" was followed by another about a subsequent judgment: "in case no sufficient cause shall be shown to the contrary, or if it shall appear that the patentee was not the true inventor or discoverer, judgment shall be rendered by such Court for the repeal of the patent."  Thus, Justice Story reasoned, Congress could not have intended the initial show-cause proceedings to allow for the summary invalidation of the patent; this invalidation could take place only after a proper trial.
The Supreme Court therefore granted Wood and Brundage's petition, and ordered the trial court to issue a scire facias for a trial on whether their patent was valid.
Subsequent developments
The specific statutory interpretation performed by Justice Story became obsolete when the Patent Act of 1836 took effect, Ex parte Wood has never been cited in a Supreme Court opinion.  It has however resurfaced in recent debates over the jury trial right in patent cases.  In the 1995 case of In re Lockwood, the Federal Circuit used it to distinguish invalidity proceedings from inequitable conduct proceedings, arguing that the proceedings under section 10 of the Patent Act of 1793 were more similar to proceedings of the inequitable conduct kind, and therefore the jury-trial right did not extend to modern invalidity proceedings.Andrew W. Bateman, Reconsidering in Re Technology Licensing Corporation and the Right to Jury Trial in Patent Invalidity Suits, 82 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 933, 948 (2007).In re Lockwood, 50 F.3d 966, 975 (Fed. Cir.) vacated sub nom. Am. Airlines, Inc. v. Lockwood, 515 U.S. 1182, 116 S. Ct. 29, 132 L. Ed. 2d 911 (1995).
In 2005, the case was cited in Judge Pauline Newman's dissent in the Federal Circuit case of In re Tech. Licensing Corp., where the court eliminated the right to a jury trial when the validity of patent claims is at issue.423 F.3d 1286, 1296.  She also cited it in 2006 in her dissent on a similar issue in Agfa Corp. v. Creo Products Inc.451 F.3d 1366, 1381.
References
External links
Category:1824 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
"""

From "Ex parte Yarbrough" ==> """
Ex parte Yarbrough (also known as the Ku Klux Cases), 110 U.S. 651 (1884), was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States involving Congress's power to punish individuals who interfere with the right to vote in federal elections. The Court sustained the convictions of Jasper Yarbrough and seven others, who had been found guilty of beating and injuring an African-American man to prevent him from voting. The decision marked one of the few times that the post-Reconstruction Court upheld Congress's ability to protect civil rights.
 Background 
The Fifteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution states that "the right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude", and it gives Congress the ability to enforce that right "by appropriate legislation". Congress passed several laws to enforce the Fifteenth Amendment, but the federal judiciary was reluctant to protect former slaves' right to vote. In United States v. Reese (1876), the Supreme Court struck down several sections of the Enforcement Act of 1870 that outlawed racial discrimination on the part of local elections officials. The Court invalidated an anti-discrimination law in the Civil Rights Cases (1883), and it voided Section 5519 of the Revised Statutes (formerly Section 2 of the Ku Klux Act of 1871), which prevented individuals from interfering with legally protected rights, in United States v. Harris (1883).
Jasper Yarbrough and seven fellow members of the Ku Klux Klan beat and injured Berry Saunders, an African-American man, in order to keep him from casting a vote in a Georgia congressional election. They were charged with violating two provisions of federal law: Sections 5508 (derived from Section 6 of the Enforcement Act of 1870) and 5520 (derived from Section 2 of the Ku Klux Act of 1871) of the Revised Statutes, which prevented individuals from conspiring to deprive others of their constitutional rights and their right to vote in federal elections. The defendants were tried and convicted in the Circuit Court for the Northern District of Georgia, and five were sentenced to two years' imprisonment each. They sought a writ of habeas corpus, arguing that Congress's power to regulate elections did not permit it to regulate the conduct of individuals. The Supreme Court heard arguments in the case on January 23 and 24, 1884.
 Decision 
thumb|Justice Samuel F. Miller delivered the opinion of the Court in Yarbrough.
The Court rendered its decision on March 3, 1884. In a unanimous opinion by Justice Samuel F. Miller, the justices rejected the appeal and upheld Yarbrough's conviction. Miller interpreted the Fifteenth Amendment broadly, arguing that it directly conferred a right to vote in federal elections. Once an individual met the qualifications to vote imposed by state law, the Court concluded, he had a right to vote, and Congress could exercise its power "to protect the citizen in the exercise of rights conferred by the Constitution of the United States essential to the healthy organization of the government itself". Miller cited Article I, Section 4 of the Constitution, which authorizes Congress to regulate federal elections. In closing, he wrote:
 Analysis and legacy 
The Court in Yarbrough "fused the Fifteenth Amendment and article I, section 4 to come up with a bold, highly nationalist approach to black voting rights", in the words of the scholar Richard M. Valelly. According to the political scientist Rogers Smith, it was "the one Supreme Court decision markedly favorable to black voting rights" in the post-Reconstruction era. In subsequent years, the Court's interpretation of the Fifteenth Amendment continued to change: in a decision in James v. Bowman (1903) that did not mention Yarbrough, it struck down by a 6–2 vote another provision of the Enforcement Acts on the grounds that it was not authorized by the Fifteenth Amendment. Yarbrough has received limited attention from scholars, although recent analyses have emphasized it more strongly. The decision played a prominent role in the voter registration campaign of the 1960s, and Sefton writes that it "forms part of the philosophical foundation of the constitutional law of all civil rights". According to the scholar William Gillette, Miller's "remarkable" opinion "began to build the judicial foundation for the civil rights movement".
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1884 in United States case law
Category:United States Fifteenth Amendment case law
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
"""

From "Ex parte Yerger" ==> """
Ex parte Yerger, 75 U.S. (8 Wall.) 85 (1869), was a case heard by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the court held that, under the Judiciary Act of 1789, it is authorized to issue writs of habeas corpus. 
Background
In June 1869 Edward M. Yerger stabbed to death Maj. Joseph G. Crane, who was the acting mayor of Jackson, Mississippi. Military authorities arrested Yerger and placed him on trial before a military commission. During the trial Yerger sought a writ of habeas corpus from the circuit court under the Judiciary Act of 1789, but the circuit court upheld the military tribunal's jurisdiction over the proceeding under the First Reconstruction Act of 1867. When the circuit court denied him relief, he refiled the case directly to the Supreme Court.
Opinion of the court
thumb|alt=The Chase Court in 1868.|The Chase Court as of 1869.
Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase held that while the United States Congress had enacted legislation in 1868 eliminating one route to a habeas corpus hearing before the court (see Ex parte McCardle, 74 U.S. 506 (1868)), the Court could still hear cases of a similar nature in the first instance under the Judiciary Act of 1789. Chase concluded that the Court had jurisdiction to hear the case and the power to direct its writ at a military officer.
Subsequent developments
At this point the attorney general and Yerger's counsel worked out a compromise in which the prisoner was turned over to civilian authorities for prosecution in Mississippi. The Court was not actually forced to confront Congress on issues involving Reconstruction, and Congress in turn abandoned plans to completely abolish the Court's appellate jurisdiction in habeas corpus cases.  
Yerger was placed in a Mississippi jail, but released on bail and quickly moved to Baltimore, where he died in 1875, never having been tried for murder.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 75
References
PAUL FINKELMAN & MELVIN I. UROFSKY, Ex parte Yerger, in LANDMARK DECISIONS OF THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT (2003), available in CQ ELECTRONIC LIBRARY, CQ Supreme Court Collection, http://library.cqpress.com/scc/lndmrk03-113-6430-338597 (last visited April 4, 2007). Document ID: lndmrk03-113-6430-338597.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:1869 in United States case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:Jackson, Mississippi
Category:Original habeas cases
Category:Criminal cases in the Chase Court
"""

From "Ex parte Young" ==> """
Ex parte Young, 209 U.S. 123 (1908), is a United States Supreme Court case that allows suits in federal courts for injunctions against officials acting on behalf of states of the union to proceed despite the State's sovereign immunity, when the State acted contrary to any federal law or contrary to the Constitution.Erwin Chemerinskiy, Federal Jurisdiction 458-461 (7th. ed.)
Facts
The state of Minnesota passed laws limiting what railroads could charge in that state and established severe penalties, including fines and jail for violators. Some shareholders of Northern Pacific Railway filed a lawsuit in the United States Circuit Court for the District of Minnesota asserting that the laws were unconstitutional as violating the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, as well as the Dormant Commerce Clause. The shareholders sued the railroads to prevent them from complying with the law. They also sued Edward T. Young, the Attorney General of Minnesota, to prevent him from enforcing the law.
Young argued that the Eleventh Amendment, which prohibits states from being sued in federal court by citizens of other states, meant that the court did not have jurisdiction to hear the case. The federal circuit court still issued an injunction against Young enforcing the law. The following day, Young filed a proceeding in Minnesota state court to force the railroads to comply with the statute, in violation of the federal injunction. The court ordered Young to explain his actions, and he reiterated his Eleventh Amendment claim. Finding that Young violated the injunction of the federal court by enforcing the Minnesota law in state court, the court held Young in contempt. Young was placed in the custody of the U.S. Marshals Service, and so he filed a petition with the United States Supreme Court for a writ of habeas corpus for his release.
Issue
The Supreme Court faced three issues here. The first involved three questions as to the constitutionality of the Minnesota statutes:
 Did the statutes violate Fourteenth Amendment due process by setting too low a cap on the rates that railroads could charge?
 Did the statutes violate Fourteenth Amendment due process by establishing punishments so harsh that no one would challenge the laws, for fear of the consequences of losing such a challenge?
 Did the statutes violate the Commerce Clause by interfering with commerce between the states?
The second issue exposed the tension between the Eleventh Amendment and the Fourteenth Amendment. The Eleventh Amendment had recently been held in Hans v. Louisiana, 134 U.S. 1 (1890), to prohibit the federal courts from hearing suits by citizens against their own states. Conversely, the Fourteenth Amendment prohibits the states from violating the due process rights of their citizens. Could a federal court entertain a lawsuit seeking to enjoin a state official from carrying out state laws that were purportedly in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment?
Result
The Court, in an opinion written by Justice Rufus Wheeler Peckham, found that the Minnesota laws with respect to the railroad rates were unconstitutional, and moved on to the issue of whether the state official could be enjoined from prosecuting violations of such laws.
Failure to enjoin the unconstitutional statute would require the person subject to a potential violation to either pay the increased rate or face the threat of prosecution. Therefore, the Court determined that it would be unfair to require challengers of a law to wait until they faced a harsh sanction before they could bring any kind of action questioning the validity of that law. The Court also noted that, although a number of cases had held that the state itself could not be sued, those cases did not prohibit enjoining a state official, as an individual, from carrying out some task on behalf of the state.
Young contended that he was merely acting for the state of Minnesota when he sought to enforce its laws. The Court disagreed, holding that when a state official does something that is unconstitutional, the official cannot possibly be doing it in the name of the state, because the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution means that the Constitution overrides all the laws of the states, invalidating any contrary laws. Therefore, when a state official attempts to enforce an unconstitutional law, that individual is stripped of his official character. He becomes merely another citizen who can constitutionally be brought before a court by a party seeking injunctive relief.
The Court, in laying out this doctrine, created two legal fictions:
 That such a suit is not against the state, but merely against the individual officer, who cannot be acting on behalf of the state when he enforces a law that is unconstitutional; and
 That an individual can be a state actor for Fourteenth Amendment purposes (which only prohibits unconstitutional acts by the state, and those who represent it) while remaining a private person for sovereign immunity purposes.
The Court also rejected the contention raised by Young that an injunction was inappropriate because the railroads could get an adequate remedy by testing the statute in the courts. The Court noted that the railroads could never recover the costs of obeying the law while waiting for it to be adjudicated unconstitutional.
Based on these findings, the Court held that suits may be brought to enjoin state officials from enforcing unconstitutional laws in the United States District Courts, which have the power to enjoin those officials from enforcing such laws.
Dissent
Justice John Marshall Harlan angrily dissented, writing that the only reason that the suit was brought against Young was because he represented the state, and that the result of the suit would be to "tie the hands of the state". This was therefore no different from a suit against the state itself, prohibited by the Eleventh Amendment.
Harlan observed that the state can never act except through its officers, and this decision would deprive the state of the representation of its officers in court. He therefore condemned the decision as a "radical change in our government system" that "would place the states of the Union in a condition of inferiority never dreamed of when the Constitution was adopted or when the Eleventh Amendment was made a part of the supreme law of the land."
Harlan also contended that Constitutional rights can be enforced by suits in the state courts, instead of the federal courts. If the state's trial courts did not enforce the Constitution, they could be appealed up to the state supreme court, which could then be appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
See Erwin Chemerinsky's opus Federal Jurisdiction.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 209
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:1908 in United States case law
Category:Northern Pacific Railway
Category:Legal history of Minnesota
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Examining Board v. Flores de Otero" ==> """
Examining Board v. Flores de Otero, 426 U.S. 572 (1976), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that invalidated a state law that excluded aliens from the practice of civil engineering. The Court invalidated the law on the basis of equal protection using a strict scrutiny standard of review..Varat, J.D. et al.  Constitutional Law Cases and Materials, Concise Thirteenth Edition.  Foundation Press, New York, NY: 2009, p. 667
Prior history
A Puerto Rico law permits only United States citizens to practice privately as civil engineers. Appellees are alien civil engineers residing in Puerto Rico, one of whom (Flores de Otero) was denied a license under this law, and the other of whom (Perez Nogueiro) was granted only a conditional license to work for the Commonwealth.  Each appellee brought suit for declaratory and injunctive relief against appellant Examining Board and its members in the United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico, claiming jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1343(3) and alleging that the statute's citizenship requirement violated 42 U.S.C. § 1983.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 426
References
External links
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Puerto Rico
Category:Civil engineering
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Expressions Hair Design v. Schneiderman" ==> """
Expressions Hair Design v. Schneiderman, 581 U.S. ___ (2017), was a United States Supreme Court decision that held that price controls, when used to prohibit the communication of prices of goods with regards to a surcharge, was a regulation of speech and required an analysis of the First Amendment's protections for freedom of speech. 
In a five-Justice majority, Chief Justice John Roberts, joined by Associate Justices Kennedy, Thomas, Ginsburg, and Kagan, wrote that, "In regulating the communication of prices rather than prices themselves," the law in question "regulates speech.", slip op. at 10.
 Background 
In contracting with credit card companies, retailers are typically assessed a fee whenever a credit card is used.Expressions Hair Design, 581 U.S. ___ (2017), slip op. at 1. In order to compensate for these losses in revenue, merchants are given two options: either charge the customer a surcharge based on their use of credit cards, or provide a discount to customers paying with cash. In regards to the former option—charging the customer a surcharge—the New York Legislature enacted a law, §518, which banned this practice, in that, "[n]o seller in any sales transaction may impose a surcharge on a  holder  who  elects  to  use  a credit card in lieu of payment by cash, check, or similar means.""Credit card surcharge prohibited", 2010 New York Code, General Business, Article 29-A§518 Additionally, the New York Legislature was not the only legislative body which had banned surcharges before. Congress passed a law in 1981 that banned the use of surcharges in pricing goods, but this ban expired in 1984.Expressions Hair Design, 581 U.S. ___ (2017), slip op. at 2.
The Attorney General of New York, Eric Schneiderman, argued that because price controls prohibit conduct, but not speech, then there is no reasonable claim to a violation of free speech.Expressions Hair Design, 581 U.S. ___ (2017), slip op. at 8.  On January 10, 2017, one-hour of oral arguments were heard, where Deepak Gupta appeared for the hairdressers, an assistant to the Solicitor General of the United States appeared as an amicus curiae is support of neither party, and a deputy solicitor general of New York appeared for that state.
 Opinion of the Court 
On March 29, 2017, the Supreme Court delivered judgment in favor of the merchants, voting unanimously to vacate and remand to the lower court.  Roberts authored the opinion of the Court, joined by Kennedy, Thomas, Ginsburg and Kagan.The Supreme Court, 2016 Term — Leading Cases, 131 Harv. L. Rev. 223 (2017).Mark Chenoweth, Expressions Hair Design: Detangling the Commercial-Free-Speech Knot, 2016–2017 Cato Sup. Ct. Rev. 227 (2017). The Court argued that, because §518 does not regulate the price that may be received by a business, as per usual price control, but rather the communication of prices, "§ 518 regulates speech."
Justice Stephen Breyer issued a concurrence in the judgement, arguing that while the statute does limit speech, all human interactions limit speech as well.Expressions Hair Design, 581 U.S. ___ (2017), slip op. at 1, Breyer (J.) concurring in judgement. However, Breyer argued that because the statute was effectually under state law, that it should be remanded to the Second Circuit.Expressions Hair Design, 581 U.S. ___ (2017), slip op. at 3, Breyer (J.) concurring in judgement.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor, joined by Justice Alito, issued a concurrence only in the judgement. She argued that it should be left to the Second Circuit to interpret and to certify the meaning of §518, which could be done on remand. The "complexity" of the case, she argues, could have been avoided had the lower courts decided to interpret the law.Expressions Hair Design, 581 U.S. ___ (2017), slip op. at 11, Sotomayor (J.) concurring in judgement.
 References 
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2017 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
"""

From "Exxon Corp. v. Governor of Maryland" ==> """
Exxon Corp. v. Governor of Maryland, 437 U.S. 117 (1978), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States upheld a Maryland law prohibiting oil producers and refiners from operating service stations within its borders.. The challengers, including Exxon, claimed that the law violated the Dormant Commerce Clause. Justice Stevens wrote for the majority, which disagreed with Exxon et al.: "Since Maryland's entire gasoline supply flows in interstate commerce and since there are no local producers or refiners, such claims of disparate treatment between interstate and local commerce would be meritless." Exxon challenged the Maryland statute in Circuit Court which ruled the statute invalid. The Maryland Court of Appeals reversed the ruling.
Background
Maryland found that companies controlling both the production and distribution of oil were receiving preferential treatment from oil refineries through favorable purchasing rates. To combat this type of business, Maryland passed a law that prohibited producers or refiners from operating gasoline stations in Maryland, and required producers and refiners extend temporary price cuts to the stations they supplied.
Questions before the Court
(1) Does Maryland's statute prohibiting the control of both the production and distribution of oil violate the Due Process and Commerce Clauses of the Constitution?
(2) Does Maryland's statute conflict with the Robinson-Patman Act?
The Decision of the Court
In a 7-1 decision in favor of the defendant, Justice Stevens wrote for the majority. The Court held that the statute passed by Maryland does not (1) discriminate against interstate dealers (2) prohibit the flow of interstate goods (3) place added cost on them (4) or distinguish between in-state or out-of-state retailers. The absence of any of these factors fully distinguishes this case from Hunt v. Washington Apple Commission. The Court held that the regulation was constitutional despite huge extraterritorial effects of the regulation, less burdensome options available to the state, and no legitimate state interest apart from a desire for cheaper oil. This case is an exception to the rules set forth in Pike v. Bruce Church, Inc.. Justice Blackmun, with the only vote in favor of Exxon, wrote the dissenting opinion for the court.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 437
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:United States energy case law
Category:ExxonMobil litigation
Category:Legal history of Maryland
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Energy in Maryland
"""

From "Exxon Mobil Corp. v. Allapattah Services, Inc." ==> """
Exxon Mobil Corp. v. Allapattah Services, Inc., 545 U.S. 546 (2005), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that 28 U.S.C. § 1367. permits supplemental jurisdiction over joined claims that do not individually meet the amount-in-controversy requirements of § 1332,. provided that at least one claim meets the amount-in-controversy requirements.. 
Background
Federal Courts are courts of limited subject matter jurisdiction.  The limited jurisdiction is created by specific grants contained in Article III, Section 2 of the United States Constitution, and Congress is granted authority to further limit the jurisdiction of the federal court.  Congress cannot grant jurisdiction to the federal courts that would be prohibited by the Constitution, but they have the authority to further limit (narrow the scope of jurisdiction).  Historically, Congress has authorized exercise of two primary types of jurisdiction in civil cases:  federal-question jurisdiction (28 U.S.C. § 1331),. which grants jurisdiction over civil cases wherein the plaintiff seeks adjudication on the grounds of some Federal statute or rule; and diversity jurisdiction (28 U.S.C. § 1332),. wherein the plaintiffs are from different states of the Union.
In order to limit the number of cases in federal court, both of these forms of jurisdiction once required that the amount of money, or equivalent monetary value in the case of non-monetary relief, must reach a certain threshold.  These requirements were called amount-in-controversy requirements, and at the time of Exxon, only diversity jurisdiction cases retained such requirements.
Simple grants of jurisdiction over plaintiffs' original claims under § 1331 and § 1332 would present problems for the efficient adjudication of disputes; a federal court may not have subject-matter jurisdiction over potential counter-claims by defendants, or other claims such as impleader and cross-claims.  Without jurisdiction for these claims, proceedings between parties could be unnecessarily and inefficiently split between federal and state courts.  Two types of additional jurisdiction developed to address this issue via judicial interpretation:  pendent and ancillary jurisdiction.  Disagreeing with the decision reached by the Supreme Court in Finley v. United States. regarding pendent-party jurisdiction, Congress enacted 28 U.S.C. § 1367, which brought pendent and ancillary jurisdiction under a single form of jurisdiction called supplemental jurisdiction.
The Exxon case was a combination of several United States Courts of Appeals cases, wherein certiorari was granted to resolve a split among Courts of Appeals.  The question was whether § 1367 granted supplemental jurisdiction to claims and parties joined to a claim for which original jurisdiction was based solely upon diversity of citizenship, and where the additional joined claims did not independently meet the amount-in-controversy requirements of § 1332.
Opinion of the Court
The United States Supreme Court, Justice Kennedy, held that supplemental jurisdiction statute permits exercise of diversity jurisdiction over additional plaintiffs who fail to satisfy minimum amount-in-controversy requirement, as long as other elements of diversity jurisdiction are present and at least one named plaintiff satisfies amount-in-controversy requirement.
Section 1367(a) is a broad grant of supplemental jurisdiction over other claims within the same case or controversy, as long as the action is one in which the district courts would have original jurisdiction. The last sentence of § 1367(a) makes it clear that the grant of supplemental jurisdiction extends to claims involving joinder or intervention of additional parties. The single question before us, therefore, is whether a diversity case in which the claims of some plaintiffs satisfy the amount-in-controversy requirement, but the claims of other plaintiffs do not, presents a “civil action of which the district courts have original jurisdiction.” If the answer is yes, § 1367(a) confers supplemental jurisdiction over all claims, including those that do not independently satisfy the amount-in-controversy requirement, if the claims are part of the same Article III case or controversy. If the answer is no, § 1367(a) is inapplicable and, in light of our holdings in Clark and Zahn, the district court has no statutory basis for exercising supplemental jurisdiction over the additional claims.545 U.S. at 558.
We now conclude the answer must be yes. When the well-pleaded complaint contains at least one claim that satisfies the amount-in-controversy requirement, and there are no other relevant jurisdictional defects, the district court, beyond all question, has original jurisdiction over that claim. The presence of other claims in the complaint, over which the district court may lack original jurisdiction, is of no moment. If the court has original jurisdiction over a single claim in the complaint, it has original jurisdiction over a “civil action” within the meaning of § 1367(a), even if the civil action over which it has jurisdiction comprises fewer claims than were included in the complaint. Once the court determines it has original jurisdiction over the civil action, it can turn to the question whether it has a constitutional and statutory basis for exercising supplemental jurisdiction over the other claims in the action.545 U.S. at 559.
Dissenting opinions
Justice Stevens argued that the expansion of supplemental jurisdiction was prompted by a single case, designed to clarify district court jurisdiction over federal questions. Carefully examining the legislative history of the relevant portion of the statute, the dissenters concluded that a more narrow reading was preferable to the analysis of the majority. After a detailed analysis of ancillary and pendant jurisdiction, the historical precursors to supplemental jurisdiction.
Justice Ginsburg concluded that the ambiguities of the statute as enacted should be read to preserve continuity and precedent, in so far as that construction is possible. In applying that standard, she concluded that Congress did not intend, nor did the language they adopted enact, an expansive grant of additional jurisdiction such that joined parties should no longer have to independently meet ALL requirements of diversity jurisdiction, including the individual consideration of the amount-in-controversy requirement.
References
External links
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States supplemental jurisdiction case law
Category:ExxonMobil litigation
"""

From "Exxon Mobil Corp. v. Saudi Basic Industries Corp." ==> """
Exxon Mobil Corp. v. Saudi Basic Industries Corp., 544 U.S. 280 (2005), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court clarified the Rooker-Feldman doctrine and its relation to preclusion and concurrent jurisdiction.
 Background 
In 1980, two subsidiaries of Exxon Mobil Corporation (the plaintiff and petitioner in this matter) formed a joint venture with defendant/respondent Saudi Basic Industries Corporation (SABIC).  Twenty years later, a dispute arose over royalties SABIC had charged Exxon Mobil's subsidiaries for sublicenses to a polyethylene manufacturing method, and SABIC sued the two subsidiaries in Delaware Superior Court in July 2000.
Instead of first filing a counterclaim in the Delaware state court system, Exxon Mobil and its subsidiaries chose to sue SABIC in the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey. There, they alleged that SABIC had overcharged the subsidiaries for the sublicenses. Exxon Mobil claimed subject-matter jurisdiction in federal court under , which gives the United States district courts jurisdiction over foreign states.
In January 2002, Exxon Mobil filed an answer to SABIC's complaint in the Delaware state court, asserting the same counterclaims that they had filed in federal court. Meanwhile, SABIC moved to dismiss the federal suit. The district court denied the motion.  The state suit reached trial first, and the jury returned a huge verdict for Exxon Mobil, totalling over $400 million. SABIC then appealed the judgment to the Delaware Supreme Court.
SABIC also filed an interlocutory appeal with the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit of the denial of their motion to dismiss the federal suit. The Third Circuit raised, sua sponte (on its own motion), the issue of subject-matter jurisdiction, and concluded that the Rooker-Feldman doctrine precluded the district court from proceeding, on the grounds that Exxon Mobil's claims had already been heard in state court—even though Exxon Mobil was not seeking to have the state court verdict overturned.
 Issue 
The main issue in this case was whether the Rooker-Feldman doctrine overrides the preclusion doctrine  (see res judicata) or concurrent jurisdiction of the state & federal courts.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Ginsburg, writing for a unanimous Court, reversed the Third Circuit's decision and remanded the case.  She began her decision with a fairly concise retelling of the holdings in both the Rooker  and Feldman cases.  She then held that the Rooker-Feldman doctrine
is confined to cases of the kind from which the doctrine acquired its name:  cases brought by state-court losers complaining of injuries caused by state-court judgments rendered before the district court proceedings commenced and inviting district court review and rejection of those judgments.  Rooker-Feldman does not otherwise override or supplant preclusion doctrine or augment the circumscribed doctrines that allow federal courts to stay or dismiss proceedings in deference to state-court actions.
125 S.Ct. at 1521-1522.
This essentially had the effect of cabining the Rooker-Feldman doctrine and limiting its application, defining it as separate and distinct from both preclusion and abstention doctrine.  Furthermore, Ginsburg went on to explain that parallel litigation in both state and federal courts does not automatically trigger Rooker-Feldman, and that federal courts must give state court judgments preclusive effect under the Full Faith and Credit Act, .
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:Rooker–Feldman doctrine case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:ExxonMobil litigation
"""

From "Exxon Shipping Co. v. Baker" ==> """
Exxon Shipping Co. v. Baker, 554 U.S. 471 (2008), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States. The Court ruled in a 5-3 decision that the punitive damages awarded to the victims of the Exxon Valdez oil spill should be reduced from $2.5 billion to $500 million.
The case was appealed from the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. The Ninth Circuit had also ruled that Exxon could be held liable for the reckless conduct of the ship's captain, Joseph J. Hazelwood, who had left the bridge during the disaster and had been drinking vodka that evening. The Supreme Court was split 4–4 on the question of whether Exxon was liable for Hazelwood's action. The result of the split is that the Ninth Circuit's ruling on Exxon's respondeat superior liability for Hazelwood's conduct remains since Hazelwood acted in a managerial capacity under the Restatement (Second) of Torts Section 909(c) approach to punitive damages.
After considering the punitive damage policies of foreign nations, the Court reasoned that although punitive damages were warranted, they may not exceed what Exxon already paid to compensate victims for economic losses, which was about US$500 million. It held that a one-to-one ratio between punitive and compensatory damages was "a fair upper limit" in maritime cases that involved recklessness, compared to the lower liability of negligence or the higher liability of intentional conduct.  Its reasoning, "The real problem, it seems, is the stark unpredictability of punitive awards," frustrates the goal of punitive damages, deterring reprehensible conduct, because predictable damages create an incentive to continue dangerous misconduct if the personal injury liability is less than the potential profit, as on the Ford Pinto. It suggested giving a "bad man" the chance to look ahead and to calculate the consequences of doing or not doing a bad act will deter harmful actions. He suggests the upper limits on punitive damages should be as predictable as the legislative range of criminal sentences, but no minimum for punitive damages were discussed.
Justice David Souter wrote for the majority, joined in full by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, and Clarence Thomas. Justice Samuel Alito took no part in the decision because he owns stock in ExxonMobil.
Justice Stevens wrote a separate opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part. His dissent advocated judicial restraint because Congress has chosen to regulate maritime tort law. Stevens wrote that the trial court award of $2.5 billion in punitive damages was not an abuse of discretion and should have been affirmed.
Of this reasoning, Boston University law professor Keith Hylton said, "The court's elaborate and lengthy argument for the one-to-one ratio is troubling for several reasons. First, the whole discussion was largely unnecessary if the court really wanted to limit its decision to maritime cases. The court's majority appears to be trying to make the case for imposing the one-to-one ratio as a default rule in ordinary civil cases."
The case is often cited as one of the worst Supreme Court decisions in modern times.
 References 
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2008 in Alaska
Category:2008 in the environment
Category:Exxon Valdez oil spill
Category:ExxonMobil litigation
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Recklessness (law)
"""

From "Facebook, Inc. v. Duguid" ==> """
Facebook, Inc. v. Duguid, 592 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case related to the definition and function of auto dialers under the Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991 (TCPA) to send unsolicited text messages. In a unanimous decision based on statutory interpretation of the TCPA, the Supreme Court ruled that auto dialers are defined by their function to either store or produce telephone numbers from a random or sequential number generator.
 Background 
The Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991 (TCPA) was passed to cut down the number of unsolicited calls that consumers were receiving. Among its provisions, the TCPA disallowed the use of automated dialers from being used to contact consumers through services that may cost the consumer money, such as through cell phones or text messaging, with violations accessed and fined by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Amendments have been made to the TCPA; relevant to this case was an amendment added in 2015 that exempted automated calls made to pay-for consumer lines for federal debt collection purposes. Since its inception, this "autodialer" provision of the TCPA has been challenged as a violation of free speech rights under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, but the federal Circuit Courts have generally upheld all challenges to the statute. The 2015 amendment created a new line of arguments to challenge the autodialer statute of the TCPA as it carved out an exception for one type of speech and making the whole statute fundamentally content-based and unconstitutional. Concurrent to this case, the judicial proceedings of Barr v. American Assn. of Political Consultants, Inc.,. one of the direct challenges to the 2015 amendment that sought to invalidate the autodialer statute of the TCPA, began working its way to the Supreme Court.
Starting in 2014, Noah Duguid began receiving text messages on his cell phone from Facebook warning him about suspicious account activity, despite the fact he had not set up a Facebook account. Duguid reached out to Facebook to rectify the situation, but Facebook did nothing to stop the messages. Duguid filed a class-action lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California in March 2015, asserting that Facebook violated the autodialer statute of the TCPA because the messages he received were being placed by an automatic telephone dialing system (ATDS) and seeking  for each message he had received. Facebook objected to the lawsuit, challenging both Duguid's claim that their notification system for logic security was an ATDS, as the messages sent were targeted to specific phone numbers and not the sequential or random number behavior associated with ATDS, and asserting that the autodialer statute of the TCPA with the 2015 amendment was a content-based speech restriction that violated the First Amendment. Due to the latter complaint, the federal government injected itself into the case to seek its dismissal in favor of Facebook as to protect the constitutionality of the TCPA. The judge agreed on the case's dismissal, ruling in Facebook's favor that Duguid had failed to show that Facebook's logic security notification system qualified as an ATDS.
Duguid appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. Facebook's defense was again joined by the federal government in interest of protecting the constitutionality of the TCPA statute. Though Facebook reasserted its stance that their notification system was not an ATDS, the Ninth Circuit had precedence from Marks v. Crunch San Diego, LLC that an ATDS was not limited to devices that dialed numbers sequentially or randomly, but also include those that could dial stored numbers, and that it categorically fit a device that sends "automated, unsolicited, and unwanted" messages to consumers. The Ninth Circuit thus ruled in Duguid's favor in that Facebook had used an ATDS and proceeded then to evaluate the First Amendment challenge to the autodialer statute raised by Facebook. In this, the Ninth Circuit determined that the 2015 amendment did add content-based exemptions for free speech and thus was unconstitutional, but was also severable from the rest of the TCPA, leaving in place the autodialer statute. As such, the Circuit Court ruled in favor of Duguid and that Facebook had violated the autodialer statute of the TCPA.
 Supreme Court 
Facebook petitioned to the Supreme Court, seeking judgement on two questions: whether the auto dialer statute was an unconstitutional content-based restriction on free speech, and whether the TCPA definition of an ATDS includes any device that can store and dial stored numbers. In the latter case, Facebook identified that the Ninth Circuit's ruling had established a split circuit with a ruling out of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. On July 6, 2020, the Supreme Court issued its judgement in Barr v. American Assn. of Political Consultants, Inc. which affirmed that the 2015 amendment to the TCPA was unconstitutional but was also severable from the TCPA. The Court subsequently certified Facebook's case, but limited the case to the second question on the definition of an ATDS.
The Supreme Court held oral arguments on December 8, 2020. In oral hearings, the Justices debated on the statutory interpretation of the law with Duguid's counsel, Bryan A. Garner, one of the experts in the areas of law and grammatical interpretation.
The Court issued its unanimous decision on April 1, 2021, reversing the Ninth Circuit's latest ruling and remanding the case for further review. The majority opinion was written by Justice Sonia Sotomayor and joined by all except Justice Samuel Alito, who wrote a concurring opinion. The Court found that under a statutory interpretation of the TCPA, the dialing system used by Facebook did not qualify as an "automatic telephone dialing system", and stated that only systems that "have the capacity either to store a telephone number using a random or sequential number generator", or that "produce a telephone number using a random or sequential number generator" can qualify as an automatic dialer under the TCPA. Sotomayor wrote that "Congress’ chosen definition of an autodialer requires that the equipment in question must use a random or sequential number generator. That definition excludes equipment like Facebook's login notification system, which does not use such technology." Sotomayor further wrote "Congress found autodialer technology harmful because autodialers can dial emergency lines randomly or tie up all of the sequentially numbered phone lines at a single entity. Facebook's interpretation of [the TCPA] better matches the scope of the TCPA to these specific concerns. Duguid's interpretation, on the other hand, would encompass any equipment that stores and dials telephone numbers."
 Impact 
The Supreme Court's ruling was seen to be favorable to the telemarketing industry, since the decision narrowed the definition of an automatic dialing system of which are regulated under the TCPA. As few actual automated dialers in use at the time of the decision incorporate the random or sequential number generator, telemarketers would be able to use other automatic dialing systems that do not meet this definition to engage in their business, according to the National Consumer Law Center. The National Consumer Law Center as well as Consumer Reports expressed concern that there would be a significant increase in unwanted telemarketing calls due to this decision.
Senator Ed Markey, one of the authors of the TCPA, along with Representative Anna Eshoo, called the ruling "disastrous", as the Congressional intent of the TCPA was "to ban dialing from a database", and announced the same day of the decision that they would be looking to introduce amended legislation to address the Court's decision.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Facebook litigation
"""

From "Fairchild v. Hughes" ==> """
Fairchild v. Hughes, 258 U.S. 126 (1922), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a general citizen, in a state that already had women's suffrage, lacked standing to challenge the validity of the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment.. A companion case, Leser v. Garnett, upheld the ratification.
Background
In 1919, the United States Congress proposed a Constitutional amendment reading: "Section 1: The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex." "Section 2: Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation."  By July 1920, thirty-five states had ratified the proposal, with only one additional state needed for the Amendment to be adopted.
thumb|left|140px|Charles S. Fairchild challenged the validity of what was to become the 19th Amendment.
On July 7, 1920, Charles S. Fairchild challenged the validity of the ratification process for that Amendment in the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia. The challenge sought to prevent Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes from officially declaring the Amendment valid. The district court dismissed the case on July 20, and Fairchild appealed to the Court of Appeals of the District of Columbia. On August 26, Hughes acknowledged Tennessee's ratification, and the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution became law.  The Court of Appeals affirmed the lower court decision. The case was appealed to the Supreme Court. In November 1921, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case, which was argued in January 1922.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|140px|right|Louis Brandeis penned the Court's opinion.
In February, the Court announced a unanimous decision authored by Associate Justice Louis Brandeis, concluding that Fairchild, as a private citizen, lacked standing to challenge the amendment's ratification under the limitations of the Case or Controversy Clause of Article III. On the same day, the Court also decided a companion case, Leser v. Garnett which upheld the Amendment's ratification process on the merits.
The Fairchild decision marked a departure from prior doctrine, which had allowed any citizen to sue to preserve a public right.The Metaphor of Standing and the Problem of Self-Governance, by Steven L. Winter, 40 Stan. L. Rev. 1371, July, 1988.
Subsequent developments
This case is often seen as one of two cases, along with Frothingham v. Mellon, that became the genesis of the doctrine of legal standing. However, the term standing was not associated with Article III until the New Deal era.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 258
References
External links
Category:1922 in United States case law
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States Nineteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
"""

From "Fairfax's Devisee v. Hunter's Lessee" ==> """
Fairfax's Devisee v. Hunter's Lessee, 11 U.S. (7 Cranch) 603 (1813),. was a United States Supreme Court case arising out of the acquisition of lands originally granted by the British King Charles II (then in exile) in 1649 to Lord Fairfax in the Northern Neck and westward (all in what became the state of Virginia).. 
Historical background
Basically, settlers who developed the once-forested Northern Neck Proprietary land into farms (and their heirs) for more than a century paid quitrents to the designated agent for Lord Fairfax's descendants. One complicating factor was that following King Charles II's restoration in 1660, he gave a group of merchants a different land grant in order to encourage settlement of the western frontier, but without disrupting Tidewater area lands already developed or claimed by others. Another problem was conflicting land grants issued by the Maryland colony--which extended only to the Appalachian Divide by its charter, whereas the Virginia grants had no western boundary. Furthermore, at the time the grants were made, essentially for lands between the Potomac and Rappahannock Rivers, surveys had not even proceeded westward to realize that the Rappahannock River arose after the confluence of two forks (as did the Potomac), so another dispute arose as to whether the Fairfax grant extended to the South Fork or ended at the North Fork of the Rappahannock. Various orders from successive Virginia governors and their councils did not resolve matters. In the 1730s, when "King Carter" was Lord Fairfax's agent in Virginia, Jost Hite and Isaac VanMeter brought 54 immigrant families from Pennsylvania and New York and sought to obtain title, eventually reaching an agreement with Lord Fairfax. Meanwhile, other German emigrants from Pennsylvania continued south past the Shenandoah Valley into North Carolina to avoid disputes after they developed farms. By 1745 the sixth Lord Fairfax, a bachelor, took a trip to the Virginia colony, settled there in 1747 and died at his Greenway Court hunting lodge in 1781. Lord Fairfax left most of his Virginia land to his nephew Denny Martin Fairfax, who did not want to leave England. Martin's younger brother, Thomas B. Martin, who had for years been trying to collect land rents from western settlers, and for whom Martinsburg, West Virginia would be named, received Greenway Court, where he died in 1792.William Thomas Doherty, Berkeley County, U.S.A.: A Bicentennial History of a Virginia and West Virginia County, 1772-1972 (McClain Printing Company, Parsons W.Va. 1972) pp. 15-21 
Immediately before the American Revolutionary War, one of Lord Fairfax's surveyors in western Virginia was Thomas Marshall, now better known as the father of Supreme Court justice John Marshall, and who at the time lived in central Virginia on part of Lord Fairfax' Leeds Manor tract, on land leased from Richard Henry Lee. Meanwhile, while not even surveying was complete for western acreage (and many surveys conflicted), considerable land even further west in Virginia claimed by Lord Fairfax's descendants had been cleared and developed by others, including the Hite and VanMeter families, who also supported the Patriot cause.Doherty Because of the complexity of the conveyances of Fairfax land prior to the acquisition, litigation was bound to arise, even in the absence of questions arising under the Peace Treaty.
Shortly after Lord Fairfax's death, the new Virginia legislature passed laws affecting his claims, and soon began sequestering quitrents stemming from the developed lands, and tried to settle the manor and undeveloped land controversies by confiscating lands because of his heir's presumed Loyalist sympathies. It relied on a common law rule that aliens could not inherit land, which would then escheat to the state. Virginia officials secured the Proprietary's land office books in 1785, and the following year under governor Patrick Henry began selling them to settlers.Marshall Papers Vol. II, p. 141
While a young attorney, John Marshall represented Denny Martin Fairfax, and won a favorable decision from a Virginia court in Hite v. Fairfax (1786), which recognized Martin as Lord Fairfax's heir.Smith, p. 164  It would be only the first of many legal cases relating to his inheritance, with this case which began in 1791 in the next round. While in England in 1792-1793, James Markham Marshall (the future chief justice's younger brother) agreed to buy the Fairfax family's claim to the Leeds Manor and South Branch tracts (which totaled 215,000 acres) from Martin for 20,000 pounds sterling, with closing scheduled for February 1, 1794. The Marshalls organized former Revolutionary War friends and relatives -- James and John Marshall, Lighthorse Harry Lee (later bought out by James Marshall) and Rawleigh Colston (husband of Elizabeth Marshall) -- who then needed to arrange financing.According to Smith p. 101, another shareholder was John Ambler, possibly the richest man in Virginia after inheriting Jamestown Island, and who briefly served as a delegate for James City County as well as married Lucy Marshall, sister of James and John. In fact, John Marshall had turned down both George Washington's offer to make him the Attorney General of the United States, and his temporary position as Attorney General of Virginia (since James Innes left the state) in order to pursue this land claim.Smith pp. 163-166Marshall papers p. 144 The Marshalls' arrangement was initially financed by Robert Morris (whose daughter was James Marshall's wife), but he overextended himself in various speculations as became apparent in the Panic of 1797. Meanwhile, various county attorneys in Virginia pursued escheat actions against Fairfax in their county courts, and Virginia's legislature also reflected anti-British sentiments encouraging more actions. In 1794, the Frederick County judgment favoring the Commonwealth was quashed on a technicality, but separate Shenandoah and Fauquier County juries decided in the Commonwealth's favor.Smith p. 165Marshall papers Vol. II, p. 143
Litigation background
The litigation began in the Virginia District Court at Winchester, the county seat of vast Frederick County. In 1793, the parties arranged a test case with the objective of settling points of Virginia law. Trial judge St. George Tucker only ruled that Virginia had to initiate legal proceedings in a court in order to invoke the doctrine of escheat.Smith p. 165 Virginia appealed that decision to Virginia's highest court (then called the Supreme Court of Appeals and now the Virginia Supreme Court), but because Marshall had resigned as Attorney General, and Patrick Henry refused the case, the state hired John Wickham and Alexander Campbell, but the latter committed suicide by laudanum overdose before the appeal could be argued, further delaying matters.Smith p. 166
Meanwhile, in 1795, Marshall filed a different (but related) lawsuit against David Hunter in the (new) United States Circuit Court. David Hunter had previously purchased a 788-acre parcel from the state of Virginia, then leased it to another man. Justice James Wilson and Judge Cyrus Griffin ruled in Fairfax's favor, but that case would not reach the U.S. Supreme Court until 1816.Smith pp. 166-167, 580 n.134 noting that the pleadings used elaborate fictional titles which were abolished in a statutory revision in 1849.Martin v. Hunter's Lessee, 14 U.S. 304, 356 relates some of this.
The Marshalls were interested in getting good (saleable) title to the 215,000 acres that Fairfax owned personally, and the State of Virginia wanted to be able to resell approximately two million acres of still undeveloped land involved in the original royal grant.Smith p. 167 On December 10, 1796 the Virginia House of Delegates, with John Marshall as a member and Robert Andrews of Williamsburg advocating on behalf of those who held Fairfax land under conveyances from the state, passed compromise legislation. Robert Morris had suggested that legislation would help obtain loans from foreign sources. What was actually agreed to in the compromise was itself open to dispute, probably that upon obtaining the loan (and thus fulfilling the deal with Martin), the Marshall interests would retain interest in the 215,000 acres and convey the rest to the state. John Marshall seems to have believed in those years (the late 1790s) that the family was on legally solid ground based on the Treaty of Paris issue argued in the federal case.William Crosskey, Politics and the Constitution in the History of the United States, (University of Chicago Press 1953) pp.785–790
The Marshall group finally consummated the deal with Denny Martin Fairfax on October 16, 1806, and after various exchanges with James Marshall and Rawleigh Colston, Marshall secured 50,000 acres of prime Virginia real estate.Smith p. 168
Case
The case reached the Supreme Court on "a writ of error to the Court of Appeals of Virginia (the original name of the Supreme Court of Virginia) in an action of ejectment involving the construction of the treaties between Great Britain and the United States, the judgment of the Court of Appeals being against the right claimed under those treaties."Fairfax's Devisee v. Hunter's Lessee, 11 U.S. at 604. Because John Marshall had an interest in the proceeding, he recused himself.
Justice Joseph Story refused to accept, as final, the Virginia Court of Appeals' interpretation of Virginia law. He found that precedents in Virginia law itself upheld the Fairfax titles.Fairfax's Devisee v. Hunter's Lessee, 11 U.S. at 625–628. Story's decision to "look into" Virginia law was a vital step in securing federal supremacy. Otherwise, the federal courts could be effectively blocked, by a state court's decision, from addressing a federal question— in this case a British national's rights under the treaties with Britain.Haskins and Johnson, Foundations of Power, vol. 2, Oliver Wendell Holmes Devise, 597–599  The history of litigation prior to reaching the Supreme Court suggests that there was much for the Court to look into.  
Justice Johnson dissented, arguing that the Virginia legislature acted within its rightful authority, when the Fairfax lands were sequestered without certain established procedures being followed.Fairfax's Devisee v. Hunter's Lessee, 11 U.S. at 628–632.
Aftermath
After the U.S. Supreme Court decided that the Virginia Court of Appeals was mistaken in denying the validity of the Fairfax land titles,  the Virginia Court rejected the U.S. Supreme Court's mandate. Martin v. Hunter's Lessee then came forward under a writ of error. Fairfax's Devisee is, however, significant in its own right.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 11
References
External links
Category:1813 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States federalism case law
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:Northern Neck
"""

From "Falbo v. United States" ==> """
Falbo v. United States, 320 U.S. 549 (1944), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a draft board's alleged error in classifying a Jehovah's Witness as a conscientious objector rather than a minister of religion is no defense to the board's order to report for national service; post-reporting review of the classification is sufficient due process..
Background
When the Selective Service and Training Act was passed in September 1940, most of the world was at war. The preamble of the Act declared it 'imperative to increase and train the personnel of the armed forces of the United States.' The danger of attack by enemies, if not imminent, was real, as subsequent events would grimly demonstrate. Congress was faced with the urgent necessity of integrating all the nation's people and forces for national defense.
The petitioner was indicted on November 12, 1942, in a federal District Court in Pennsylvania for knowingly failing to perform a duty required of him under the Selective Training and Service Act of 1940. The particular charge was that after his local board had classified him as a conscientious objector, he wilfully failed to obey the board's order to report for assignment to work of national importance. Admitting that his refusal to obey the order was wilful, the petitioner defended his conduct on the ground that he was entitled to a statutory exemption from all forms of national service since the facts he had presented to the board showed that he was a 'regular or duly ordained' minister.
Prior history
The result of the trial was a conviction and sentence to imprisonment for five years. On appeal, the petitioner urged that the District Court had erred in refusing to permit a trial de novo on the merits of his claimed exemption.
In the alternative, he argued that at least, the Court should have reviewed the classification order to ascertain whether the local board had been 'prejudicial, unfair, and arbitrary' in that it had failed to admit certain evidence that he offered, had acted on the basis of an antipathy to the religious sect of which he is a member, and had refused to classify him as a minister, despite the overwhelming weight of the evidence.
Decision
The Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the District Court per curiam, and the Supreme Court agreed.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Murphy wrote a dissenting opinion:
Common sense and justice dictate that a citizen accused of a crime should have the fullest hearing possible, plus the opportunity to present every reasonable defense. Only an unenlightened jurisprudence condemns an individual without according him those rights. Such a denial is especially oppressive where a full hearing might disclose that the administrative action underlying the prosecution is the product of excess wartime emotions. Experience demonstrates that in time of war individual liberties cannot always be entrusted safely to uncontrolled administrative discretion.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Conscientious objection
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:1944 in United States case law
Category:1944 in religion
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Faragher v. City of Boca Raton" ==> """
Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775 (1998), is a US labor law case of the United States Supreme Court in which the Court identified the circumstances under which an employer may be held liable under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 for the acts of a supervisory employee whose sexual harassment of subordinates has created a hostile work environment amounting to employment discrimination. The court held that "an employer is vicariously liable for actionable discrimination caused by a supervisor, but subject to an affirmative defense looking to the reasonableness of the employer's conduct as well as that of a plaintiff victim.".
Facts
The case centered around a lifeguard resigning her position.  In 1992, Beth Ann Faragher brought to the city's attention that her supervisors, Bill Terry and David Silverman, had created a "sexually hostile atmosphere" at work and there was constant offensive touching which was not invited.  The two supervisors would also speak about women in offensive terms.  "Following a bench trial, the District Court concluded that the supervisors' conduct was discriminatory harassment sufficiently serious to alter the conditions of Faragher's employment and constitute an abusive working environment."Faragher, 524 U.S. at 781. The complaint contained specific allegations that Terry once said that he would never promote a woman to the rank of lieutenant, and that Silverman had said to Faragher, "Date me or clean the toilets for a year." Faragher states that there were many times these two supervisors had said things to her and other female lifeguards, and other lifeguards agreed.
Faragher stated that from time to time, Terry would repeatedly touch the female lifeguards without being invited to do so, and in areas that should not be touched without being invited.  Silverman, the other supervisor would make frequent vulgar slurs to the females, such as referencing oral sex and speaking about female matters.  Faragher was not the only woman that was being spoken to this way, in fact another lifeguard, Nancy Ewanchew, had brought it to the City's Personnel Director in an effort to put a stop to the way they were being spoken to, but the taunting did not stop.  However, a major factor held against Faragher was if this problem had been going on for a while, then it should have been brought to the City's attention earlier.
Judgment
The Court noted that "Terry and Silverman were acting outside of the scope of their employment and solely to further their own personal needs."  The Eleventh Circuit had stated that the supervisors' relationship with the City did not assist in why they were treating their co-workers this way. In this case, the court stated that neither Terry nor Silverman threatened to fire Faragher or demote her so their agency relationship did not "facilitate their harassment."Faragher, 524 U.S. at 785. "The court reviewed the record and found no adequate factual basis to conclude that the harassment was so pervasive that the City should have known of it, relying on the facts that the harassment occurred intermittently, over a long period of time, and at a remote location." The court felt that if this was such a serious issue taking place at the workplace that these lifeguards, such as Faragher herself, should have brought it to the City's attention earlier.
Faragher stated that in many ways the agency relationship "aided Terry and Silverman in carrying out their harassment." She argued that these two supervisors abused their authority to keep the workers in their place while they make offensive statements. The Court Of Appeals rejected liability on the City's behalf and that the employer is not liable for what their employees do. The City feels that they should not be held responsible for what the employees did at the workplace. The court debated that since the victim did not receive any harm then the employer should not be held responsible for the actions of their employees. However, Faragher stated that she was working for the City and they should be the ones held responsible.
Justice David H. Souter delivered the opinion of the Court. The Court considered the interaction between prior sexual harassment cases and the Restatement of Agency, and found that the City is responsible for the employer's actions based on Title VII, subject to an affirmative defense.
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:Boca Raton, Florida
Category:Sexual harassment in the United States
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Harassment case law
Category:History of women in Florida
"""

From "Faretta v. California" ==> """
Faretta v. California, 422 U.S. 806 (1975), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that criminal defendants have a constitutional right to refuse counsel and represent themselves in state criminal proceedings..
Facts of the case
The defendant Anthony Faretta was accused of grand theft in Los Angeles County, California. Well before the trial began, the defendant requested permission to represent himself. Questioning by the judge revealed that he had once represented himself in a criminal case and that he believed that the public defender's office was under a heavy case load. The judge warned him that he was making a mistake and emphasized that he would receive no special treatment. The judge entered a preliminary ruling allowing Faretta to represent himself, however stating that he might reverse his decision if it seemed that he was unable to adequately represent himself.
Several weeks later, but still before the trial, the judge initiated a hearing to inquire into Faretta's ability to defend himself. After questioning him on numerous topics, including hearsay and juries, the judge ruled that his answers were inadequate and he had not made an intelligent decision to waive counsel. In addition he ruled that Faretta had no constitutional right to his own defense. Therefore, he rescinded his previous decision. During the trial the judge denied Faretta's motions to be co-counsel and other motions he attempted to make on his behalf. Subsequently, he was convicted by a jury and sentenced to life in prison.
The California Court of Appeal, which relied on a recent California Supreme Court decision that had expressly decided the issue, ruled that Faretta had no federal or state right to represent himself. Appeal to the Supreme Court of California was denied.
Opinion of the court
In the opinion of the court by Justice Stewart, the Court held that a defendant in a state criminal trial has the constitutional right to refuse appointed counsel and conduct the trial when he or she voluntarily and intelligently elects to do so. However, such a defendant may not later complain that he received ineffective assistance of counsel. The court brought analogies to the Star Chamber, saying "the Star Chamber has, for centuries, symbolized disregard of basic individual rights. The Star Chamber not merely allowed, but required, defendants to have counsel. The defendant's answer to an indictment was not accepted unless it was signed by counsel. When counsel refused to sign the answer, for whatever reason, the defendant was considered to have confessed."422 U.S. at 821-22.
Dissents
Chief Justice Burger wrote a dissent arguing there is no constitutional basis for a right to self-representation, in which Justice Blackmun and Justice Rehnquist joined.
Justice Blackmun wrote a dissent arguing that the Sixth Amendment does not support the right to self-representation and raised the additional procedural problems that would inevitably arise by the decision, arguing that such procedural problems would far outweigh whatever tactical advantage the defendant may feel he has gained by electing to represent himself. Blackmun concludes with the following: "If there is any truth to the old proverb 'one who is his own lawyer has a fool for a client,' the Court by its opinion today now bestows a constitutional right on one to make a fool of himself." Chief Justice Burger and Justice Rehnquist joined in this dissent.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 422
 List of criminal competencies
 Frendak v. United States (D.C. 1979)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Sixth Amendment self-representation case law
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:1975 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:Self-representation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Farmer v. Brennan" ==> """
Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U.S. 825 (1994), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that a prison official's "deliberate indifference" to a substantial risk of serious harm to an inmate violates the cruel and unusual punishment clause of the Eighth Amendment. Farmer built on two previous Supreme Court decisions addressing prison conditions, Estelle v. Gamble and Wilson v. Seiter. The decision marked the first time the Supreme Court directly addressed sexual assault in prisons."Hailing Supreme Court Decision" (Press release). Stop Prisoner Rape (now Just Detention International). 1994-06-07. Archived from the original on 2010-11-25. Retrieved 2008-12-30.
Background
 Dee Farmer 
Dee Farmer, a trans woman, was convicted of credit card fraud in 1986, and was initially incarcerated at the Federal Correctional Institution, Oxford, a medium-security federal prison for men. Farmer was incarcerated with the general male population due to federal prison guidelines that assigned trans prisoners to facilities based on medical transition status. In 1989, Farmer was transferred to the general male population at US Penitentiary Terre Haute, Indiana, a higher security facility that housed "more troublesome prisoners."Stacy L. Cozad, Cruel But Not So Unusual: Farmer v. Brennan and the Devolving Standards of Decency, 23 Pepp. L. Rev. 175 (1996) Within two weeks of arriving at the penitentiary, Farmer was beaten and sexually assaulted by another inmate in her cell, which potentially exposed her to HIV infection.
Farmer subsequently filed a Bivens lawsuit in federal court without a lawyer, alleging that the wardens of both of her prisons and other officials within the Federal Bureau of Prisons violated her Eighth Amendment rights. In an amended filing, she specified that the prison administration was deliberately indifferent to her safety when it transferred her to a general male prison population with a history of inmate violence, knowing that she would be particularly vulnerable to rape as a trans woman.
 Procedural history 
 District Court 
The District Court granted defendants' motion for summary judgment, denying Farmer's motion to delay its ruling until the defendants complied with a discovery request. It concluded that failure to prevent inmate assaults violates the Eighth Amendment only if prison officials had "actual knowledge" of a potential danger, and that respondents lacked such knowledge because Farmer never expressed any safety concerns to them.
 Court of Appeals 
The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the District Court in a short memorandum opinion, noting that any issues that could be raised on appeal were "insubstantial," and the parties did not need to submit any briefs for the court to consider.Farmer v. Brennan, 11 F.3d 668 (7th Cir. 1992)
 Consideration by the Supreme Court 
 Petition for certiorari 
The Supreme Court granted Farmer's petition for certiorari from the Seventh Circuit decision, in order to resolve disagreement among different Courts of Appeals regarding the proper test to assess "deliberate indifference" of officials.
 Merits briefs & oral arguments 
After the Supreme Court granted certiorari, the ACLU National Prison Project stepped in to represent Farmer. In their briefing before the Court and at oral argument, Farmer and the ACLU argued that deliberate indifference should be defined objectively, where deliberate official indifference to obvious risks that are likely to result in the violation of constitutional rights is sufficient for a plaintiff to show an Eighth Amendment violation.Brief for Petitioner at 10-11,  (No. 92-7247)  This standard is akin to the recklessness standard used in civil cases. The federal government argued that the Court should adopt a test more similar to criminal recklessness, which would require that a plaintiff show that the prison official had actual knowledge of the substantial risk of serious harm.Brief for Respondents at 7-11,  (No. 92-7247)
ACLU attorney Elizabeth Alexander used Farmer's proper pronouns in her briefs and at oral arguments, while lawyers for the federal government used male pronouns.
 Amicus briefs 
Amicus briefs were filed in favor of reversing the Seventh Circuit on behalf of the Montana Defender Project, the D.C. Prisoners' Legal Services Project, and Stop Prisoner Rape. An amicus brief in favor of affirming the Seventh Circuit was filed on by the Attorney General of Maryland, which was joined by all other state attorneys general.
The brief filed by Stop Prison Rape emphasized that prison rape is "widespread, repetitive, deadly, devastating, predictable, and preventable," but is rarely reported because it is "ingrained in the culture of confinement, both among prisoners and prison officials.""SPR files Brief in Farmer v. Brennan" (Press release). Stop Prisoner Rape (now Just Detention International). 1994-01-11. Archived from the original on 2010-11-25. Retrieved 2008-12-30. In order to address this issue, the brief asked the Court to use Farmer's case to add pressure to prison officials to bring about systemic prison reforms, and to create greater access to the courts for survivors of prison rape.
Opinion of the Court
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in a 9–0 decision that "deliberate indifference" to a substantial risk of harm to an inmate can render a prison official liable under the Eighth Amendment. Justice David Souter wrote the majority opinion, and was joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, along with Justices Harry Blackmun, John Paul Stevens, Sandra Day O'Connor, Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, and Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Justices Blackmun and Stevens also wrote separate concurring opinions. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a concurring opinion joining in the judgment, but disagreed with the majority's reasoning.
 Majority opinion 
The majority opinion of the Court held a prison official could be held liable under the Eighth Amendment if they are "deliberately indifferent" to a substantial risk of serious harm to a prisoner. The Court explained that the Eighth Amendment requires prison officials to provide humane conditions of confinement, which includes provision of "adequate food, clothing, shelter, and medical care," and taking "reasonable measures" to ensure inmate safety. In particular, prison officials have a duty to prevent harm from other prisoners. In order to prove that a constitutional rights violation occurred, however, an inmate must show (1) a substantial risk of serious harm and (2) that the prison official was deliberately indifferent to inmate health and safety. 
The Court then proceeded to clarify what qualified as "deliberate indifference." Under the deliberate indifference standard, a prison official must actually know of and disregard an excessive risk to inmate health and safety. The Court explained that this is a subjective standard, under which the official must be aware of facts that would lead to an inference that a substantial risk of serious harm exists, and then must also draw that inference.
Applying this standard to Farmer's case, the Court noted that the District Court mistakenly relied on the fact that Farmer never notified the guards of her risk of being assaulted in granting the defendants' motion for summary judgment.  Notification was not required under the deliberate indifference standard, and Farmer could use other circumstantial evidence to prove actual knowledge, such as admissions by prison guards that she was likely to face "a great deal of sexual pressure" in prison.  Consequently, the Court vacated the judgment by the Court of Appeals and remanded the case to the District Court for further proceedings.
 Concurrences 
 Justice Blackmun 
Justice Blackmun's concurring opinion went further by saying that the government was responsible for the conditions inside, regardless of a prison or government official's subjective state of mind:Where a legislature refuses to fund a prison adequately, the resulting barbaric conditions should not be immune from constitutional scrutiny simply because no prison official acted culpably....The responsibility for subminimal conditions in any prison inevitably is diffuse, and often borne at least in part, by the legislature. Yet, regardless of what state actor or institution caused the harm and with what intent, the experience of the inmate is the same. A punishment is simply no less cruel or unusual because its harm is unintended. In view of this obvious fact, there is no reason to believe that, in adopting the Eighth Amendment, the Framers intended to prohibit cruel and unusual punishments only when they were inflicted intentionally.
 Justice Stevens 
Justice Stevens wrote a short concurring opinion noting that he agreed with Justice Blackmun, but joined in Justice Souter's majority opinion because it more closely followed the Court's precedent.
 Justice Thomas 
Justice Thomas concurred in the judgment only, explaining that conditions of confinement should not violate the Eighth Amendment unless they are imposed as part of a sentence. In Farmer's case, because the attack "was not part of his sentence, it did not constitute 'punishment' under the Eighth Amendment." However, he agreed that a "deliberate indifference" standard should govern prison official liability, and therefore concurred in the Court's ruling.
 Subsequent developments 
 Farmer on remand 
The District Court again granted summary judgment against Farmer on remand. This second summary judgment was overturned by the Court of Appeals for not giving Farmer a meaningful chance to seek discovery in her case.Farmer v. Brennan, 81 F.3d 1444 (7th Cir. 1996) The subsequent trial lasted only two days, and the jury found for defendants after deliberating for one hour. The jury found that there was insufficient evidence presented to prove that Farmer's sexual assault had occurred.
 Subsequent cases 
Tens of thousands of cases in the lower courts have cited Farmer's case and the legal standard it established. Farmer also continues to have an impact on jailhouse lawyers. By carefully explaining how to argue constitutional violations behind bars, defining complex legal terms like “subjective recklessness” and mapping out a successful claim, Justice Souter's majority opinion serves as a roadmap for Eighth Amendment prison condition litigation. Nonetheless, the "actual knowledge" focus of the standard adopted by the Court in Brennan sets a high bar for plaintiffs that can often prove difficult to surmount. These claims became even more difficult to pursue after the Supreme Court's decision in Ashcroft v. Iqbal, which established a strict plausibility pleading standard, and makes it difficult for inmate plaintiffs to survive a motion to dismiss without clear evidence of prison officials' actual knowledge of their substantial risk of harm.Maureen Brocco, Facing the Facts: The Guarantee Against Cruel and Unusual Punishment in Light of PLRA, Iqbal, and PREA, 16 J. Gender Race & Just. 917, 921 (2013)
 Legacy 
Stop Prisoner Rape lauded the decision as a "historic breakthrough" in efforts to end "the widespread and institutionalized practice of rape of prisoners.""Hailing Supreme Court Decision" (Press release). Stop Prisoner Rape (now Just Detention International). 1994-06-07. Archived from the original on 2010-11-25. Retrieved 2008-12-30. The attention that the case brought to sexual assault in prisons, especially for trans inmates, helped to spur policy changes as well. Nine years later, Congress passed the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 and both the House and Senate referenced Farmer in floor debates regarding the bill.149 Congressional Record S9659, H7764-66 (2003) In 2012, the Department of Justice announced regulations implementing the PREA, including specific protections for transgender people that referred to Farmer expressly.77 Federal Register 37106 The final rule implemented by the DOJ explained that placement decisions for trans inmates must be made on a case-by-case basis, and should entail consideration of whether a placement would ensure the inmate’s health and safety, with serious consideration given to the inmate’s own views regarding their own safety.28 Code of Federal Regulations 115.42
See also
 Prison rape in the United States
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 511
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
 Notes 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Prison rape in the United States
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:Prisons in Indiana
Category:Legal history of Indiana
Category:Violence against trans women
Category:United States transgender rights case law
Category:1994 in LGBT history
"""

From "Farrington v. Tokushige" ==> """
Farrington v. Tokushige, 273 U.S. 284 (1927), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States unanimously struck down the Territory of Hawaii's law, making it illegal for schools to teach foreign languages without a permit, as it violated the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment.. Violation of the due process clause under the 14th Amendment was not considered as Hawaii was a territory of the United States at the time. 
Decision
The Court unanimously affirmed the lower court's decision:
The foregoing statement is enough to show that the school Act and the measures adopted thereunder go far beyond mere regulation of privately supported schools where children obtain instruction deemed valuable by their parents and which is not obviously in conflict with any public interest. They give affirmative direction concerning the intimate and essential details of such schools, intrust their control to public officers, and deny both owners and patrons reasonable choice and discretion in respect of teachers, curriculum and text-books. Enforcement of the Act probably would destroy most, if not all, of them; and, certainly, it would deprive parents of fair opportunity to procure for their children instruction which they think important and we cannot say is harmful. The Japanese parent has the right to direct the education of his own child without unreasonable restrictions; the Constitution protects him as well as those who speak another tongue.
The Court stated that "owners, parents and children" are guaranteed rights by the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment with reference to Meyer v. Nebraska, Bartels v. Iowa, and Pierce v. Society of Sisters.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 273
Meyer v. Nebraska
Pierce v. Society of Sisters
References
External links
Category:1927 in education
Category:1927 in Hawaii
Category:1927 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Hawaii
Category:United States education case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:Japanese-American culture in Hawaii
Category:Japanese-American history
Category:Language education in the United States
"""

From "Fashion Originators' Guild of America v. FTC" ==> """
Fashion Originators' Guild of America v. FTC, 312 U.S. 457 (1941), is a 1941 decision of the United States Supreme Court sustaining an order of the Federal Trade Commission against a boycott agreement (concerted refusal to deal) among manufacturers of "high-fashion" dresses. The purpose of the boycott was to suppress "style piracy" (unauthorized copying of original dress creations of Fashion Guild members). The FTC found the Fashion Guild in violation of § 5 of the FTC Act, because the challenged conduct was a per se violation of § 1 of the Sherman Act., affirming on other grounds 
Background
The Fashion Originators Guild (FOGA) and its members made and sold medium– and high–priced, fashionable women's dressesOther members were manufacturers, converters. or dyers of textiles from which these garments were made. 312 U.S. at 461. to retailers, who select their purchases from designs exhibited in show rooms in New York City.About a fourth of all women's dresses made in America sold for more than $10.75, and the Guild members in 1935 sold 42% of these. 312 U.S. at 461. The members made their dresses from their own "original designs." The designs were not protected by patents or copyrights, which were not available for clothing in 1941, and therefore other dress manufacturers (so-called "style pirates") made and sold unauthorized copies.114 F.2d at 81–82. See Cheney Bros. v. Doris Silk Co., 35 F.2d 279, 281 (2d Cir. 1929) (Hand, J.) (copyright not available).
thumb|right|FOGA label from a 1930s dress
The Guild was organized in 1932 to protect its members from "piracy," which they said was an unfair and tortious invasion of their rights. "Because of these alleged wrongs, petitioners . . . combined among themselves to combat and, if possible, destroy all competition from the sale of garments which are copies of their original creations." The Guild and its members agreed to refuse to sell any dresses to retailers who purchased, or ordered to be manufactured, dresses which the Guild found embodied copies of its members' designs. For that purpose the Guild set up a "Piracy Committee," which decided which of the designs registered by its members were original. It then employed shoppers in various parts of the country who visited the shops of retailers and report delinquents: if a retailer was found to be selling "pirated designs," it must stop doing so, or else it would get no more dresses from the Guild's members; nor would it be allowed to see the designs exhibited in the Guild's New York show rooms. Retailers that co-operated with the Guild had to agree to accept the decision of the Piracy Committee, and to return to sellers any dresses that had been "pirated." Furthermore, they had to warrant to customers that the designs of the dresses they sold had not been "pirated." As a result of the Guild's efforts, approximately 12,000 retailers signed agreements to "cooperate" with the Guild's boycott program.312 U.S. at 461.
If the Guild, upon auditing a member's books, found that a manufacturer was selling to a retailer dealing in pirated designs, the manufacturer was heavily fined. (In one instance, a fine of $1,500 was imposed, and the Guild notified its membership that a fine of $5,000 would be assessed in case of future violation.) The Guild also regulated the discount the manufacturers could allow, prohibited their selling at retail, and cooperated with local guilds in regulating days upon which special sales could be held.312 U.S. at 463.
The FTC issued a complaint against FOGA in April 1936,Commission Holds Guild a Monopoly: Issues Complaint Against Body and Four Other Groups for Conspiracy, N.Y. , Apr. 21, 1936, at 42. held hearings, found the pattern of conduct described above an unfair method of competition, and "made an order appropriate to break up the combination," from which the Guild appealed.114 F.2d at 82.
Ruling by Second Circuit
FOGA did not challenge the accuracy of the findings, "but on the contrary seeks to justify the combination." It argued that says that its actions "were necessary to protect the industry as a whole from 'demoralization' and the 'property' of its members from appropriation."
The Second Circuit, in an opinion by Judge Learned Hand, held that any common-law property right that the FOGA members had in their creations was lost upon publication. To embody a design in a dress or a fabric, and offer the dress for general sale was such a "publication"; therefore, the FOGA members had no property right against the copying by the so–called style pirates. "The Guild has therefore no . . . excuse for preventing other dressmakers from copying." Accordingly, the court said, "we are therefore to judge the Guild as a combination seeking to exclude outsiders from a market to which they have as lawful access as it has itself." A boycott can be justifiable only if it is in self-defense against a crime, tort, or breach of contract. "But that excuse does not extend to a boycott of retailers who buy dresses copied from 'published' designs; if that is to be justified, the excuse must be found elsewhere." The court could find no other excuse, and it observed that the effect of the boycott by the FOGA members "puts into their hands collectively the power to control the supply and with it the price," to the detriment of consumers. The court perceived each dress design as the subject of a monopoly (i.e., relevant submarket), so that "for these reasons the combination was unlawful per se."114 F.2d 84–85.
thumb|150px|right|Justice Hugo Black
Ruling by Supreme Court
The Supreme Court, in an opinion by Justice Hugo Black, unanimously affirmed the judgment of the Second Circuit on different grounds. The Court did not consider whether FOGA had property rights that were wrongfully invaded, or whether a boycott could be justified on some ground. It held horizontal boycotts (concerted refusals to deal) illegal per se.
The Court began by declaring, "If the purpose and practice of the combination of garment manufacturers and their affiliates runs counter to the public policy declared in the Sherman and Clayton Acts, the Federal Trade Commission has the power to suppress it as an unfair method of competition." The Court then considered whether the challenged boycott violated the letter of the Sherman or Clayton Acts, and found both to have been violated.312 U. S. 463–64.
The Court then found that FOGA's "scheme" vioated § 3 of the Clayton Act because "the scheme is bottomed upon a system of sale under which (1) textiles shall be sold to garment manufacturers only upon the condition and understanding that the buyers will not use or deal in textiles which are copied from the designs of textile manufacturing Guild members; (2) garment manufacturers shall sell to retailers only upon the condition and understanding that the retailers shall not use or deal in such copied designs." Since the FTC concluded "that these understandings substantially lessened competition and tended to create a monopoly," the FTC "correctly concluded that this practice constituted an unfair method of competition."312 U.S. at 464.
FOGA's program also violated the policies of §§ 1 and 2 of the Sherman Act, in that: "it narrows the outlets to which garment and textile manufacturers can sell and the sources from which retailers can buy; subjects all retailers and manufacturers who decline to comply with the Guild's program to an organized boycott; takes away the freedom of action of members by requiring each to reveal to the Guild the intimate details of their individual affairs; and has both as its necessary tendency and as its purpose and effect the direct suppression of competition from the sale of unregistered textiles and copied designs." In addition, FOGA's "combination is in reality an extra-governmental agency which prescribes rules for the regulation and restraint of interstate commerce and provides extrajudicial tribunals for determination and punishment of violations, and thus 'trenches upon the power of the national legislature and violates the statute.' "312 U.S. at 465.
FOGA argued that the "boycott and restraint of interstate trade is not within the ban of the policies of the Sherman and Clayton Acts, because 'the practices of FOGA were reasonable and necessary to protect the manufacturer, laborer, retailer and consumer against the devastating evils growing from the pirating of original designs and had in fact benefited all four. " In addition, FOGA said, the copying of dress designs against which FOGA directed its conduct was itself tortious. The Court rejected these arguments, saying:
[E]ven if copying were an acknowledged tort under the law of every state, that situation would not justify petitioners in combining together to regulate and restrain interstate commerce in violation of federal law. And for these same reasons, the principles declared in International News Service v. Associated Press cannot serve to legalize petitioners' unlawful combination.312 U.S. at 467-68.
Subsequent developments
In Associated Press v. United States. the Supreme Court condemned the restrictive by-laws of the AP because, like FOGA, AP was operating as a private government:
Here as in the Fashion Originator's Guild case, 'the combination is in reality an extra-governmental agency, which prescribes rules for the regulation and restraint of interstate commerce, and provides extra-judicial tribunals for determination and punishment of violations, and thus 'trenches upon the power of the national legislature and violates the statute.'
In FTC v. Cement Institute,. the Supreme Court relied on the FOGA case to support the proposition that restrictive practices that violate the Sherman Act violate § 5 of the FTC Act.
In Klor's, Inc. v. Broadway-Hale Stores, Inc.,. the Supreme Court relied on the FOGA case to support the proposition: "Group boycotts, or concerted refusals by traders to deal with other traders, have long been held to be in the forbidden category. They have not been saved by allegations that they were reasonable in the specific circumstances, nor by a failure to show that they 'fixed or regulated prices, parcelled out or limited production, or brought about a deterioration in quality.' " In the Klor's case, the boycott was created when a retail store, Broadway-Hale, and ten household appliance manufacturers and their distributors agreed that the distributors would not sell household appliances (or would sell them only at discriminatory prices) to Broadway-Hale's small, nearby competitor, Klor's, a price-cutter.359 U.S. at 208—209. The defendants submitted undisputed evidence that their agreement hurt only one competitor (Klor's) and that so many other nearby appliance-selling competitors remained that competition in the marketplace continued to thrive.359 U.S. at 209—210. The Court held that this evidence was immaterial, because the conspiracy was "not to be tolerated merely because the victim is just one merchant."359 U.S. at 213.
In American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Inc. v. Hydrolevel Corp.,. the Supreme Court condemned the use of as standards-setting agency by some of its members to exclude competition. As in the FOGA case, the Court said: "ASME can be said to be 'in reality an extra-governmental agency, which prescribes rules for the regulation and restraint of interstate commerce.' "
In Nynex Corp. v. Discon, Inc.,. the Supreme Court held that the per se rule against boycotts was limited to horizontal group boycotts. The Court said:
[T]he specific legal question before us is whether an antitrust court considering an agreement by a buyer to purchase goods or services from one supplier rather than another should (after examining the buyer's reasons or justifications) apply the per se rule if it finds no legitimate business reason for that purchasing decision. We conclude no boycott-related per se rule applies and that the plaintiff here must allege and prove harm, not just to a single competitor, but to the competitive process, i.e., to competition itself.525 U.S. at 135.
The Court pointed to precedent: FOGA involved "a group boycott in the strongest sense: A group of competitors threatened to withhold business from third parties unless those third parties would help them injure their directly competing rivals." Klor's "also  involved a horizontal agreement among those threatened, namely, the appliance suppliers, to hurt a competitor of the retailer who made the threat." Because the case before the Court "concerns only a vertical agreement and a vertical restraint, a restraint that takes the form of depriving a supplier of a potential customer," it was not within existing boycott precedent.525 U.S. at 135-36.
Commentary
Wallace Kirkpatrick, an official of the Antitrust Division, writing shortly after the Supreme Court's decision in the FOGA case, pointed out the difference between Learned Hand's and Justice Black's respective approaches to boycotts against wrongdoers—persons committing criminal or tortious acts.W. Wallace Kirkpatrick, Commercial Boycotts As Per Se Violations of the Sherman Act, 10  387 (1942). Judge Hand held that a boycott may be justified by the conduct of the person against whom the boycott is directed, even where the boycott was not a refusal to participate in unlawful acts. For instance, he said, it was justifiable for dress manufacturers to boycott retailers who got access to unpublished designs by a crime or a breach of contract, or who
knowingly bought from a manufacturer who stole unpublished designs or copied them without the owner's consent. Justice Black, however, would not permit vigilante justice. He said that the fact that a person was engaged in tortious conduct would not allow a group to refuse in concert to deal with him and would not justify "combining together to regulate and restrain interstate commerce in violation of federal law." Kirkpatrick pointed out that the Supreme Court, but not Judge Hand, properly followed the principle that the Supreme Court had explained in United States v. American Livestock Comm'n Co., (dictum: concerted refusal to deal with cooperative would be legal if in fact merely a refusal to participate in an illegal course of conduct). which distinguished between joint refusals to participate in unlawful conduct and joint refusals to deal where "the wrong is completely independent of the dealings
into which the combination refuses to enter." Kirkpatrick aligns himself with Black in saying that no private group has the right to "assum[e] the power to decide who is fitted to enter into business and what is a prerequisite for engaging in interstate commerce."Kirkpatrick, at 399-402.
Robert Merges observed of FOGA that  the only important differences between it (and similar guilds) and a formal statutory IP right covering fashion designs were: 
 the guilds were based on "an informal, inter-industry quasi-property right, rather than a formal statutory right";
 the guilds "required concerted action to achieve any appropriability"; and
 the guilds "concentrated [their] enforcement efforts at the retail level by requiring retailers to sign contracts and by policing retailers, rather than targeting competing manufacturers."Robert P. Merges, Contracting into Liability Rules: Intellectual Property Rights and Collective Rights Organizations, 84  1293, 1364 (1996).
In Merges's view, which is the diametric opposite of that of the Court in regard to "an extra-governmental agency which prescribes rules for the regulation and restraint of interstate commerce and provides extrajudicial tribunals for determination and punishment of violations," the FTC and Court made a mistake in condemning FOGA "out of hand" simply because it ran a boycott. Rather, the "Court should have considered whether the Guild tended to enhance economic efficiency,' and whether it did so at a lower cost than a formal property right in dress design." He would favor the Guild over a formal IPR [intellectual property right] granted by the state . . . [if] the combination of (1) enforcement at the retail level and (2) shared understandings about what qualifies as an 'original design' would make the system cheaper to administer than a formal, state-run system that created the same level of reward, and hence incentives."Merges at 1364. He concludes that the Court's rejection of the FOGA scheme:
not only killed an interesting experiment in alternative intellectual property systems, but it also sent a far-reaching signal that when these systems are based on informal property rights, they are void per se. While this conclusion may be defensible in certain cases, it might have been better to establish a "rule of reason" analysis for private intellectual property systems.Merges at 1365.
Like Kirkpatrick, Professors Hemphill and Suk noted the difference between Judge Hand's relatively tolerant attitude and reluctance to condemn the Guild, as contrasted with Justice Black's condemnation of its usurpation of legislative power in the final opinion of the Court. But they describe an early unpublished draft of the FOGA opinion, in which Justice Black gave careful substantive attention to the Guild's justification arguments, stating that "there is much force in petitioners' arguments" that a quasi-property right like that recognized in the INS caseSee INS v. AP. could perhaps apply, but concluding that the principle was too difficult to confine within limits. A subsequent draft of the opinion adopts a suggestion by Justice Harlan Stone that the case should be disposed of "on the ground that self-help through boycott was impermissible, even to vindicate a legal right."C. Scott Hemphill and Jeannie Suk, The Fashion Originators' Guild of America: Self-Help at the Edge of IP and Antitrust, at 18-19 (March 22, 2013).
See also
 C. Scott Hemphill and Jeannie Suk, The Fashion Originators' Guild of America: Self-Help at the Edge of IP and Antitrust (March 22, 2013).
 Friend Friday: Copying in the Fashion Industry (is imitation the sincerest form of flattery?) in  (Sept. 3, 2010).
References
External links
 Article at vintagefashionguild.org
 Contemporary magazine article, dated Mar. 23, 1936, from the Time magazine archive
 New Yorker article: "The Piracy Paradox"
 Dress with Fashion Originators Guild label
Category:Cartels
Category:1941 in United States case law
Category:Federal Trade Commission litigation
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:Fashion design
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc. (2012)" ==> """
Federal Communications Commission v. Fox Television Stations, Inc., 567 U.S. 239 (2012), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States regarding whether the U.S. Federal Communications Commission's scheme for regulating speech is unconstitutionally vague. The Supreme Court excused the broadcasters from paying fines levied for what the FCC had determined indecency, in a majority opinion delivered by Justice Anthony Kennedy. The Supreme Court had previously issued an opinion in the case in 2009 addressing the nature of the fine itself, without addressing the restriction on indecent speech.
Initial case
The case entered the Supreme Court's docket in October 2007 and specifically concerns obscene language broadcast on the Fox television network from two Billboard Music Awards shows occurring in 2002 and 2003. On the December 9, 2002 ceremony, while accepting an artist achievement award for her career, Cher said "fuck 'em" regarding people who she believed criticized her; on the ceremony occurring on December 10, 2003, presenter Nicole Richie stated regarding her television show: “Why do they even call it The Simple Life? Have you ever tried to get cow shit out of a Prada purse? It’s not so fucking simple.” 
In 2004, after those incidents and another incident in January 2003 involving NBC and the 2003 Golden Globes, where U2 lead singer Bono called the band's win for Best Original Song "really, really, fucking brilliant" in his acceptance speech, Federal Communications Commission (FCC) changed its rules on expletives to prohibit "single uses of vulgar words" under any circumstances, including previous instances where it gave leeway for "fleeting" expletives that networks unknowingly allowed to enter the airwaves. Fox was subsequently fined through its owned and operated television stations group, and challenged its fine in the courts. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled in the initial case (06-1760) that the FCC cannot punish broadcast stations for such incidents. The FCC appealed to the Supreme Court, and in the 2009 case, the Supreme Court reversed the Second Circuit,reversed the Second Circuit finding that the new policy was not arbitrary. However, the issue of constitutionality was remanded to the Second Circuit, which had not considered the issue initially.
Background
Upon remand to hear the initially deferred issue of constitutionality, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals re-heard the case in January 2010. On July 13, 2010, in a unanimous decision written by Judge Rosemary S. Pooler, the Second Circuit vacated the FCC order and policy on First Amendment grounds, finding that "by prohibiting all 'patently offensive' references to sex, sexual organs, and excretion without giving adequate guidance as to what 'patently offensive' means, the FCC effectively chills speech, because broadcasters have no way of knowing what the FCC will find offensive. To place any discussion of these vast topics at the broadcaster’s peril has the effect of promoting wide self-censorship of valuable material which should be completely protected under the First Amendment." The Second Circuit added 
The FCC requested that the full Second Circuit hear the case en banc, but was denied. The Supreme Court heard oral arguments in this round on January 10, 2012.
Ruling
In an 8–0 decision (Justice Sonia Sotomayor recused herself because she had previously sat on the Second Circuit) written by Justice Anthony Kennedy, the Supreme Court ruled that because the regulations at the time did not cover "fleeting expletives" (the regulations have since been amended to that end), the fines issued were invalidated as "unconstitutionally vague" under the Due Process Clause. Because the case was resolved on that basis, the Court declined to address the First Amendment implications of the FCC's indecency regulations or to reconsider FCC v. Pacifica, 438 U.S. 726 (1978).FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc., slip op. at 17.
Ginsburg concurrence
Ginsburg authored a one-paragraph concurrence in which she agreed with the decision, but argued that the Supreme Court should have revisited Pacifica, as she felt it was “wrong when it was issued”.
See also
Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy (FCC v. CBS), which led to new rules involving fleeting indecency as well as fleeting expletives
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Federal Communications Commission litigation
*
Category:Censorship of broadcasting in the United States
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:2012 in American television
Category:Media case law
Category:20th Century Fox litigation
Category:Fox Broadcasting Company
Category:United States obscenity case law
"""

From "FCC v. Prometheus Radio Project" ==> """
Federal Communications Commission v. Prometheus Radio Project, 592 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with media ownership rules that the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) can set under the Telecommunications Act of 1996. The case dates back to Third Circuit rulings from 2002 that have blocked FCC decisions to relax media ownership rules related to cross-ownership of newspapers with television and radio broadcast stations. In the present case, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously in April 2021 that the FCC had not made arbitrary and capricious rulemaking decisions in the context of the Administrative Procedure Act, nor had the requirement to review minority ownership of stations under Congressional mandate as stated in the Third Circuit's ruling, reversing this last ruling and allowing the FCC to proceed to relax cross-media ownership rules.
Background
In the United States, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) had been given authority under the Communications Act of 1934 to set media ownership rules of broadcast services such as radio and television that served the same community as to manage the broadcasting spectrum. In 1975, the FCC enacted a rule restricting cross-media ownership, preventing newspapers from also owning broadcast services, as to reduce concentration of media ownership that had been occurring in the years prior. While the FCC could not regulate newspapers, they could extend their regulation on broadcast services to cover cross-ownership.
The 1975 rule led to a number of debates on the cross-media ownership rules, as they were found to become barriers to entry into the market. Among other functions, the Telecommunications Act of 1996 instructed the FCC to perform a review of its rules related to media ownership every four years and repeal rules that no longer made sense in the current market as to foster competition within the communications industry.
The first such review was performed in 2002. The FCC issued its first proposed rule that year for public review, and voted in 2003 to enact it. The new rule partially repealed the cross-media ownership limitations as the FCC found that the rule was no longer necessary in the public interest to maintain competition, diversity or localism. However, it maintained some limited ownership controls through a diversity index based on the Herfindahl–Hirschman Index to determine if market consolidation was an issue. The ruling was challenged by several groups, with the primary legal challenge led by the Prometheus Radio Project, a non-profit advocacy group campaigning against media consolidation. The suit reached the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, which ruled in Prometheus Radio Project v. FCC (or Prometheus I) that while the FCC had properly justified replacing the older cross-ownership restrictions with the newer cross-media limits, the reasoning they used to justified the rules for the new limits was insufficient, specifically for how the diversity index was calculated with the inclusion of Internet coverage. The Third Circuit placed a stay on the new cross-media limit rules, and required the FCC to maintain the pre-2002 rules for cross-ownership.
The FCC's next required review under the Telecommunications Act came in 2006, which included reassessing the Third Circuit's decision alongside commissioned studies on the state and impact of changing the cross-ownership rules. It issued new rules in 2008, primarily limiting owners of newspapers to owning one television or one radio station in the top twenty urban markets. The rules also created a new class of minority-owned broadcasters which had been suggested from the Prometheus I decision as to assure there would be viewpoint diversity. The new rules were again challenged by the Prometheus Radio Project, which the Third Circuit heard in 2011 as Prometheus Radio Project v. FCC (Prometheus II). The Third Circuit ruled to maintain the stay on the new rules, stating that the FCC still had not shown good justification for the new cross-ownership rules and minority ownership concerns that the court had previously raised. The court did reassert that the FCC had compelling interest to relax the prior media ownership rules from 1975 as this served no compelling public interest, urging the FCC to find rules with proper justification to support this.
With the ongoing action in Prometheus II, the FCC failed to complete its 2010 or 2014 review, and what efforts had been performed had not followed on the cross-media ownership aspects. The lack of inaction on these matters led to a third suit, Prometheus Radio Project v. FCC (Prometheus III) in 2016 in the Third Circuit. The court ordered the FCC to complete the 2010 and 2014 reviews and issue a new proposed cross-media ownership rule by the end of 2016, since there was a compelling drive to replace the 1975 rule and the FCC's delay was hampering the process. By August 2016, the FCC issued its new rules that for all purposes left the 1975 rule in place with small modifications, such as for a failing newspaper to receive investments from a local television or radio station.
The new rules were seen as inaction by many media companies, which had been losing revenue over the previous years, and a fourth iteration or Prometheus Radio Project v. FCC (Prometheus IV) began in the courts. While the case was under litigation, newly elected Donald Trump replaced the FCC chairmen with Ajit Pai, who led the FCC to release two new orders related to media ownership in 2017 and 2018. The 2017 orders overrode parts of the 2016 rules and essentially eliminated the cross-ownership restrictions from 1975, while the 2018 order addressed minority ownership to allow larger companies to incubate minority-owned states as to meet diversity goals. Both orders were challenged, and the cases consolidated into the ongoing Prometheus IV case at the Third Circuit. The Third Circuit ruled in September 2019 that the FCC still had not "adequately considered the effects" of the new rules on "diversity in broadcast media ownership," vacating both the 2017 and 2018 rules. The Third Circuit criticized the FCC's proposed orders for failing to consider gender or social disadvantage diversity alongside racial diversity as part of its incubator program or in relaxing the ownership rules. The decision left parts of the 2016 rules but otherwise returned media ownership back to the 1975 restrictions.
Supreme Court
While prior Third Circuit decisions have been petitioned to the Supreme Court, the Court has not certified the prior cases. The FCC petitioned to the Supreme Court to challenge the ruling from Prometheus IV in April 2020 with the support of the United States Department of Justice. The Supreme Court certified the case in October 2020, consolidated with a challenge from the National Association of Broadcasters, with oral arguments heard on January 19, 2021. Observers believed that a majority of the Justices on both conservative and liberal sides may side with the FCC as the Justices questioned whether the FCC needed to account for minority ownership under the original 1996 law, which has been a limiting factor in the Third Circuit's decisions in the past cases, and that under the Administrative Procedures Act, the FCC has shown it has done a sufficient amount of evaluation in its rule-making evaluations to all other factors relating to public interest of media ownership.
The Court issued its unanimous ruling on April 1, 2021, reversing the Third Circuit's most recent decision. The majority opinion was written by Justice Brett Kavanaugh and joined by all other Justices. Kavanaugh wrote that the Court found that the FCC's decision to modify or eliminate the prior cross-media ownership rules were not arbitrary and capricious and thus did not violate the APA. Justice Clarence Thomas also wrote a concurrence.
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:Federal Communications Commission litigation
Category:Concentration of media ownership
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "FDA v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp." ==> """
FDA v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., 529 U.S. 120 (2000), is an important United States Supreme Court case in the development of American administrative law. It ruled that the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act did not give the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) the authority to regulate tobacco products as "drugs" or "devices." This was later superseded by the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act, which granted the FDA the authority to regulate such products.
Legal principle
The scope of authority held by an agency is determined by the agency's organic statute.  Where Congress repeatedly denies an agency the power to regulate a particular area and develops a comprehensive regulatory scheme outside the agency's control, the agency may not regulate that area.
The approach, in this case, balances the approach of US v. Southwestern Cable Co..  Whereas Southwestern Cable allowed an agency to regulate areas not explicitly contemplated by the statute when necessary to fulfill its ultimate goal even when legislative efforts to gain such power failed, FDA does not allow agencies to regulate areas for which Congress has developed a separate statutory scheme.
Facts and procedural posture
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) attempted to regulate tobacco products.  Tobacco companies, including Brown & Williamson and Philip Morris Companies (among others), challenged the regulations.  The District Court granted in part and denied in part the plaintiff's claim.  The Circuit Court reversed, ruling for the tobacco company.
The Supreme Court ultimately affirmed the Circuit Court's ruling for the tobacco company, ruling that the FDA did not have the power to enact and enforce the regulations in question.
Analysis
The FDA's authority to regulate came from the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FDCA).  The FDA argued that nicotine was a "drug" and cigarettes and smokeless tobacco are "devices" that deliver nicotine to the body within the meaning of the FDCA.  Congress had enacted several tobacco-specific laws after the FDCA, and the FDA had never exercised any control over tobacco.  The Court concluded that Congress did not intend to give the FDA the power to regulate tobacco and that the regulations were therefore invalid.
Further developments
This decision was overridden by the passage of the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act of 2009, which gave the FDA the authority to regulate the tobacco industry and control the level of nicotine in cigarettes.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 529
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 Y1 (tobacco)
References
Further reading
Suing the Tobacco and Lead Pigment Industries: Government Litigation as Public Health Prescription by Donald G. Gifford. Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press, 2010. 
External links
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States tobacco case law
Category:Food and Drug Administration
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:Brown & Williamson
Category:History of Louisville, Kentucky
Category:Smoking in the United States
"""

From "FEC v. Akins" ==> """
Federal Election Commission v. Akins, 524 U.S. 11 (1998), was a United States Supreme Court case deciding that an individual could sue for a violation of a federal law pursuant to a statute enacted by the U.S. Congress which created a general right to access certain information..
Facts
The plaintiffs were registered voters who had asked the defendant Federal Elections Commission ("FEC") to determine that an organization called the American Israel Public Affairs Committee ("AIPAC") was a "political committee" subject to certain regulations and reporting requirements under the Federal Election Campaign Act, because AIPAC had crossed certain spending thresholds. The FEC determined that AIPAC had indeed crossed those thresholds, but still did not require it to make the required reports because the organization was issue-oriented, not campaign-related. The plaintiffs sought review in the District Court, which granted summary judgment for the FEC; this ruling was affirmed by a panel of the Court of Appeals, but the Court of Appeals en banc reversed. The government sought certiorari, and challenged the plaintiff's standing on the grounds that the plaintiffs had suffered no 'injury in fact'; that if the plaintiffs had any injury it was not fairly traceable to the FEC decision; and that a decision in favor of the plaintiffs would not redress their injury.
Issue
Did the plaintiffs suffer an injury in fact sufficient to establish standing?
Opinion of the Court
The Court, in an opinion by Justice Breyer, held that Congress has, by statute, allowed "any party aggrieved by an order of the Commission" to file a suit, which is a broad grant; not getting the requested information is an "injury in fact" just like the denial of any other information which is statutorily required to be provided to citizens by the government. The grievance is a "generalized grievance," but the harm is concrete enough to overcome this, and the harm is fairly traceable to the FEC – even though the FEC may find other grounds not to make AIPAC provide the info.Akins, 524 U.S. at 24 ("[W]here a harm is concrete, though widely shared, the Court has found 'injury in fact.'"). 
The Court distinguished this case from lawsuits where an individual seeks relief based on mere taxpayer standing - an insufficient ground for standing to sue. It instead employed a "zone of interests test," asking whether the injury asserted fell into the zone of interests protected by the statute.
The case was remanded to the FEC to review its definition of 'members.' The Court noted that the FEC was producing new guidelines regarding this issue, which would address it and not require a new legal precedent. The plaintiffs were bitterly disappointed by the decision not to intervene, as the effort to have AIPAC legally declared a political action committee was a higher priority than the (successful) effort to show standing to have filed this lawsuit in the first place. While they repeatedly attempted filings to have the case re-opened, these were entirely rejected, and in 2010 a Federal court in D.C. ruled that the lawsuit had no merit as electoral law and it was officially and finally dismissed.
Dissent
Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion asserting that the fact the statute differentiated between 'any person' (in defining the class of persons who could file a complaint with the FEC over a violation) and 'any party aggrieved' (in defining the class of persons who could bring suit in federal court over the FEC's decision on the complaint) demonstrated the limiting force of the latter provision—anyone could file a complaint with the FEC if they believed a violation had occurred, but only parties who had actually been aggrieved (suffered a particularized injury) as a result of the FEC's decision on the complaint could sue.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 524
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States standing case law
Category:Federal Election Commission litigation
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:American Israel Public Affairs Committee
"""

From "FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life" ==> """
In Federal Election Commission v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Inc., 479 U.S. 238 (1986), the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Inc. violated the Federal Election Campaign Act by distributing flyers asking voters to vote "for life" paid for with treasury funds. However, the court also ruled that the FECA section that required any spending by corporations on political campaigning to be done through political action committees (PACs) was itself a violation of the First Amendment rights of nonprofit political and ideological groups.
 See also 
 FEC v. National Conservative PAC
 FEC v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc.
 Citizens United v. FEC
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Federal Election Commission litigation
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:United States elections case law
Category:Anti-abortion movement
"""

From "FEC v. National Conservative PAC" ==> """
FEC v. National Conservative PAC, 470 U.S. 480 (1985), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States striking down expenditure prohibitions of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA), which regulates the fundraising and spending in political campaigns. The FECA is the primary law that places regulations on campaign financing by limiting the amount that may be contributed. The Act established that no independent political action committee may contribute more than $1,000 to any given presidential candidate in support of a campaign.
A political action committee is an organization that oversees contributions made by members for an electoral candidate. The committee then donates the funding to campaign for or against a candidate.
The Democratic Party of the United States and the Federal Election Commission (FEC) accused the National Conservative Political Action Committee (NCPAC) of violating the Federal Election Campaign Act in 1975.  The defendants were accused of violating the expenditure limit implemented by the FECA, with the assertion that the independent contribution was in violation of the Act. The NCPAC expressed concern that the FECA violated the First Amendment.
In response, The Federal Election Commission claimed that the limitation of expenditures held by the FECA was not a violation of the First Amendment. The FEC said that because it is important to protect the integrity of the Government, as well as to uphold the public's perception of integrity, the limitation was necessary and still complied with the First Amendment. The FEC believed private financing could tarnish the protection of integrity and the public's perception. The Commission also believed the FECA would not hinder individual expression, and that ample room was left to freely express oneself under the Act.
Justice William H. Rehnquist concluded in the majority opinion that an attempt to limit spending in support of a presidential candidate, regardless of financial numerical amount, is still an attempt to regulate the First Amendment and the freedom of association, and is therefore unconstitutional.  
left|thumb
 Background of the case 
On November 28, 1984, the FEC v. National Conservative PAC was argued at the Supreme Court level. This case was argued together with Democratic Party v. National Conservative Political Action Committee. Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States often referred to the decision of the 1976 Supreme Court case Buckley v. Valeo when discussing FEC v. NPAC.
The U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia ruled Section 9012(f) unconstitutional in September 1980, regarding three political committees that were not tied with an overall organization. The Presidential Election Campaign Act established that no committee may spend more than $1,000 in support of a candidate, if they were not authorized by a candidate to do so. After the Supreme Court of the United States heard the case on January 19, 1982, the decision came to a split 4 - 4 decision, due to the absence of Justice Sandra O'Connor. This led to the Federal Election Commission enforcing the same previous limitation of expenditures on the NCPAC and the FCM under Section 9012(f).
The Federal Election Commission then introduced another case to the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania in order to come to a conclusion as to whether or not Section 9012(f) holds constitutional. Another case, Democratic National Committee v. NCPAC, was filed around the same time. However, the FEC argued that the DNC did not have authorized constitutional standing. In response, the DNC requested clarification by a judge panel to determine the expenditures limitation, and whether or not it held constitutional.
The defendants were accused of making expenditures in excess of the $1,000 limit, violating the Federal Election Campaign Act. The defendants said that this limitation was a violation of the First Amendment. The Supreme Court debated whether or not the dollar limit was of concern, pointing out that if the limit was set to $100, $50, or $1, the limit is still a limit. Essentially, Justice Warren E. Burger noted that any dollar limit, regardless of what numerical value it holds, is a limitation to the freedom of expression.
Both the FEC and Democratic Party of the United States believed that the Federal Election Campaign Act was not in violation of the First Amendment. The Commission said that freedom of expression was hindered under the FECA, despite the limit regulation placed on expenditures. The Democratic Party of the United States emphasized that the FECA allowed candidates to campaign and focus on the most important issues occurring in the country, free of judgment or pressure to persuade in favor of financial support.
Although the trial began on November 28, 1984, it was not until March 18, 1985 that the Supreme Court of the United States reached a decision. The court determined 9012(f) unconstitutional.
 Majority opinion 
The Supreme Court ruled, 5 – 4, that under the First Amendment, the defendants' freedoms of speech and association was violated because the Court decided regulating expenditures is the same as hindering the freedom of expression.
Writing for the majority, Justice William Rehnquist asserted the opinion over two issues. The majority reversed the decision held by the District Court regarding an initial issue as to the standing of the Democratic Party and its jurisdiction to bring the case into question..  The court concluded: 
We noted probable jurisdiction pursuant to the statutory appeal provision of § 9011(b)(2), which provides for a direct appeal to this Court from three-judge district courts convened in proceedings under § 9011(b)(1). 466 U.S. 935 (1984). We reverse the judgment of the District Court on the issue of the standing of the Democratic Party and the DNC, but affirm its judgment as to the constitutional validity of § 9012(f).
The majority concluded that the expenditure limit, regardless of how much the limit is set to, under the Federal Election Campaign Act is an infringement on the First Amendment and freedom of association. The court asserted that:  Allowing the presentation of [political] views while forbidding the expenditure of more than $1,000 to present them is much like allowing a speaker in a public hall to express his views while denying him the use of an amplifying system.
The majority also concluded that claims made by those who were in support of the FECA's limitation of expenditures regarding the motive to avoid corruption within elections did not hold, the Court concluded: 
Section 9012(f)'s limitation on independent expenditures by political committees is constitutionally infirm, absent any indication that such expenditures have a tendency to corrupt or to give the appearance of corruption.
The court noted that Section 9012(f) shall not restrict these groups from participation in political debates or campaigns, despite Congress' opinion. The court found that these groups were simply expressing the First Amendment, asserting that these groups: 
Are quite different from the traditional organizations organized for economic gain [e.g., corporations and labor organizations] that may properly be prohibited from making contributions to political candidates.
The court held that the limitation of expenditures in excess of $1,000, or in any amount, violated the First Amendment. The majority ruled that the Federal Election Campaign Act was unconstitutional, and any individual is free to express participation in a Presidential campaign or election. Congress previously asserted it necessary for these political action groups to be withheld, but the court finalized the decision that this is unconstitutional in the majority opinion.
 Stevens Concurs with part of the decision 
Justice John Paul Stevens both concurs and dissents in his opinion. He distinguishes his conclusions regarding the participation of the Democratic National Committee, stating he only agrees with the second part held by the majority opinion. Stevens challenges that the decision of the Court in reference to the DNC's standing is not necessary, because ultimately the Supreme Court makes the decisions of appeals. Stevens asserts that:
The fact that the Federal Election Commission also has standing is not, in my opinion, a sufficient reason for concluding that it was not appropriate for DNC to commence this action regardless of whether or not the FEC elected to participate.
 White's dissent 
Justice Byron White wrote the dissenting opinion and was then joined by Justice Thurgood Marshall who also stated his dissent.
Justice White concluded in his dissent that campaign spending regulations are constitutional and that there is a difference between freedom of speech restrictions and freedom of spending money. He states:
The First Amendment protects the right to speak, not the right to spend, and limitations on the amount of money that can be spent are not the same as restrictions on speaking. I agree with the majority that the expenditures in this case "produce" core First Amendment speech. See ante at 470 U. S. 493. But that is precisely the point: they produce such speech; they are not speech itself.
White asserted that the case the Supreme Court had referred to, Buckley v. Valeo, was not decided correctly. White concluded that the expenditures in campaigns ought to be regulated in favor of the government's interests. He asserts:
Congressional regulation of the amassing and spending of money in political campaigns without doubt involves First Amendment concerns, but restrictions such as the one at issue here are supported by governmental interests -- including, but not limited to, the need to avoid real or apparent corruption -- sufficiently compelling to withstand scrutiny.
White believed that even despite the outcome of Buckley v. Valeo, the case was not correctly referenced in regard to FEC v. NPAC, the current case. He asserted that Section 9012(f) was more appropriately related to the Buckley v. Valeo case and that it did not hold the same in the current case. He states:
The provision challenged here more closely resembles the contribution limitations that were upheld in Buckley and later cases than the limitations on uncoordinated individual expenditures that were struck down.
 Marshall's dissent 
Justice Thurgood Marshall, who joined Justice White in the dissent, asserted his change in opinion that he too believes the interests of the government can justify expenditures. He states:
Unlike contributions, such independent expenditures may well provide little assistance to the candidate's campaign, and may indeed prove counterproductive. The absence of prearrangement and coordination of an expenditure with the candidate or his agent not only undermines the value of the expenditure to the candidate, but also alleviates the danger that expenditures will be given as a quid pro quo for improper commitments from the candidate.
Marshall dissents that the impact of limitations on expenditures and contributions on First Amendment freedoms are critically different. He states: First, the underlying rights at issue -- freedom of speech and freedom of association -- are both core First Amendment rights.  Second, in both cases, the regulation is of the same form:  it concerns the amount of money that can be spent for political activity.  Thus, I do not see how one interest can be deemed more compelling than the other.
Justice Marshall writes his dissent with references to the 1976 Supreme Court case, Buckley v. Valeo. Marshall states that he no longer agrees with the distinction concluded in the Buckley v. Valeo case. Marshall concludes that the limitation of independent expenditures is necessary to maintain integrity in the Government and the public's perception of integrity. He concludes:
I have come to believe that the limitations on independent expenditures challenged in that case and here are justified by the congressional interests in promoting "the reality and appearance of equal access to the political arena," id. at  424 U. S. 287, and in eliminating political corruption and the appearance of such corruption.
 Subsequent developments 
Previous Supreme Court cases, such as Buckley v. Valeo and Democratic National Committee v. NCPAC, set the precedent for the decision in FEC v. NPAC. However, all of these cases are important in setting the precedent for future cases to come. FEC v. NPAC establishes that, under the First Amendment, it is constitutional to make expenditures in support of a candidate's campaign in any dollar amount. The freedom of expression must not be hindered by the restriction or limitation of expenditures.
Candidates have traditionally financed campaigns through private, voluntary contributions in both the United States and other democratic nations. Thus, the idea of public funding in support of a political candidate naturally received opposition. However, Supreme Court decisions, such as FEC. v. NPAC, have developed the concept of public funding. The FEC. v. NPAC decision began to establish a sense of normality in public funding for elections.
In 2014, the Supreme Court revisited issues imposed by the FECA. McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission was a Supreme Court decision that declared imposing an aggregate contribution limit on an individual over a two-year period to national party and federal candidate committees unconstitutional. In a 5–4 decision, Supreme Court Justices decided that this was a violation of the First Amendment.
Federal campaign finance regulations have been altered substantially since the first law was introduced in 1867. Public financing has been declared constitutional, and has since been normalized from past private financing traditions. Individuals have the right under the First Amendment to exercise the freedom of expression, and contribute financially to election campaigns, whether those funds are to campaign for or against a candidate.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 250
 FEC v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc.
 FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life
 Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission
 References 
External links
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Federal Election Commission litigation
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "FEC v. Ted Cruz for Senate" ==> """
Federal Election Commission v. Ted Cruz for Senate, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a case related to the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Supreme Court of the United States struck down section 304 of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002, which limited the amount of money that candidates could be paid on personal loans to their campaign.
 Background 
Section 304 of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act (BCRA) of 2002 ((j)) precludes candidates for Congress from using greater than $250,000 in post-election contributions each cycle to pay off debt the campaigns owe to the candidates. Campaigns can repay loans in excess of  in full within 20 days of the election and using pre-election funds, but otherwise loan repayments were capped at that amount afterwards. The purpose of the provision was to prevent candidates from receiving bribes; If a candidate made a loan to their own campaign, and charged interest on the loan, then people and lobbyists could donate money to a candidate's election campaign, of which the money could be used to pay off the loan the candidate made and benefit the candidate's personal wealth.
As part of his re-election campaign for the U.S. Senate seat from Texas in 2018, Senator Ted Cruz loaned  to his campaign. The campaign failed to repay his loan within 20 days of the election, so later repaid him the maximum amount by law, leaving Cruz  of his loan. Cruz and his election committee sued the Federal Election Commission (FEC), which oversees violations of election financing, in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. Cruz and his campaign argued that BCRA's limit on repayment violated Cruz's First Amendment rights since it placed a limit on his ability to spend for free speech. The FEC argued that the election committee, on the day before the election, had more than  in funds which they could have paid Cruz within the 20-day window but purposely waited until after the window as to create a vehicle to challenge BCRA, making Cruz's losses self-inflicted. The three-judge panel at the district court ruled unanimously in Cruz's favor. Judge Neomi Rao, in the court opinion, "Protections for political speech extend to campaign financing because effective speech requires spending money" and that "the loan-repayment limit intrudes on fundamental rights of speech and association without serving a substantial government interest"
 Supreme Court 
The FEC appealed the case to the Supreme Court, on the question of whether the loan repayment limits of BCRA did violate the First Amendment. Oral arguments were heard on January 19, 2022.
The court released its decision on May 16, 2022. The 6–3 decision, falling along the court's ideological lines, was written by Chief Justice John Roberts and joined by Justices Samuel Alito, Clarence Thomas, Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett, and upheld the decision of the D.C. Appellate Court and that the loan repayment stipulation of BCRA was unconstitutional. Roberts wrote that BCRA "burdens core political speech without proper justification", and argued that such personal loans "will sometimes be the only way for an unknown challenger with limited connections to front-load campaign spending. And early spending — and thus early expression — is critical to a newcomer's success."
Justice Elena Kagan wrote the dissenting opinion joined by Stephen Breyer and Sonia Sotomayor. Kagan wrote "Repaying a candidate's loan after he has won election cannot serve the usual purposes of a contribution: The money comes too late to aid in any of his campaign activities. All the money does is enrich the candidate personally at a time when he can return the favor — by a vote, a contract, an appointment. It takes no political genius to see the heightened risk of corruption."
 References 
External links
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Ted Cruz
"""

From "FEC v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc." ==> """
Federal Election Commission v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc., 551 U.S. 449 (2007), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that issue ads may not be banned from the months preceding a primary or general election.. 
 Background 
In 2002, the Congress passed the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act ("McCain-Feingold" or "BCRA"), amending the Federal Election Campaign Act to further regulate money in public election campaigns. One primary purpose of the legislation was to regulate what were colloquially known as "issue ads." "Issue ads" typically discussed a named candidate's views regarding a particular issue, but because they did not expressly advocate the election or defeat of the candidate, they fell outside the prohibitions and limitations of the Federal Election Campaign Act. Section 203 of BCRA prohibited corporations and unions from directly or indirectly funding "electioneering communications," defined as broadcast ads costing in excess of an aggregated $10,000 that mentioned a candidate for federal political office within 30 days of a primary election or 60 days of a general election. In McConnell v. Federal Election Commission, the Supreme Court upheld section 203 and other sections of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act against a facial challenge that the law was unconstitutional.
Wisconsin Right to Life Inc. ("WRTL"), a nonprofit advocacy group, sought to run ads asking voters to contact their Senators and urge them to oppose filibusters of judicial nominees. (The text of one of WRTL's proposed ads is listed at the conclusion of this article). WRTL sought to run its ads within the 30- and 60-day blackout provisions of BCRA. However, because WRTL was itself incorporated and also because it accepted corporate contributions, it was prohibited from doing so. WRTL argued that the proposed ads addressed a current issue pending in Congress and did not advocate the election or defeat of a candidate. As such, the government had no compelling interest in prohibiting them from airing even during the election session.
In the first round of litigation, the federal district court ruled that the language of McConnell v. FEC precluded not only a facial challenge, but also an "as applied" challenge to this portion of BCRA and so dismissed the case. However, in Wisconsin Right to Life v. Federal Election Commission. ("WRTL I"), the Supreme Court reversed and remanded the case to the lower courts to determine whether or not WRTL should be granted an "as applied" exception to the law.
On remand, the FEC argued that ads run so close to an election and naming a candidate or candidates should be presumed to have the intent of influencing the election, and thus BCRA's limitation on financing such ads with corporate funds was constitutionally valid. It argued that WRTL's specific ads were intended to and would influence the 2004 Senate election in Wisconsin. The district court rejected the FEC's argument and refused to delve into the matter of the intent and underlying meaning of the ads. The Court stated that such an investigation would be impractical and would "have a chilling effect on protected speech." The District court thus limited its review to that content of the ad. In doing so, the court found that they were not "sham" issue ads and did not expressly advocate for or against a candidate. It, therefore, found that the government lacked a compelling interest to abridge WRTL's rights of free speech. The FEC appealed and the case returned to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Supreme Court 
The Supreme Court, in a 5–4 decision, crafted a major exception to the limitations on broadcast ads within 30 days of a primary or 60 days of a general election. The court ruled that unless an ad could not reasonably be interpreted as anything other than an ad urging the support or defeat of a candidate (in other words, unless an ad expressly urges support or defeat of a candidate), it was eligible for an "as applied" exception to the McCain-Feingold limits on issue ads close to an election.
The decision of the Court, authored by Chief Justice John G. Roberts, is notable not only for its holding, affirming the lower court, but for its strong language (repeatedly referring to BCRA's prohibition as the "blackout" period; rebuking calls for greater regulation of political speech by declaring "Enough is enough"; and concluding "we give the benefit of the doubt to speech, not censorship") and for demonstrating a skepticism of campaign finance regulation that was absent in McConnell. In the opinion, Roberts argued that Congress's ability to limit speech about politicians and issues was limited to "express advocacy or its functional equivalent." Roberts endorsed the lower court's view that it would be improper and would chill speech to subject speakers to an extensive investigation of motive and factor surrounding the ad and, instead, limited review to the content of the ad itself. Although, in theory, the opinion left BCRA's prohibition on "electioneering communications" standing and conformed with McConnell v. FEC, for most practical purposes, it cut deeply into the law, reverting it to its pre-McConnell state in which only speech expressly advocating the election or defeat of a candidate could be constitutionally subject to limits and prohibitions on financing. Though announcing the Court's judgment, Roberts' opinion was joined only by Justice Samuel Alito. The rest of the majority consisted of Justices Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, and Clarence Thomas, who would have gone further and simply reversed McConnell outright.
Justices John Paul Stevens, Stephen Breyer, David Souter, and Ruth Bader Ginsburg dissented.
Although "WRTL II," as the case is generally called, remains an important marker in First Amendment campaign finance jurisprudence, as a practical matter, it has been largely superseded by the Court's 2010 decision in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission.
Proposed text of WRTL ad
[Wedding scene]
PASTOR: And who gives this woman to be married to this man?
BRIDE'S FATHER: Well, as father of the bride, I certainly could. But instead, I'd like to share a few tips on how to properly install drywall. Now you put the drywall up ...
VOICE-OVER: Sometimes it's just not fair to delay an important decision. But in Washington, it's happening. A group of Senators are using the filibuster delay tactic to block federal judicial nominees from a simple "yes" or "no" vote. So qualified candidates don't get a chance to serve. It's politics at work, causing gridlock and backing up some of our courts to a state of emergency. Contact Senators Feingold and Kohl and tell them to oppose the filibuster.
Paid for by Wisconsin Right to Life, which is responsible for the content of this advertising and not authorized by any candidate or candidates committee.
 See also 
 Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission
 FEC v. National Conservative PAC
 FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life
 James Bopp
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Federal Election Commission litigation
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Wisconsin
Category:United States elections case law
Category:Anti-abortion movement
"""

From "Federal Aviation Administration v. Cooper" ==> """
Federal Aviation Administration v. Cooper, 566 U.S. 284 (2012), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that "actual damages" under the Privacy Act of 1974 is not clear enough to allow damages for suits for mental and emotional distress..  The reasoning behind this is that the United States Congress, when authorizing suit against the government, must be clear in waiving the government's sovereign immunity.
 Background 
Stanmore Cawthon Cooper was a licensed pilot since 1964.  He was diagnosed with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in 1985, but he did not inform the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) because at the time of his diagnosis the FAA would not allow pilots with HIV to keep flying. He also feared that if his sexual orientation was disclosed he would suffer discrimination in many aspects of his life.   So to keep his pilot's license during renewal periods, Cooper withheld that information from his renewal certifications. Cooper renewed his medical certificate in 1994, 1998, 2000, 2002. and 2004 without disclosing his HIV status.  In 1995 Cooper was no longer able to work because of his medical condition, Cooper filed for Social Security Disability from the Social Security Administration (SSA) and was granted long-term disability benefits, under Title II of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. § 401..  Cooper disclosed his HIV status to the Social Security Administration, believing that his medical information was protected under the Privacy Act.
Operation Safe Pilot
In 2002 the FAA and the United States Department of Transportation started a criminal investigation in cooperation with the SSA called Operation Safe Pilot.  The program's goal was to find people who were fraudulently collecting disability benefits or who had material misstatements on their FAA medical certifications.  Operation Safe Pilot was run by the Office of Inspector General for the Department of Transportation (DOT-OIG).
In July 2002, the FAA had disclosed the names and other information of all active certified pilots.  In November 2003, the DOT-OIG disclosed files on 45,000 pilots in Northern California, including the pilots' names, dates of birth, social security numbers, and genders.  In March 2003, the SSA-OIG gave the DOT-OIG three spread sheets summarizing and cross checking the 45,000 pilots who had received Title II Social Security Benefits and those who had received Title XVI benefits.
Investigation and criminal prosecution of Cooper
Based on the release of information from the Social Security Administration, the DOT-OIG classified Cooper as a person of interest, as he had received disability benefits and had not disclosed it to the FAA.
In March 2005, agents met with Cooper, where he confessed to having intentionally withheld his medical condition from the FAA on his pilot medical certificate renewal.  That same month, the FAA grounded Cooper for his misrepresentation to the FAA.  In August 2005, Cooper was indicted on three counts of making a false statement to a government agency, and one count of making and delivering a false official writing, a misdemeanor. He was sentenced to two years of probation and fined $1,000.
Lawsuit against the FAA
In March 2007, Cooper filed a lawsuit in the Northern District of California against the Government for "willful or intentional" violations of the 1974 Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552a, and that such violation caused him "to suffer humiliation, embarrassment, mental anguish, fear of social ostracism, and other severe emotional distress."  The Privacy Act includes a private right of action that allows citizens to sue the federal government if an agency makes an unauthorized disclosure that has an "adverse effect" on the individual.  In Doe v. Chao, , the Supreme Court held that even when a plaintiff shows that the Government violated the Privacy Act by disclosing his Social Security Number, an individual must prove some actual damages before he can receive the minimum $1,000 award. The district court held that the Government violated the Privacy Act, but that the Act only allows recovery for pecuniary damages.  Having failed to state such a claim, the court ruled that Cooper could not make a claim for relief under the Act. That court also held that when the statutory language is ambiguous, the "sovereign immunity canon" requires a court to construe the damages provision in favor of the Government.  The case was dismissed. Cooper appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
Ninth Circuit holding
The Court of Appeal looked at the summary judgment de novo, and held that mental and emotional damages constitute "actual damages" under the Privacy Act. Calling Congress' intent to allow recovery for mental and emotional damages "unambiguous", the Ninth Circuit also held that the sovereign immunity canon was inapplicable in this case. Congress waived sovereign immunity, the court reasoned, by allowing citizens who were injured by the release of information to initiate a civil action.  The Court of Appeals stated "Unfortunately, there is no ordinary or plain meaning of the term actual damages because it is a legal term of art. As a result, ordinary dictionaries are of no assistance in clarifying the plain meaning of the term."  The ninth circuit reversed and remanded the case back to the district court.
 Opinion of the Supreme Court 
The Supreme Court granted certiorari in 2011, after the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit denied a rehearing of the case.  The Supreme Court disagreed with the Appeals Court, saying that "Waiver of sovereign immunity must be 'unequivocally expressed" in the statutory text.  The court went on to say that "Congress need not state its intent in any particular way. We have never required that Congress use magic words."  The court held that as the 9th Circuit stated, "actual damages" is a legal term of art and its meaning is far from clear.  Like the Ninth Circuit the Supreme Court stated that "actual damages has this chameleon like quality, we cannot rely on any all-purpose definition but must consider the particular context in which the term appears."
The Supreme Court held that the Privacy Act does not unequivocally authorize an award of damages for mental or emotional distress.  Accordingly, the Act does not waive the Federal Government's sovereign immunity from the liability.
Sotomayor dissent
The dissent was joined by Ginsburg and Bryer.  The dissent argues that "actual damages" for the Privacy Act does only allow for pecuniary loss alone, and pointed out that the Privacy Act was expressly designed to prevent agency conduct which results in intangible harms to the individual as a result of privacy violations.
 Subsequent developments 
The lawsuit with Cooper prompted the FAA to change the notice on the FAA Form 8500-8 Medical certificate Application For Airman Medical Certificate.  The form now provides notice that the FAA will, as needed, compare data with other agencies that might be providing disability benefits to the individual.  Because of these changes, all persons applying for their medical certification have been duly informed and have given the FAA permission to share data as needed.
The FAA gave Cooper a medical clearance in March 2006, and restored Private Pilot Certificate Airman Card on March 1, 2008.
 Proposed New Laws
Legislation proposed to address the court's ruling was included in the Cybersecurity Act of 2012 (S. 3414), but the bill was filibustered by Senate Republicans.  Senator Daniel Akaka (D-HI) attempted to call for a vote on this bill, stating 
Finally, it would address the Supreme Court’s ruling restricting Privacy Act remedies earlier this year that has by many experts’ accounts rendered the Privacy Act toothless. In Federal Aviation Administration v. Cooper, the Social Security Administration violated the Privacy Act by sharing the plaintiff’s HIV status with other federal agencies. The Court concluded that the plaintiff could not recover damages for emotional distress because Privacy Act damages are limited to economic harm. My amendment would heed the call of scholars across the political spectrum to amend the Privacy Act and fix this decision. It would also clarify that in the event of a federal violation in the information sharing title of the bill, a victim would be entitled to recovery for the same types of non-economic harms.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 566
References
External links
 Amicus Brief by the Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC)
 SCOTUSblog Federal Aviation Administration v. Cooper
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:Federal Aviation Administration
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2012 in United States case law
"""

From "Federal Baseball Club v. National League" ==> """
Federal Baseball Club v. National League, 259 U.S. 200 (1922), is a case in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the Sherman Antitrust Act did not apply to Major League Baseball.
Background
After the Federal League folded in 1915, most of the Federal League owners had been bought out by owners in the other major leagues, or had been compensated in other ways. For example, the owner of the St. Louis Terriers of the Federal League had been permitted to buy the St. Louis Browns of the American League. The owner of the Baltimore Terrapins had not been compensated, and sued the National League, the American League and other defendants, including several Federal League officials for conspiring to monopolize baseball by destroying the Federal League. In 1919, the defendants were found jointly liable, and damages of $80,000 assessed, which was tripled to $240,000 under the provisions of the Clayton Antitrust Act.
Judgment
Court of Appeals
The Court of Appeals reversed the trial verdict, and held that baseball was not subject to the Sherman Act. The case was appealed to the Supreme Court.
Supreme Court
thumb|Taft Court in 1921.
In a unanimous decision written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, the Court affirmed the Court of Appeals, holding that "the business is giving exhibitions of base ball, which are purely state affairs"; that is, that baseball was not interstate commerce for the purposes of the Sherman Act. Justice Holmes' decision was as follows:
Significance
This case is the main reason why MLB has not faced any competitor leagues since 1922, and MLB, to date, remains the only American sports league with such an antitrust exemption.
The case was reaffirmed in Toolson v. New York Yankees, Inc. 
In Flood v. Kuhn, the Court partially reversed, and found Major League Baseball to be engaged in interstate commerce. However, the justices refused to overturn baseball's original antitrust exemption from Federal Baseball, deeming it necessary to preserve precedent: in addition to Toolson, the case had already been heavily cited in Shubert, International Boxing, and Radovich.
In 2016's Direct Marketing Association v. Brohl, the 10th Circuit's Neil Gorsuch cited Federal Baseball and Toolson in his concurrence as one of the "precedential islands[, along with Bellas Hess, that] manage[s] to survive indefinitely even when surrounded by a sea of contrary law…. [that] would never expand but would, if anything,
wash away with the tides of time". N.B: Two years later, Associate Justice Gorsuch would wash away the Bellas Hess "precedential island" in the Wayfair decision.
See also
 1922 in baseball
 Baseball law
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 259
References
External links
Category:History of Major League Baseball
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:Baseball law
Category:Federal League
Category:1922 in United States case law
Category:Baltimore Terrapins
Category:Major League Baseball litigation
"""

From "Federal Bureau of Investigation v. Fazaga" ==> """
Federal Bureau of Investigation v. Fazaga, 595 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the use of law enforcement surveillance under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) of 1978 and the state secrets privilege defense. The case stems from a 2011 class action lawsuit filed against the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) related to one of its surveillance operations. In August 2012, the district court dismissed the case on the basis of the FBI's invocation of state secrets privilege. The Ninth Circuit overturned this ruling in part in 2019, ruling that FISA precluded the defendants from invoking the state secrets defense. However, the Supreme Court overturned the Ninth Circuit’s ruling in a unanimous decision in March 2022, stating that FISA does not override the state secrets defense.
Background
In 2006, the FBI and the Orange County, California Joint Terrorism Task Force ran Operation Flex, a counterterrorism operation, by recruiting a fitness instructor, Craig Monteilh, to become an informant. Monteilh, under an assumed name, pretended to convert to Islam and joined the Islamic Center of Irvine (ICOI) in Irvine, California. Besides his own gathering of information, Monteilh wore and planted recording devices throughout the mosque and in homes and businesses of ICOI members that Monteilh came to know personally, passing on the information to the FBI. After about a year, Monteilh began making statements about taking violent action while in the presence of ICOI. He was reported to the police and put under a restraining order from ICOI. The FBI lost confidence in Monteilh and ended the operation.
Monteilh was convicted of grand theft in connection with the distribution of steroids in a separate matter in 2008, and ended up in California state prison. In April 2008, he was stabbed repeatedly in prison after being labelled a snitch. Monteilh filed a lawsuit against the FBI, stating that they failed to protect him after using him for their investigation, and made numerous details of Operation Flex public in 2009 prior to filing his suit against the FBI in 2010. Monteilh also spoke to these details of Operation Flex in a 2009 case the FBI brought against Ahmad Niazi, an Afghan immigrant that Monteilh had attempted to blackmail to become an FBI informant, though charges against Niazi were eventually dropped.
Lower courts
Three members of ICOI, using Monteilh's information, filed a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California in 2011 against the United States, the FBI, and several FBI agents involved in Operation Flex. The plaintiffs alleged that they were subject to unconstitutional law enforcement surveillance under eleven causes of action, including FISA, First, Fourth, and Fifth Amendment rights, and other laws related to the use of mass surveillance and religious profiling. They also sought class certification. The American Civil Liberties Union was the lead counsel for the plaintiffs; the Council on American-Islamic Relations was also involved. Monteilh also provided more information on his role as an informant to the plaintiffs.
Eric Holder, the Attorney General at the time (under the Obama administration), helped defend the FBI's actions leading up to Fazaga. The government moved to dismiss the case, invoking the state secret privilege of FISA and arguing that further litigation of the case would risk national security. U.S. District Judge Cormac J. Carney agreed, stating that the FBI could not defend itself without "relying on privileged material", and in August 2012, dismissed the class-action suit. Judge Carney did allow FISA-related portions of the suit against the specific FBI agents to continue.
The plaintiffs appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. In 2019, the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's ruling in part and reversed in part. The Ninth Circuit found that the District Court erred in application of FISA's state secret privilege outlined in Section 1806(f), as the conditions of the three members of ICOI met the requirements of Section 1806(f): that they were an "aggrieved person" that had sought to "discover or obtain" the information the FBI had obtained on them. Along with other reversals of the District Court's dismissal, the Ninth Circuit decision allowed the class-action suit to proceed. The Ninth Circuit denied to rehear the case en banc in July 2020.
Supreme Court
The FBI filed a petition for a writ of certiorari that asked the Supreme Court to review the Ninth Circuit's ruling and resolve the question regarding FISA Section 1806(f). The FBI stated that the specific FISA section only applied when the case dealt with charging a specific individual, and did not apply to a general challenge to their surveillance methods. The Supreme Court granted certiorari in June 2021, agreeing to hear the case during its 2021–22 term.
The Court ruled unaminiously on March 4, 2022, reversing the Ninth Circuit and remanding the case. The opinion, written by Justice Samuel Alito, stated that Section 1806(f) of FISA does not override the state secrets privilege, as was ruled by the Ninth Circuit.
Impact
In a 2013 book on transparency in legal contexts, Bianchi noted that although public opinion supports government transparency (even when it involves security-sensitive governmental law enforcement), there are "dark sides of transparency". In an opinion piece in 2014 for Al Jazeera, assistant professor of history Abdullah Al-Arian at Georgetown University criticized the use of informants in Fazaga.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States District Court for the Central District of California cases
Category:Class action lawsuits
Category:Legal issues related to the September 11 attacks
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States state secrets privilege case law
"""

From "FCC v. AT&T Inc." ==> """
Federal Communications Commission v. AT&T Inc., 562 U.S. 397 (2011), was a United States Supreme Court case on aspects of corporate personhood.  It held that the exemption from Freedom of Information Act disclosure requirements for law enforcement records which "could reasonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy" does not protect information related to corporate privacy.. 
Parties
Plaintiff
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) is an independent agency of the United States government. The FCC works towards six goals in the areas of competition, the public safety, broadband, spectrum, the media, and homeland security.  The FCC was created by the Communications Act of 1934 as the successor to the Federal Radio Commission and they are  charged with regulating all non-federal government use of the radio spectrum which includes radio and television broadcasting and all interstate telecommunications as well as all international communications that originate or terminate in the United States
Defendant
AT&T inc. is the largest provider of fixed telephony in the United States.
Background
In 2004, AT&T and FCC agreed to produce an “E-Rate” program that assists schools and libraries across the US to obtain affordable telecommunications and Internet access. Later, AT&T disclosed to FCC that it might have overcharged the Government for its services. FCC started an investigation process which ended in a $500,000 settlement paid by AT&T. Many AT&T customers, represented by CompTel company, then requested FCC to make public all the pleadings and correspondences between FCC and AT&T from the investigation. AT&T, however, argued that FCC has no right to do so, referring to the Freedom of Information Act §552(b)(7)(C) which exempts records if their disclosure might lead to “an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy”.  AT&T filed a case in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. On September 22, 2009, the Third Circuit released its decision favoring AT&T.  The court agreed that the use of word “personal” derives from a word “person”, which legally includes corporations.
Corporate Personhood
The case revived the debates over the corporate personhood. The question whether corporations should be treated as persons has been presented to the Supreme Court before. In the 1886 case Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad, 118 U.S. 394, the Supreme Court decided that corporations could be regarded as persons for the purposes of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Another Supreme Court case related to the issue is Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission.. The dispute was over whether Citizens United, a non-profit corporation, had the same right to fund political campaigns as a person. In this controversial case, the Supreme Court's 5–4 decision favored Citizen United, granting corporations, profit and non-profit, and unions the right to financially support political campaigns.
Based on these precedent cases, AT&T sued to halt the disclosure of the investigation details in order to protect the corporation's "personal privacy".
Personal Privacy
The Freedom of Information Act requires federal agencies to make records and documents publicly available upon request (subject to several statutory exemptions). It was the main component in allocations that the FCC brought against the AT&T on January 19, 2011.
§552(b)(7)(C) of FOIA states:
“(b) This section does not apply to matters that are (7) records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes, but only to the extent that the production of such law enforcement records or information (C) could reasonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy” 
The different interpretations of the term “personal privacy” became the central focus point of the case. AT&T contended that its reading of “personal” was supported by the common legal usage of the word “person.” Yet while “person,” in a legal setting, often refers to artificial entities, AT&T's effort to ascribe a corresponding legal meaning to “personal” again elided the difference between “person” and “personal.”
The Third Circuit Case
AT&T filed a lawsuit against FCC on September 22, 2009, after the latter had rejected ATT's position regarding the disclosure of investigation materials concluding that the corporations lacked the personal privacy rights. The court's decision relied heavily on the plain text of the Freedom Of Information Act, which did not define a term “personal” but included corporations in the legal definition of the term “person”. In regards to FCC Vs. ATT Inc., in the case referring to the term “personal” the Third Circuit opinion states that exemption 7(C) extends to the “personal privacy” of corporations, reasoning that “personal” is the adjective form of the term “person”, which Congress has defined, as applicable here, to include corporations.  Judge Chagares of the Third Circuit concluded in the court opinion:
““Personal” is the adjectival form of “person,” and FOIA defines “person” to include a corporation. We agree. It would be very odd indeed for an adjectival form of a defined term not to refer back to that defined term”
Supreme Court Case
Not content with the Third Circuit decision, FCC appealed in the Supreme Court. The case was argued on January 19, 2011. AT&T Inc. position remained the same, where it focused on the definition of the word “personal” being directly related to a legal meaning of a term “person”.
The court session opened with an announcement of the 8-0 decision by the Supreme Court in the NASA v. Nelson case, which was argued on October 5, 2010. The case's concerns were whether the background checks of NASA employees by the federal government violated their personal privacy. The Court's decision stated that such actions did not violate the employees' constitutional privacy rights.  Even though the current FCC v. ATT Inc. case was focused on the different type of personal privacy involving corporations, the announcement set the tone of the Court's view on the privacy issues involving government interests.
Court Opinion
In the Supreme Court's ruling published on March 1, 2011, the definition of the term “personal” has been regarded differently. The opinion states: 
“Personal” ordinarily refers to individuals. People do not generally use terms such as personal characteristics or personal correspondence to describe the characteristics or correspondence of corporations.”
Therefore, the Third Circuit ruling was reversed by the Supreme Court's decision.
In the Court's opinion, Chief Justice Roberts discussed several examples of how adjective and noun forms of the same word stem could have completely different meanings.
Adjectives typically reflect the meaning of corresponding nouns, but not always. Sometimes they acquire distinct meanings of their own. The noun "crab" refers variously to a crustacean and a type of apple, while the related adjective "crabbed" can refer to handwriting that is “difficult to read,” Webster's Third New International Dictionary 527 (2002); "corny" can mean "using familiar and stereotyped formulas believed to appeal to the unsophisticated," which has little to do with "corn" ("the seeds of any of the cereal grasses used for food"); and while "crank" is "a part of an axis bent at right angles," "cranky" can mean "given to fretful fussiness."
The Court's opinion ends with the following:
We reject the argument that because "person" is defined for purposes of FOIA to include a corporation, the phrase "personal privacy" in Exemption 7(C) reaches corporations as well. The protection in FOIA against disclosure of law enforcement information on the ground that it would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy does not extend to corporations. We trust that AT&T will not take it personally.
Implications
The Supreme Court's decision struck a blow to corporate personhood and held that corporations cannot claim exempt status from Freedom of Information Act requests. The decision however is limited only to the specific exemptions under FOIA. That being said, the importance of the case on the bigger scale is that corporations lack a statute that provides personal privacy rights for them and it becomes unlikely that they will be able to get such statutory rights under state or federal statutory law.
Many conservatives see this as an effort by the left to use FOIA to control and "terrorize American businesses at will". On the other hand, businesses are expected to make a greater use of information collected from their competitors and disclosed to the public by the federal government.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 562
References
External links
 FCC v. AT&T, Inc. coverage on SCOTUSblog
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:AT&T litigation
Category:Federal Communications Commission litigation
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States corporate case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc. (2009)" ==> """
Federal Communications Commission v. Fox Television Stations, Inc., 556 U.S. 502 (2009), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court that upheld regulations of the Federal Communications Commission that ban "fleeting expletives" on television broadcasts, finding they were not arbitrary and capricious under the Administrative Procedure Act.FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc., .  The constitutional issue, however, was not resolved and was remanded to the Second Circuit and re-appealed to the Supreme Court for a decision in June 2012..
Background
The case entered the Supreme Court's docket in October 2007 and specifically concerns obscene language broadcast on the Fox television network from two Billboard Music Awards shows from 2002 and 2003. In the 2002 show, presenter Cher said "fuck 'em" regarding people who she believed criticized her; in the 2003 show, presenter Nicole Richie stated regarding her television show: “Why do they even call it The Simple Life? Have you ever tried to get cow shit out of a Prada purse? It’s not so fucking simple.” 
In 2004, the FCC prohibited "single uses of vulgar words" under any circumstances, including previous instances where it gave leeway for "fleeting" expletives that networks unknowingly allowed to enter the airwaves. However, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled in the case Fox et al. v. Federal Communications Commission (06-1760) that the FCC cannot punish broadcast stations for such incidents.
On the week of March 17, 2008, the Supreme Court announced that it would hear this case. The Supreme Court heard arguments from the case on November 4, 2008, which was also Election Day. Chief Justice John G. Roberts and Associate Justice Antonin Scalia expressed support for the FCC.
Supreme Court decision
The Supreme Court ruled in a 5–4 decision on April 28, 2009 that the Federal Communications Commission had not acted arbitrarily when it changed a long-standing policy and implemented a new ban on even "fleeting expletives" from the airwaves. The Court explicitly declined to decide whether the new rule is constitutional, and sent that issue back to the lower courts for their review. Justice Antonin Scalia, in the majority opinion, wrote: "The FCC’s new policy and its order finding the broadcasts at issue actionably indecent were neither arbitrary nor capricious." In the dissenting opinion, Justice John Paul Stevens claimed that this decision was hypocritical given the presence of television commercials for products treating impotence or constipation.
First Amendment question
In its decision, "the court did not definitively settle the First Amendment implications of allowing a federal agency to censor broadcasts,"Suderman, Peter (April 5, 2010) The FCC Doesn't Need to Be, Reason and left that issue for the Second Circuit Court of Appeals.  However, Justice Clarence Thomas's separate opinion openly stated his willingness to overturn Federal Communications Commission v. Pacifica Foundation and Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. Federal Communications Commission, the two cases on which all FCC authority rest, even as he joined the majority on procedural grounds.
Subsequent history
Upon remand, the Second Circuit addressed the actual Constitutionality of the fleeting expletive rules, striking it down in July 2010.Second Circuit opinion against FCC on constitutional grounds The FCC re-appealed the case. On June 21, 2012, the Court decided the re-appeal narrowly, striking down the fines as unconstitutionally vague, but upholding the authority of the FCC to act in the interests of the general public when licensing broadcast spectrums to enforce decency standards, so long as they are not vague, without violating the First Amendment.
See also
 FCC v. Pacifica Foundation
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 556
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
 Fox et al. v. Federal Communications Commission oral argument on archive.org - 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals
Associated Press article about the case
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Federal Communications Commission litigation
Category:Censorship of broadcasting in the United States
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:2009 in American television
Category:Media case law
Category:20th Century Fox litigation
*
Category:Fox Broadcasting Company
"""

From "FCC v. Pacifica Foundation" ==> """
Federal Communications Commission v. Pacifica Foundation, 438 U.S. 726 (1978), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court that defined the power of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) over indecent material as applied to broadcasting..
 Facts 
On October 30, 1973, FM radio station WBAI in New York City aired a broadcast that included a segment which featured the George Carlin routine "Filthy Words" as part of a program about societal attitudes toward language. A few weeks later, John Douglas (an active member of Morality in Media) stated in a complaint filed with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) that he heard the broadcast while he was driving with his 15-year-old son. He also stated the material was inappropriate for the time of day (approximately 2:00 p.m.). In response, the Pacifica Foundation (owner of WBAI) received a letter of reprimand from the FCC, censuring them for allegedly violating broadcast regulations which prohibited airing indecent material.
thumbnail|left|In reference to this case, a poster in a WBAI broadcast booth warns radio broadcasters against using the seven dirty words.
 Holding 
The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the FCC's actions in 1978, by a vote of 5 to 4, ruling that the routine was "indecent but not obscene". The Court recognized the government had strong interests in:
 Shielding children from potentially offensive material, and
 Ensuring that unwanted speech does not intrude on the privacy of one's home.
The Pacifica Court upheld the FCC's power to regulate broadcast media, citing two pervading governmental interests. First, the “uniquely pervasive” nature of these broadcasts allows them to seep into “the privacy of the home” without the consent of the viewer. Second, broadcasts are “uniquely accessible to children” whose “vocabulary [could be enlarged] in an instant” by hearing indecent or profane language. The Court held that these two concerns were sufficient to “justify special treatment of indecent broadcasting,” thereby allowing the FCC to fine broadcasters for airing inappropriate content.
The Court stated that the FCC had the authority to prohibit such broadcasts during hours when children were likely to be among the audience, and gave the FCC broad leeway to determine what constituted indecency in different contexts.
 Impact 
At first, despite the resounding win in Pacifica, the FCC used its new regulatory powers sparingly. In the 1990s, however, the FCC ramped up sanctions for indecent broadcasts. By the early 2000s, the FCC began to levy more sanctions with higher dollar amounts—with fines of up to $500,000 for some offenses.
In 1997, Pacifica Radio "Living Room" host Larry Bensky prefaced an interview with Carlin by saying: "George Carlin, you're a very unusual guest for Pacifica Radio. You're probably the only person in the United States that we don't have to give The Carlin Warning to about which words you can't say on this program, because it's named after you."
In 1996, Congress passed the Communications Decency Act, which criminalized the knowing transmission of "obscene or indecent" messages to underage people on the Internet. In Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union (1997), the American Civil Liberties Union claimed that the act violated First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech for adult Internet users. To attain standing, the ACLU published the Supreme Court's opinion on F.C.C. v. Pacifica Foundation on its website, which included a transcript of Carlin's monologue.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 438
Federal Communications Commission v. Fox Television Stations (2009)
Federal Communications Commission v. Fox Television Stations (2012)
 Miller v. California 413 U.S. 15 (1973).
 References 
Further reading
 External links 
Category:Censorship of broadcasting in the United States
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:Federal Communications Commission litigation
Category:Pacifica Foundation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:Media case law
Category:History of radio
Category:1978 in radio
Category:George Carlin
"""

From "Federal Power Commission v. Sierra Pacific Power Co." ==> """
Federal Power Commission v. Sierra Pacific Power Co., 350 U.S. 348 (1956), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court interpreted the Federal Power Act (FPA) as permitting the Federal Power Commission (FPC) to modify a rate specified in a contract between an electric utility and distribution company only upon a finding that the contract rate is unlawful because it adversely affects the public interest.. Sierra Pacific and its companion case United Gas Pipe Line Co. v. Mobile Gas Service Corp.. established the Mobile-Sierra doctrine, which holds that an electricity or natural gas supply rate established resulting from a freely negotiated contract is presumed to be "just and reasonable" and thus acceptable under the FPA or Natural Gas Act (NGA). In some literature, the Mobile-Sierra doctrine is described as being a presumption.
Background
The Federal Water Power Act was amended in 1935 and renamed the FPA and reorganized the FPC. It also regulated all interstate transmission of electricity. Under the FPA, a power company could establish a rate by either filing a new rate schedule thirty days prior to its effective date or by filing a contract with a wholesale customer. The FPC could suspend a newly filed rate and establish an administrative proceeding to investigate it for its reasonableness, and it could investigate filed contracts to determine if they were unlawful.
The Sierra Pacific Power Company distributed electricity in northern Nevada and eastern California and purchased the majority of its power from a California electric utility, the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E), which was subject to regulation under the FPA. In 1947, because of increased post-war power demand and consumer desire for less expensive electricity, Sierra Pacific began negotiating for new supplies, including with the Bureau of Reclamation, which had excess capacity available from the recently completed Shasta Dam. PG&E then offered Sierra Pacific a fifteen-year power supply contract, which Sierra Pacific accepted in June 1948.
In early 1953 after excess power from the Shasta Dam was no longer available, PG&E without the consent of Sierra Pacific filed a new rate schedule with the FPC purporting to increase the rate to Sierra Pacific by 28%. The FPC suspended the rate until September 6, 1953, and initiated an administrative proceeding to determine the reasonableness of the new rate. Sierra Pacific intervened but its motion to reject the new rate because the contract could not be changed without its consent was rejected by the FPC. In 1954 the FPC issued an order upholding its decision not to reject the new rate and finding it to be not "unjust, unreasonable, unduly discriminatory, or preferential." On appeal by Sierra Pacific, the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, holding that the contract rate could only be changed upon a finding that it was unreasonable, reversed the FPC order and remanded it without prejudice to the FPC initiating a new proceeding to determine the reasonableness of the contract rate. The Supreme Court granted certiorari because of the importance of the case to the administration of the FPA..
Opinion
thumb|250px|right|The availability of low cost power from the newly constructed Shasta Dam resulted in a 15-year power supply contract with a low rate in 1948, which the Supreme Court held could not later be unilaterally changed by the supplier.
The unanimous opinion by Justice Harlan noted two issues in the case. First, since the relevant provisions of the FPA are substantially equivalent to those of the NGA, the Court held that, under the holding of Mobile Gas, the filing of a new rate schedule and the proceeding to review it was not effective to supersede the contract rate. Mobile Gas held that the NGA did not authorize a unilateral contract change, and that holding also applied to the FPA.
Secondly, the FPA also allows the FPC to set aside a contract upon a determination that the rate is unlawful. The parties during the FPC proceeding had stipulated that a reasonable or fair rate of return (ROR) for PG&E was 5.5%, and that the contract rate provided a ROR of 2.6% while the new filed rate schedule provided a ROR of 4.75%, which was the lowest that PG&E stated it would accept. The FPC had in its order found that the 1948 contract rate to be unreasonably low and unlawful because of its low ROR. The Supreme Court, however, noted that while a regulatory agency such as the FPC may not normally impose upon a public utility a ROR that is less than the fair ROR, it did not follow that the public utility may not itself agree by contract to a ROR that is less than the fair ROR, or that if it does so, that it is entitled to regulatory relief of its improvident bargain.See  (Holding that there is no government duty relieve a contracting utility company from the burdens of an improvident contract to provide gas.) Under the FPA, the proper standard for determining whether a contract rate is unlawful is whether the rate is so low as to adversely affect the public interest, such as having been unduly discriminatory to third parties, excessively burdensome to consumers, or a threat to continued service to the utility company.
Subsequent events
The Supreme Court in its companion case Mobile Gas found a similar result regarding contracts filed with the FPC involving electricity sales under the NGA. In later cases, the validity of rates set by contracts between gas and electric transmission companies became known as the Mobile-Sierra doctrine. Under this doctrine, an electricity or gas rate specified in a freely negotiated contract is presumed to be "just and reasonable" and thus acceptable under the FPA or NGA.
On October 1, 1977, the FPC was replaced by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission..
In Morgan Stanley Capital Group, Inc. v. Public Utility District No. 1 of Snohomish County (2008), the Supreme Court determined that the Mobile-Sierra doctrine also applied when the burden of the improvident contract was on the purchaser.. The case was remanded to determine if the contract negotiated during the California electricity crisis of 2000–2001 was the result of market manipulation, which would eliminate one premise on which the Mobile-Sierra doctrine rests: that the contract rates are the product of fair, arms-length negotiations.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 350
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States energy case law
Category:1956 in United States case law
"""

From "Federal Power Commission v. Tuscarora Indian Nation" ==> """
Federal Power Commission v. Tuscarora Indian Nation, 362 U.S. 99 (1960), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court that determined that the Federal Power Commission was authorized to take lands owned by the Tuscarora Indian tribe by eminent domain under the Federal Power Act for a hydroelectric power project, upon payment of just compensation.
 Background 
In 1950 the United States and Canada entered into treaty in respect to the Niagara Falls in order to properly split the use of an obviously huge natural resource. When approving the treaty, the Senate entered into force a provision that stated that no development of the areas was to occur without an Act of Congress. Because of this the Army Corps of Engineers reported to the Congress about the most feasible plans to use all of the waters afforded to it by the 1950 treaty. Also other studies were submitted to the Congress by the Federal Power Commission and Power Authority of New York.
The treaty limited the use of water during the nights and weekends. In order to overcome these times where water would not be as readily available all the plans submitted called for a reservoir to be built that could feed the power plant during these off times. However squabbling in Congress on whether the development should be public or private had delayed plans for several years. But on June 7, 1956, a rock slide destroyed the Schoellkopf Power Station, creating a critical shortage of power in the Mid-Atlantic Region. Faced with this crisis Congress authorized the FPC to issue the Power Authority of New York a license to implement a plan that would utilize all available power that the 1950 treaty afforded the United States.
In light of its new authority via an Act of Congress the Power Authority began its hearing process and notified all interested parties, including the Tuscarora Indian Nation. In the hearing the Tuscarora objected to the Power Authority's plan and stated that "the applicant lacks the authority to acquire them." During the hearings it was stated that Power Authority would need about  of land from a roughly  parcel of land. The land in question was not part of the actual reservation as mandated by treaty, but purchased by the Tuscarora with assistance from the Secretary of War. After the hearings the FPC issued the license and found that the land in question was almost completely undeveloped. On May 5, 1958, the FPC issued its order approving the licensee's revised exhibit, which precisely delineated the location, area, and acreage to be embraced by the reservoir, which included  of the Tuscaroras' lands. On May 16, 1958, the Tuscarora filed a petition at the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.
District Court
The Tuscarora Indian Nation contended that seizure of their lands was a violation under the Federal Power Act. Section 4 of the act declared that reservation land may not be acquired when it would "interfere or be inconsistent with the purpose for which such reservation was created or acquired." The Court of Appeals found that the land in question was indeed part of the Indian Reservation and could not be used and remanded the FPC. The Federal Power Act defined reservations as: "national forests, tribal lands embraced within Indian reservations, military reservations, and other lands and interests in lands owned by the United States, and withdrawn, reserved, or withheld from private appropriation and disposal under the public land laws; also lands and interests in lands acquired and held for any public purpose; but shall not include national monuments or national parks."
Upon this decision the Commission held more hearings, studying both the court's decision and exploring other locations for the reservoir. However the Commission found that other sites would cause significant delay to the project, cause unwanted community disruption, unreasonable expense and would reduce the capacity of the reservoir. This would lead to a violation of Public Law 85-159, which mandated that the commission use all of the possible energy that could be extracted from the falls. The Commission then appealed to the Supreme Court.
Opinion
Majority
Justice Whittaker wrote the opinion for the Court. The question as presented by Whittaker was "... may [the land] be taken for the storage reservoir of a hydroelectric power project, upon the payment of just compensation ...". The court did not argue whether the land was part of the Tuscarora Reservation but whether it was a reservation as defined in the Federal Power Act.
The court found that for the purposes of the law, a reservation was any land owned by the Federal Government of the United States. This would thus exclude Indian Reservations from its definition.
Dissent
Justice Black wrote a dissent. He argued that the definition of reservation was trivial and should not have been analyzed by the court. In his dissent Black wrote of a string of injustices by the United States Government and violations of treaties. He added that this ruling was another broken promise. He finished with:
Great nations, like great men, should keep their word.
Interpretation of the Nonintercourse Act
Although the Court found that the Nonintercourse Act did not bar condemnation under the Federal Power Act, it laid down an expansive interpretation of the Act:
As to the Tuscaroras' contention that [25 U.S.C. § 177] prohibits the taking of any of their lands for the reservoir 'without the express and specific consent of Congress,' one thing is certain. It is certain that if s 177 is applicable to alienations effected by condemnation proceedings under s 21 of the Federal Power Act, the mere 'expressed consent' of Congress would be vain and idle. For s 177 at the very least contemplates the assent of the Indian nation or tribe. And inasmuch as the Tuscarora Indian Nation withholds such consent and refuses to convey to the licensee any of its lands, it follows that the mere consent of Congress, however express and specific, would avail nothing. Therefore, if s 177 is applicable to alienations effected by condemnation under s 21 of the Federal Power Act, the result would be that the Tuscarora lands, however imperative for the project, could not be taken at all.But s 177 is not applicable to the sovereign United States ...362 U.S. at 119--20.
George C. Shattuck, who successfully litigated the Oneida I (1974) decision more than a decade later cited Tuscarora as the "key that helped me see the legal issues in the correct perspective."Shattuck, The Oneida land claims: a legal history (1991), p. 7. In his report to his firm, persuading them to take the case on a contingency fee basis, Shattuck repeated several arguments against Indian land claims and concluded:  "Before the Tuscarora case we might have backed away for one or more of the above reasons."Shattuck, p. 8. Shattuck notes that, "[i]ronically, the state's brief in the Tuscarora case ... gave me my first real understanding of how the Nonintercourse Act worked and how it might be used to press the Oneida claim."Shattuck, p. 21. Explaining the Oneida I holding, Shattuck states that "[t]he prophesy of the 1960 Tuscarora case became reality in 1974."Shattuck, p. 31.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 362
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States energy case law
v. Tuscarora
Category:1960 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:Aboriginal title in New York
Category:Tuscarora
"""

From "FTC v. Sperry & Hutchinson Trading Stamp Co." ==> """
Federal Trade Commission v. Sperry & Hutchinson Trading Stamp Co., 405 U.S. 233 (1972), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court holding that the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) may act against a company's “unfair” business practices even though the practice is none of the following: an antitrust violation, an incipient antitrust violation, a violation of the “spirit” of the antitrust laws, or a deceptive practice.. This legal theory is termed the "unfairness doctrine."
 Background 
The Sperry & Hutchinson Trading Stamp Co. (S&H) was in the business of issuing and "redeeming" S&H trading stamps. As explained in the Court's opinion, trading stamps are a form of “scrip.” They can be used to purchase goods but only at a designated “store.” S&H sold the stamps to merchants, such as supermarket chains, which then “gave” the stamps to their customers, typically at the rate of one stamp for each ten cents' worth of purchases. The customers were instructed to paste the S&H stamps into booklets, and when they had accumulated enough booklets full of S&H stamps they could “redeem” them at an S&H redemption center for “gifts”—merchandise, such as golf clubs or blenders. S&H accounted for 40% of the US trading stamp business and more than 60% of US consumers saved S&H stamps; the industry annually issued 400 billion stamps to more than 200,000 stores, and they were distributed to the public in connection with retail sales of $40 billion.
S&H placed restrictive notices in the booklets, advising consumers that they did not own the stamps, that their only right was to paste the stamps into the booklets and redeem booklets at an S&H redemption center, and that they could not buy, sell, or swap stamps.A notice on the inside cover of each booklet read:
Neither the stamps nor the books are sold to merchants, collectors or any other persons, at all times the title thereto being expressly reserved in the Company. . . . The stamps are issued to you as evidence of cash payment to the merchants issuing the same. The only right which you acquire in said stamps is to paste them in books like this and present them to us for redemption. You must not dispose of them or make any further use of them without our consent in writing. . . . [I]f the stamps or the books are transferred without our consent, we reserve the right to restrain their use by, or take them from other parties. It is to your interest that you fill the book, and personally derive the benefits and advantages of redeeming it.  
Other trading stamp companies (such as Gold Bond) operated on a similar basis.  S&H enforced the restrictions by suing merchants who “trafficked” in S&H stamps, for example, by accepting them in partial payment for merchandise. S&H also sued “trading stamp exchanges,” which were businesses that permitted consumers, for a fee, to swap one kind of stamp for another, in order to consolidate the consumers’ stamp holdings into one brand and thus more rapidly redeem their stamp holdings. Some consumers, the Court noted, “may seek to sell [their] stamps in order to use the resulting cash to make more basic purchases (food, shoes, etc.) than redemption centers normally provide.” S&H attempted to suppress all such “trafficking.”The Court noted: Between 1957 and 1965, by its own account, the company filed for 43 injunctions against merchants who redeemed or exchanged its stamps without authorization, and it sent letters threatening legal action to 140 stamp exchanges and 175 businesses that redeemed S&H stamps. In almost all instances, the threat or the reality of suit forced the businessmen to abandon their unauthorized practices.
The FTC sued S&H for this practice (among others) on the ground that this was unfair and oppressive to consumers. After administrative hearings, the FTC ordered S&H to stop interfering with consumers and trading stamp “traffickers” by trying to “suppress the operation of trading stamp exchanges and other ‘free and open’ redemption of stamps.”
Judgment
Court of Appeals
S&H appealed to the Fifth Circuit, which reversed the FTC’s order because section 5 of the FTC Act,Section 5 provides: “The Commission is empowered and directed to prevent persons, partnerships, or corporations . . . from using unfair methods of competition in commerce and unfair or deceptive acts or practices in commerce.” 15 U.S.C. § 45(a)(6). under which the FTC had proceeded, “empowers the Commission to restrain only such practices as are either in violation of the antitrust laws, deceptive, or repugnant to public morals.” The Fifth Circuit added that the FTC could declare “unfair” and prohibit only antitrust violations or violations of the spirit of the antitrust laws.
Supreme Court
The Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Fifth Circuit. After reviewing the legislative history of the statute and the case law, the Court held that
Significance
The FTC has occasionally invoked the unfairness doctrine against practices that did not readily fit into existing antitrust or deceptive practices categories, but until recently has not brought many such cases. Currently, however, the FTC has been using the unfairness doctrine against use of spyware. FTC Permanently Halts Unlawful Spyware Operations  (FTC press release with links to supporting documents); see also FTC cracks down on spyware and PC hijacking, but not true lies , Micro Law, IEEE MICRO (January -February  2005), also available at  IEEE Xplore; and Court Orders Halt to Sale of Spyware (FTC press release November 17, 2008).
See also
Unfairness doctrine
Notes
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:Federal Trade Commission litigation
Category:Customer loyalty programs
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Fedorenko v. United States" ==> """
Fedorenko v. United States, 449 U.S. 490 (1981), was a United States Supreme Court case which held that people who assisted in Nazi persecutions, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, were not eligible for visas to enter the United States, and thus could not legally obtain United States citizenship. It has been used as an important precedent in many denaturalization cases against former Nazis.
Following the ruling, the defendant, Feodor Fedorenko, was deported to the Soviet Union. He was tried for treason, war crimes, and collaborationism for working in Treblinka extermination camp. Fedorenko was sentenced to death in 1986, and executed in 1987.
See also
Chaunt v. United States, 
Rogers v. Bellei, 
Kungys v. United States, 
Negusie v. Holder, 
 Boļeslavs Maikovskis, Latvian Nazi collaborator, fled the U.S. before his extradition
 Anton Geiser, who lost his US citizenship for similar reasons, this case having played an important part in the process
Further reading
.
External links
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:German emigrants to the United States
Category:Nazism
Category:Denaturalization case law
Category:Holocaust trials
"""

From "Feiner v. New York" ==> """
Feiner v. New York, 340 U.S. 315 (1951), was a United States Supreme Court case involving Irving Feiner's arrest for a violation of section 722 of the New York Penal Code, "inciting a breach of the peace," as he addressed a crowd on a street.. 
 Background 
On the evening of March 8, 1949, Irving Feiner was arrested after making an inflammatory speech to a mixed crowd of 75 or 80 black people and white people at the corner of South McBride and Harrison Streets in Syracuse, New York. Feiner, a college student,Feiner, 340 U.S. at 322. had been standing on a large wooden box on the sidewalk, addressing a crowd through a loud-speaker system attached to an automobile. He made derogatory remarks about President Harry S. Truman, the American Legion, the Mayor of Syracuse, and other local political officials. Chief Justice Vinson said that Feiner "gave the impression that he was endeavoring to arouse the Negro people against the whites, urging that they rise up in arms and fight for equal rights." Blocking the sidewalk and overflowing into the street in which there was oncoming traffic, the crowd became restless with some either voicing opposition or support for Feiner. An onlooker threatened violence if the police did not act. After having observed the situation for some time without interference, police officers, in order to prevent a fight, requested the petitioner to get off the box and stop speaking. After Feiner's third refusal, they arrested him. He was subsequently convicted of violating Section 722 of the Penal Code of New York, which, in effect, forbids incitement of a breach of the peace.Feiner, 340 U.S. at 317–318. Feiner claimed that his conviction violated his right of free speech under the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution.
 Decision 
In a 6–3 decision delivered by Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson, the Supreme Court upheld Feiner's arrest.
Focusing on the "rise up in arms and fight for their rights" part of Feiner's speech, the Court found that Feiner's First Amendment rights were not violated because his arrest came when the police thought that a riot might occur; the police attempted to suppress Feiner's message not based on its content but on the reaction of the crowd. The Court reaffirmed that a speaker cannot be arrested for the content of his speech and that the police must not be used as an instrument to silence unpopular views but must be used to silence a speaker who is trying to incite a riot.
New York won, the Chief Justice wrote, because by law, Feiner's actions created an imminent threat: the police arrested him because the police wanted to protect the city government and the people of New York.
Dissent
Hugo Black wrote a foresighted dissent, saying that the evidence did not show that the crowd was about to riot. He also pointed out that the police, instead of arresting Feiner, should have protected him from hostile members of the crowd. The police "did not even pretend to try to protect" Feiner. Police testimony showed that although the crowd was restless, "there [was] no showing of any attempt to quiet it... one person threatened to assault [Feiner] but the officers did nothing to discourage this when even a word might have sufficed." Furthermore, Justice Black noted that it is common for the crowd to be heated with sensitive, polarizing topics and that the police gave no verbal reason to Feiner about his arrest at that exact moment. By ruling against Feiner, it creates precedent for allowing tyranny from the majority, the police can come and shut down any unpopular speaker simply because the popular crowd does not want the speaker to be there.Eastland, Terry (2000). Freedom of Expression in the Supreme Court. Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield Publicshers, Inc., 2000
Justice Douglas, joined by Justice Minton, stated disbelief that the situation constituted a disturbance of the peace and questioned the fairness of the trial Feiner received.
Aftermath
As a result of his conviction, Syracuse University expelled Mr. Feiner. He finally completed his degree from Syracuse when they readmitted him, and was invited back to the school to speak at the opening of the Tully Center for Free Speech in October 2006.  He continued to fight for tuition reimbursement, as his original schooling had been covered under the GI Bill.  Following the court ruling, Feiner tried to work on a local newspaper but was fired after the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) sent agents to the small town office and informed the editor of Feiner's "criminal" past.  The FBI continued to haunt Feiner's life; he enjoyed telling his family and friends of an incident in which agents would not get off his property, so his wife, Trudy, sprayed them with a garden hose.
Irving Feiner lived in Nyack, New York, a small business owner who continued to fight and write about freedom of speech and progressive issues.  He debated against Stephen Baldwin, who fought to keep an adult bookstore from opening in the village.  Born in 1924, Mr. Feiner was 82 years old and was involved in school/property tax reform and fighting a planned village parking garage when he died on January 23, 2009.
Lectures at Rutgers University
At the invitation of renowned Professor of Political Science, Milton Heumann, Feiner gave several surprise guest lectures to students of Professor Heumann's Civil Liberties class at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, New Jersey. The lectures took place on February 14, 2006 and February 12, 2008. Feiner explained his side of the case, contending that some of the facts found in the Supreme Court's decision were mistaken or that some facts were omitted. For example, the only witnesses that the prosecution called were the two arresting officers, and the infamous "S.O.B." man was never called as a witness. (The Supreme Court relies on the record assembled by lower courts for the facts of a case and deals solely with the question of how the law applies to the facts presented.)
Feiner also explained that shortly after V-E day he was in Paris where he saw a V-E parade in which marchers marched with locked arms. Feiner claims that in his speech the night he was arrested he said that "the Negroes of this town should march with locked arms down to the mayor's office and demand their rights."
See also
Clear and present danger
Heckler's veto
Imminent lawless action
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 340
Shouting fire in a crowded theater
Threatening the president of the United States
Abrams v. United States, 
Brandenburg v. Ohio, 
Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 
Dennis v. United States, 
Hess v. Indiana, 
Korematsu v. United States, 
Kunz v. New York, 
Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten, (1917)
Sacher v. United States,  
Schenck v. United States, 
Terminiello v. Chicago, 
Whitney v. California, 
References
Further reading
 Protest and Free Speech: A conversation with an SU free-speech pioneer, Irving Feiner
External links
First Amendment Center
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Syracuse University
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
