"""

From "Kyllo v. United States" ==> """
Kyllo v. United States, 533 U.S. 27 (2001), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the court ruled that the use of thermal imaging devices to monitor heat radiation in or around a person's home, even if conducted from a public vantage point, is unconstitutional without a search warrant.Kyllo v. United States, 533 U.S. 27 (2001). In its majority opinion, the court held that thermal imaging constitutes a "search" under the Fourth Amendment, as the police were using devices to "explore details of the home that would previously have been unknowable without physical intrusion." The ruling has been noted for refining the reasonable expectation of privacy doctrine in light of new surveillance technologies, and when those are used in areas that are accessible to the public.
 Background 
In 1991, federal agents with the United States Department of the Interior received a tip that Danny Lee Kyllo was growing marijuana in his home in Florence, Oregon. The agents used an FLIR thermal imaging device outside Kyllo's home, which revealed unusual heat patterns and an unusual amount of heat radiating from the roof and side walls compared with the rest of the house, leading the agents to believe he was using high-intensity halide lamps that are common in cannabis cultivation. The scan was conducted from a parked car across the street, without a search warrant. The thermograms gathered from the scan were used to obtain a warrant for a subsequent search of the house, and during that search federal agents found more than 100 marijuana plants. Kyllo was charged with one count of manufacturing marijuana.
At a preliminary hearing, the court denied Kyllo's motion to suppress the evidence obtained from the thermal imaging search, ruling that the device could not "penetrate walls or windows to reveal conversations or human activities" and that the device "recorded only heat being emitted from the home".United States v. Kyllo, 190 F.3d 1041 (9th Cir. 1999) Kyllo entered a conditional guilty plea before appealing to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals on the grounds that observations with a thermal-imaging device constituted a search under the Fourth Amendment. The Ninth Circuit ultimately upheld admission of the evidence and allowed criminal trying proceedings to continue. Kyllo then petitioned the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari, which was granted in 2000.
Opinion of the Court
At the Supreme Court, the government defended the use of thermal imaging technology on two grounds: first, that thermal imaging was not an invasion of privacy, because the devices could not reveal any intimate details of the home; and second, that heat radiation can be detected in several ways from a public vantage point without the aid of technology, such as observing snow melt or smoke rise.
In a majority opinion written by Justice Antonin Scalia, the Supreme Court ruled that the thermal imaging of Kyllo's home constituted a "search" within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment. By a 5–4 margin, the court held that a search warrant must be obtained before the government, including the police and federal agents, may use a thermal imaging device to monitor the heat and radiation of one's home. Scalia also noted the surveillance powers that could be abused by the police with technologies that are "not in general public use". As the police did not have a warrant when they used the device outside of Kyllo's home, the search was unconstitutional. 
Scalia wrote: "Where, as here, the Government uses a device that is not in general public use, to explore details of the home that would previously have been unknowable without physical intrusion, the surveillance is a ‘search’ and is presumptively unreasonable without a warrant."Kyllo v. United States, 533 U.S. at 40. The majority opinion argued that a person has an expectation of privacy in his or her home, and therefore, the government cannot conduct unreasonable searches, even with technology that does not enter the home.
The Kyllo decision, relying on Katz v. United States (1967), confirmed the expectation of privacy in one's home, and limited the means by which the government can explore the home without a warrant. Scalia referred to the firm but bright line drawn at the entrance of a home, where the Fourth Amendment is said to recognize a heightened expectation of privacy. Furthermore, Scalia discussed how future technologies could invade one's right of privacy. Scalia argued that the Framers of the Constitution would agree that such technology would be intrusive enough to warrant a search, if they knew it existed, and as such, that technology (including thermal imaging) calls for the same warrant requirements as physical intrusion. 
Scalia structured the opinion to protect against more sophisticated surveillance technology that might arise in the future. This was intended to protect the home from all types of warrantless surveillance and is an interpretation of what Scalia called "the long view" of the Fourth Amendment.
Dissenting opinion
thumb|right|An example of a thermogram gathered from a thermal imaging device
In a dissenting opinion authored by Justice John Paul Stevens, the minority argued that the use of thermal imaging does not constitute a Fourth Amendment "search" because any person could detect the heat emissions. Stevens argued that this could be done simply by feeling that some areas in or around the house are warmer than others, or by observing that snow was melting more quickly on certain sections of the house. Since the public could gather this information on their own, it was therefore not unconstitutional for the government to do the same. The dissenting opinion asserted that the use of the thermal imaging device was merely "off-the-wall" surveillance because it did not detect any "intimate" details of Kyllo's home.Kyllo, 533 U.S. at 50 (Stevens, J., dissenting). According to Stevens, "Heat waves, like aromas that are generated in a kitchen, or in a laboratory or opium den, enter the public domain if and when they leave a building."Kyllo, 533 U.S. at 43-44 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
Stevens especially criticized Scalia's invocation of the bright line test, calling it "unnecessary, unwise, and inconsistent with the Fourth Amendment", because this would be defunct as soon as the surveillance technology used went into general public use, as opposed to only being used by the police.Kyllo, 533 U.S. at 41 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
 Impact and subsequent developments 
Scalia's use of the phrases "sense-enhancing technology" and "device that is not in general public use" in the Kyllo ruling has become influential in later rulings on police search procedures, but in an inconsistent fashion. Several scholars and legal analysts noted the ambiguity in Scalia's use of those phrases. Orin Kerr wrote that such phrases "can be read plausibly as suggesting a broad and even creative view of how the Fourth Amendment should respond when technology threatens privacy." One journalist argued that this phrasing "sets up an unfortunate and unnecessary test that could erode our privacy as new technologies become more widespread." Another legal scholar called this phrasing "vague" and "considering the rapid pace of which technology is advancing daily, troublesome to say the least"; while "general public use" was not adequately defined.
 Drone surveillance 
Some analysts questioned whether the Kyllo opinion allows the government to conduct drone surveillance on suspected criminals without a warrant, largely because drones are now commonly used by the public. Raymond Nhan compared drone surveillance by law enforcement officials to the thermal imaging carried out on Danny Lee Kyllo, arguing that they can both be used to invade someone's privacy, and stressed that there's "no clear answer" on where drone technology falls in line with the Kyllo ruling. Another analyst pointed out that modern drones employ infrared technology far more advanced than the scanner used on Kyllo, and drones are currently available to the general public to purchase, seemingly putting them in "general public use" according to Scalia's test. Veronica McKnight argued that modern drones are more commonplace than thermal imaging devices, and capable of surveillance that far outweighs the scans done on Kyllo.
 Police dog searches 
thumb|right|A drug-detecting dog in Oklahoma during a training exercise
Other analysts questioned whether drug-sniffing police dogs fell in the same category as thermal imaging devices under the Kyllo opinion. During oral arguments in the Kyllo case, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor posed that dog sniffs would be considered unconstitutional if compared to thermal imaging, despite the Supreme Court previously upholding their constitutionality in United States v. Place (1983).  In the dissenting opinion in Kyllo, Stevens opined that the majority's phrasing was too broad, writing that under this new precedent, dog sniffs would be considered a search, and therefore unconstitutional without a warrant, which would effectively nullify the Place precedent.Kyllo, 533 U.S. at 47-48 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
Shannon Hurley-Deal agreed that police dogs should count as sense-enhancing technology in light of Kyllo, pointing out that a dog's sense of smell is much stronger and more enhanced than that of a human's. Tracey Maclin agreed, writing that a drug-detecting dog, like a thermal imaging device, is a "law enforcement device that allows the police to obtain information regarding the interior of a home", and noted the conflict between the Kyllo and Place rulings.
In 2005, the Supreme Court reconciled the conflict between Kyllo and Place, holding in Illinois v. Caballes that a search by a police dog was not the same as a search by thermal imaging. In 2013, the Supreme Court held in Florida v. Jardines that drug-sniffing police dogs could not be brought to the front door of a person's house without a search warrant, but they did so on the basis of trespass against property rights rather than the right to privacy.Florida v. Jardines, . Justice Elena Kagan added that police dogs count as "devices not in general public use" as understood by the Kyllo court.Jardines, 569 U.S. at 14 (Kagan, J., concurring).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 533
References
External links
 Transcript of oral argument
 Brief of the Solicitor General
 Amicus brief of the ACLU
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:2001 in cannabis
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:Infrared imaging
Category:Cannabis law reform in the United States
Category:Lane County, Oregon
"""

From "L. A. Westermann Co. v. Dispatch Printing Co." ==> """
L. A. Westermann Co. v. Dispatch Printing Co., 249 U.S. 100 (1919), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that penalties awarded "in lieu of actual damages and profits" cannot be less than $250 for each case of copyright infringement.
 References 
External links
Category:1919 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States copyright case law
"""

From "LabCorp v. Metabolite, Inc." ==> """
LabCorp v. Metabolite, Inc., 548 U.S. 124 (2006), is the first case since Diamond v. Chakrabarty. in which the U.S. Supreme Court indicated a renewed interest in examining the limits of patentable subject matter for advances in life sciences. Although the Court initially agreed to hear the case, it was later dismissed in 2006 with three Justices dissenting.. The defendant's petition to the Supreme Court raised an issue not addressed in opinions from the lower courts: the claim at issue was directed to patent ineligible subject matter and therefore invalid.
 Background 
In 1999, Metabolite sued LabCorp for infringement of a patent covering a diagnostic test. The single claim at issue, claim 13, is reproduced in full below: 
"A method for detecting a deficiency of cobalamin or folate in warm-blooded animals comprising the steps of:
"assaying a body fluid for an elevated level of total homocysteine; and
"correlating an elevated level of total homocysteine in said body fluid with a deficiency of cobalamin or folate."
Claim 13 is a diagnostic method for detecting deficiencies of vitamins B6 and B12 that relies on the correlation of that condition with elevated levels of homocysteine. The claim instructs medical providers to test homocysteine levels in a patient, without specifying any specific means of doing so, and make logical inferences based on the test results and aware of the discovered correlation between elevated levels and vitamin deficiencies.
A jury found the defendants liable for indirect infringement of claim 13 and breach of contract. The district court ordered LabCorp to pay $4.7 million in damages and permanently enjoined LabCorp from conducting future such tests at physicians' requests. The decision was upheld by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, which further stated that doctors were 'directly infringing' Metabolite's patents each time such a test is ordered and interpreted. LabCorp argued that the correlation is a principle of nature, and therefore the patent should never have been granted.
 Dissent 
The court dismissed the case, although Justice Breyer, Justice Stevens, and Justice Souter dissented from this decision. Breyer's dissenting opinion cited numerous cases in which scientific and mathematical principles had been held to be patent ineligible, including O'Reilly v. Morse. and Gottschalk v. Benson..
 Significance 
Had the case been heard, and had Metabolite's patent been invalidated, the case would have had broad implications for biotechnology companies, which may have extended far beyond patentability of correlations of biomarkers to disease states. Lori Andrews outlined various concerns regarding how routine academic practices might become actionable under the results of the case.Andrews LB (2006) The patent office as thought police, CHE 52(24), B20. Metabolite's brief to the court suggested that overturning the patent might lead to invalidation of all drug patents on the grounds that the inventors "merely discovered that certain chemicals interact with the human body in ways directed by chemistry."
In Mayo v. Prometheus in 2012 the Supreme Court unanimously held what the dissenting Justices argued for in this case.. That did not lead, however, to invalidation of all drug patents on the grounds that the inventors "merely discovered that certain chemicals interact with the human body in ways directed by chemistry," at least not as of 2020.
See also
Diamond v. Diehr
Parker v. Flook
Funk Brothers Seed Co. v. Kalo Inoculant Co.
 Medical technologist
 Valid claim
References
External links
, the disputed patent
Kinitsch E, et al. What Good Is a Patent?. Science.311:5763-946. 
Category:United States biotechnology case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Lackawanna County District Attorney v. Coss" ==> """
Lackawanna County District Attorney v. Coss, 532 U.S. 394 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case. The case concerned a federal prisoner who sought to challenge his current sentence by arguing it was enhanced based on an unconstitutional prior conviction. A divided Court held that such challenges could not be brought. The decision was based on a reading of the statute in question, not a Sixth Amendment constitutional analysis.
Background
Edward R. Coss, Jr., had an extensive criminal record. By the age of 16 he had been "adjudged a juvenile delinquent on five separate occasions". In October 1986, Coss was convicted in Pennsylvania state court of assault, vandalism, and criminal mischief. He was sentenced to two consecutive prison terms of six months to one year. A habeas challenge, based on a claim that his trial attorney was constitutionally ineffective, was never ruled on by state courts.
After serving these sentences, he was convicted of aggravated assault in 1990. The court enhanced his sentence based on the prior conviction. A new habeas action against this trial was based on an argument that the enhancement relied on an unconstitutional prior conviction. Both the federal district court and the Third Circuit Court of Appeals determined that the enhancement was not permissible. The state prosecutors petitioned the United States Supreme Court to hear an appeal through a writ of certiorari.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote the majority opinion of the Court which reversed the decision of the Third Circuit. As the basis for the habeas challenge was Title 28, Section §2254 of the United States Code, each element of that section had to be fulfilled in order to gain relief (a reduction in sentence). The first element was that the petitioner is "in custody pursuant to the judgment of a state court", a status that Coss could not fulfill as he was not serving his 1986 sentences any longer. Additionally, the claim was not properly raised because the original sentence was "no longer open to attack".
Other parts of the majority opinion regarding  Sixth Amendment claims did not control a majority of the Court, thus the judgment of the Third Circuit was simply reversed.
Dissenting opinions
Souter's dissent
Justice Souter wrote a dissent which was joined by Justices Ginsburg and Stevens. Souter argued that because there was never a decision on the constitutionality of the original trial, the issue of "adverse effect" could still be raised.
Breyer's dissent
Another dissenting opinion in the case was authored by Justice Stephen Breyer. His short, one-paragraph opinion, argued that because the state has "failed to argue that the ... consideration of the 1986 convictions were harmless" there was no reason to overturn the Third Circuit's findings. This was a different reason than the Souter dissent, which is why he did not join it.
See also
 Habeas corpus
 Daniels v. United States (2001)
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in Pennsylvania
"""

From "Ladew v. Tennessee Copper Co." ==> """
Ladew v. Tennessee Copper Company, 218 U.S. 357 (1910), was a United States Supreme Court case involving jurisdiction over a suit involving a citizen from another state beyond the Court's jurisdiction, suing a New Jersey Corporation, another out of state citizen. The Court asserted that under the statute jurisdiction was improper because neither party was a citizen in the jurisdiction of the Circuit Court.. The Court followed the decision in Wetmore v. Tennessee Copper Company another case decided later that same year.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:1910 in United States case law
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:Copper mining in the United States
Category:Copper Basin (Tennessee)
"""

From "Lafler v. Cooper" ==> """
Lafler v. Cooper, 566 U.S. 156 (2012), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court clarified the Sixth Amendment standard for reversing convictions due to ineffective assistance of counsel during plea bargaining. The Court ruled that when a lawyer's ineffective assistance leads to the rejection of a plea agreement, a defendant is entitled to relief if the outcome of the plea process would have been different with competent advice. In such cases, the Court ruled that the Sixth Amendment requires the trial judge to exercise discretion to determine an appropriate remedy.
Anthony Cooper was charged by the State of Michigan with assault with intent to murder and three other offenses. After being incorrectly advised by his lawyer that the prosecution would be unable to prove intent to murder, he rejected a plea bargain. After being convicted at a fair trial, he appealed his conviction, arguing that his lawyer had provided ineffective assistance of counsel by advising him to reject the plea deal. Michigan courts denied him relief, but federal courts granted a writ of habeas corpus requiring the State to reduce Cooper's sentence to the one he would have received under the plea agreement. The State appealed to the Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the case.
Writing for the 5–4 majority, Justice Kennedy ruled that ineffective assistance of counsel during plea negotiations can constitute grounds for relief if there is a fair probability that defense counsel's ineffective assistance resulted in a harsher sentence or conviction. In those cases, Justice Kennedy wrote, trial judges should exercise discretion in choosing to vacate a conviction and accept the original plea bargain, resentence the defendant, or leave the original conviction undisturbed. Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion joined by Justice Thomas and Chief Justice Roberts (in large part) which argued that the majority had invented a constitutional right to plea bargain. Justice Alito also wrote a dissenting opinion in which he largely agreed with Justice Scalia and specifically argued that the majority's remedy was unsound.
Reactions following the Supreme Court's ruling were mixed, with some commentators praising the Court's recognition of the role of plea bargaining in criminal justice and others criticizing the implications of not sufficiently protecting defendants' rights and of requiring defense counsel to plea bargain at the desire of the prosecutor.
Background
Ineffective assistance of counsel
The Assistance of Counsel Clause of the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides that:
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right ... to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence."U.S. Const. Amend. VI.The Supreme Court has interpreted the clause to require states to provide indigent criminal defendants with counsel. In Strickland v. Washington, the controlling Supreme Court decision on ineffective assistance of counsel, the Court ruled that simply having "a person who happens to be a lawyer [...] present at trial alongside the accused [...] is not enough to satisfy the constitutional command".. The Strickland Court determined that a conviction may be reversed for ineffective assistance of counsel if the defendant shows that:
Counsel's performance was "deficient," such that counsel's errors were "so serious that counsel was not functioning as the 'counsel' guaranteed the defendant by the Sixth Amendment" (the performance prong); and
Counsel's performance gives rise to a reasonable probability that if counsel had performed adequately, the result would have been different (the prejudice prong).Strickland, 466 U.S. at 693–694.
Michigan trial court
On March 25, 2003, Anthony Cooper shot Kali Mundy repeatedly under the waist, injuring (but not killing) her. Cooper was charged with assault with intent to murder, possession of a firearm by a felon, possession of a firearm in the commission of a felony, misdemeanor possession of marijuana, and for being a habitual offender. Before trial, the prosecution offered Cooper a plea bargain to dismiss two charges and recommend a sentence of 51 to 85 months on the other two in exchange for a guilty plea. Cooper expressed willingness to accept the deal and plead guilty, but later rejected the offer and went to trial. At trial, Cooper was convicted on all counts and received a sentence of 185 to 360 months' imprisonment.Lafler v. Cooper, .
Cooper later gave evidence his attorney had inaccurately advised him that he could not be convicted of assault with intent to murder because he shot the victim below the waist. The state trial court heard and rejected Cooper's motion for resentencing, not finding that his attorney's defective advice, to reject the plea agreement, constituted ineffective assistance of counsel.
State court appeals
Cooper appealed to the Michigan Court of Appeals, renewing his claim that his attorney's incorrect advice during plea bargaining constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. In a per curiam opinion issued on March 15, 2005, the Court of Appeals affirmed the rejection of the claim on the grounds that Cooper had "knowingly and intelligently rejected two plea offers and chose to go to trial".People v. Cooper, No. 250583, 2005 WL 599740 (March 15, 2005) (per curiam). Cooper applied to the Michigan Supreme Court for leave to file an appeal, which it denied on October 31, 2005, "because we are not persuaded that the questions presented should be reviewed by this Court".People v. Cooper, 474 Mich. 905, 705 N. W. 2d 118 (2005).
 Federal habeas proceedings 
Cooper filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan, again renewing his claim that his attorney's advice to reject the plea agreement constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. On March 26, 2009, U.S. District Judge Denise Page Hood granted the petition, issuing a writ of habeas corpus "ordering specific performance of Petitioner’s original plea agreement, for a minimum sentence in the range of fifty-one to eighty-five months, the plea Petitioner would have accepted if counsel had been competent".Cooper v. Lafler, No. 06–11068, 2009 WL 817712, *9 (ED Mich., March 26, 2009).
The State of Michigan appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, arguing that Cooper's lawyer had not provided deficient advice, that there was no prejudice because Cooper received a fair trial, and that the District Court's "specific performance" remedy was unlawful. The Sixth Circuit affirmed the District Court's order, holding that Cooper had established a Strickland violation and that the remedy of specific performance was proper.Cooper v. Lafler, 376 F.Appx. 563 (6th Cir. 2010).
Supreme Court
The State appealed to the Supreme Court, filing a petition for certiorari. On January 7, 2011, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case, granting certiorari and directing the parties to brief and argue the following question, in addition to the question presented in the petition for certiorari: "What remedy, if any, should be provided for ineffective assistance of counsel during plea bargain negotiations if the defendant was later convicted and sentenced pursuant to constitutionally adequate procedures?"Lafler v. Cooper, 562 U.S. 1127; 131 S. Ct. 856; 178 L. Ed. 2d 622 (2011) (cert. granted).
Arguments
For the Supreme Court's review, both parties agreed that the first Strickland prong had been satisfied – that is, the parties agreed that Cooper's trial counsel had performed deficiently. The central disagreement was on whether Cooper had satisfied the Strickland prejudice prong.Lafler, 566 U.S. at 174. The State argued that Cooper did not suffer any prejudice from his counsel's deficient performance because the Constitution does not guarantee defendants a right to a plea agreement, and that far from being prejudiced, Cooper had exercised his Constitutional right to stand trial by rejecting the plea deal. Because Cooper had received a fair trial after pleading not guilty, the State argued, Cooper's rights had not been violated..Lafler, 566 U.S. at 164–165.
Cooper argued that even though there is no right to a plea agreement itself, criminal defendants have the right to be assisted by competent counsel during plea negotiations. Accordingly, Cooper argued that criminal defendants can be prejudiced by ineffective assistance of counsel during plea negotiations, even if the subsequent trial was fair. Cooper also pointed out that every federal court of appeals to have considered the issue, and 25 of the 27 states to have considered the issue, agreed that counsel's deficient performance during plea negotiations can constitute Strickland prejudice.Brief of respondent Anthony Cooper at 19–20, Lafler v. Cooper, .
In response to the Supreme Court's order directing the parties to argue what remedy would be appropriate, the State argued that no remedy was appropriate. The State wrote that courts should not order prosecutions to offer a particular plea agreement, because doing so would constitute a breach of separation of powers and the discretion inherent in the plea process. The State also argued that allowing criminal defendants any remedy would "open the floodgates to litigation by defendants seeking to unsettle their convictions".Lafler, 566 U.S. at 172.Brief of petitioner Blaine Lafler at 20, Lafler v. Cooper, . Cooper argued that allowing the defendant to accept the plea agreement was the appropriate remedy, putting the defendant in the same position as if counsel had not performed deficiently.
Opinion of the Court
right|175px|thumb|Justice Kennedy delivered the opinion of the 5-4 majority.
Justice Kennedy delivered the opinion of the Court on March 21, 2012. In a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court vacated the Sixth Circuit's opinion and remanded for further consideration. Relying on his opinion in Missouri v. Frye, which was also decided the same day, Justice Kennedy wrote that the Sixth Amendment right to effective assistance of counsel extends to plea negotiations.Lafler, 566 U.S. at 160.. The Court ruled that to establish prejudice and obtain relief, a defendant
must show that but for the ineffective advice of counsel there is a reasonable probability that the plea offer would have been presented to the court (i.e., that the defendant would have accepted the plea and the prosecution would not have withdrawn it in light of intervening circumstances), that the court would have accepted its terms, and that the conviction or sentence, or both, under the offer's terms would have been less severe than under the judgment and sentence that in fact were imposed.Lafler, 566 U.S. at 164.
As to the remedy for ineffective assistance of counsel during plea negotiations, the Court wrote that any remedy should be "tailored to the injury suffered from the constitutional violation and should not unnecessarily infringe on competing interests".Lafler, 566 U.S. at 170 (quoting United States v. Morrison, 449 U.S. 361, 364 (1981)). The Court noted that the injury from deficient counsel during plea bargaining "can come in at least one of two forms": losing a "lesser sentence" and losing the opportunity to plead guilty to "counts less serious than the ones for which a defendant was convicted after trial".Lafler, 566 U.S. at 170–171. In cases where the "sole advantage a defendant would have received under the plea is a lesser sentence", the Supreme Court ruled that courts should "exercise discretion in determining whether the defendant should receive the term of imprisonment the government offered in the plea, the sentence he received at trial, or something in between". When "resentencing alone will not be full redress for the constitutional injury, [...] the proper exercise of discretion to remedy the constitutional injury may be to require the prosecution to reoffer the plea proposal".Lafler, 566 U.S. at 171.
Applying those standards to Cooper's case, the Supreme Court ruled that Cooper had established that he had been prejudiced by his counsel's deficient performance. Turning to the remedy, the Court ruled that the District Court should require the prosecution to re-offer the plea deal and then decide whether to resentence Cooper.
Dissents
Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion joined by Justice Thomas and Chief Justice Roberts (as to all but Part IV).Lafler, 566 U.S. at 175–187 (Scalia, J., dissenting). In a rare move, Scalia read his dissent from the bench, calling the Court's holding "absurd" and "unheard-of". Scalia argued that by reversing a conviction following "a full-dress criminal trial with its innumerable constitutional and statutory limitations upon the evidence that the prosecution can bring forward, and (in Michigan as in most States) the requirement of a unanimous guilty verdict by impartial jurors",Lafler, 566 U.S. at 186 (Scalia, J., dissenting). the majority transformed plea bargaining from being an embarrassing "necessary evil" to being an embraced, constitutionally-protected institution of the criminal justice system.
Justice Scalia remarked that the Sixth Amendment was designed to protect fair trials, and that errors which do not impact the fairness of a trial cannot constitute Strickland prejudice.Lafler, 566 U.S. at 178 (Scalia, J., dissenting) ("Impairment of fair trial is how we distinguish between unfortunate attorney error and error of constitutional significance."). He noted that the majority's remedy, which left to the discretion of the trial judge the specific relief, was unprecedented in the history of the Court's criminal justice jurisprudence.Lafler, 566 U.S. at 183 (Scalia, J., dissenting). Finally, he argued that granting relief would violate the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, which prohibits federal courts from granting relief unless the state court issued a decision "contrary to, or [which] involved an unreasonable application of, clearly established Federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court of the United States".Lafler, 566 U.S. at 181 (quoting (d)(1)) (Scalia, J., dissenting).
Justice Alito also wrote a dissenting opinion, which largely agreed with Justice Scalia's analysis. Justice Alito then wrote the "weakness in the Court’s analysis is highlighted by its opaque discussion of the remedy that is appropriate when a plea offer is rejected due to defective legal representation".Lafler, 566 U.S. at 187–188 (Alito, J., dissenting).
Reception
Reactions to the Supreme Court's decision were mixed. Lawyers on all sides of the issue were surprised by the broadness of the Court's ruling. An article published in the Federal Sentencing Reporter argued that the government had "[won] by losing" by requiring defense lawyers to "bargain at the behest of the prosecutor". The Brennan Center for Justice wrote that the decision could incentivize defense counsel to advise accepting the first plea bargain their clients are offered for fear of being labelled "ineffective" by a court deciding that rejecting the plea was disadvantageous with the advantage of hindsight, but also noted that the decision represented a "triumph of realism and justice over narrow legalism and formalism". Articles published by the Notre Dame Law Review and the University of Chicago Public Law & Legal Theory Research Paper Series argued that the Court had not done enough to protect defendants' rights, while an article published in the Mississippi Law Journal criticized the Court for "possibly neglecting the fundamental goal of the Sixth Amendment: the right to a fair trial". The ruling was described as creating "a new body of constitutional law" and was seen as broadly impactful on all sides.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2012 in United States case law
"""

From "LaGrand case" ==> """
The LaGrand case was a legal action heard before the International Court of Justice (ICJ) which concerned the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations. In the case, the ICJ ruled that its own temporary court orders were legally binding and that the rights contained in the convention could not be denied by the application of domestic legal procedures.
Background
On January 7, 1982, brothers Karl-Heinz LaGrand (1963–1999) and Walter Bernhard LaGrand (1962–1999) bungled an armed bank robbery in Marana, Arizona, United States, killing 63-year-old Kenneth Hartsock by stabbing him 24 times with a letter opener, and severely injuring 20-year-old Dawn Lopez by stabbing her multiple times. Lopez later said she heard one of the brothers twice say, "Just make sure he's dead." They were subsequently charged and convicted of murder and sentenced to death. The LaGrands also had prior convictions for robbery and burglary, which were used against them during the sentencing phase of their trials.
The LaGrands were German nationals, having been born from a German mother in Germany. While they had both lived in the United States since they were four and five, respectively, neither had obtained U.S. citizenship. As foreigners, the LaGrands should have been informed of their right to consular assistance, under the Vienna Convention, from their state of nationality, Germany. However, the Arizona authorities failed to do this. The brothers later contacted Consul William Behrens, head of the German Consulate in Phoenix, on their own accord, having learned of their right to consular assistance. They appealed their sentences and convictions on the grounds that they were not informed of their right to consular assistance, and that with consular assistance they might have been able to mount a better defense. The federal courts rejected their argument on grounds of procedural default, which provides that issues cannot be raised in federal court appeals unless they have first been raised in state courts.
Diplomatic efforts, including pleas by German Ambassador Jürgen Chrobog and German Member of Parliament Claudia Roth, and the recommendation of Arizona's clemency board, failed to sway Arizona Governor Jane Dee Hull, who insisted that the executions be carried out. Karl LaGrand was subsequently executed by the state of Arizona on February 24, 1999, by lethal injection. Walter LaGrand was executed March 3, 1999, by lethal gas (upon his request), and currently remains the last person executed by that method in the United States.
The case
Germany initiated legal action in the International Court of Justice against the United States regarding Walter LaGrand. Hours before Walter LaGrand was due to be executed, Germany applied for the Court to grant a provisional court order, requiring the United States to delay the execution of Walter LaGrand, which the court granted.
Germany then initiated action in the U.S. Supreme Court for enforcement of the provisional order. In its judgment,Federal Republic of Germany et al. vs. United States et al., 526 U.S. 111, per curiam the U.S. Supreme Court held that it lacked jurisdiction with respect to Germany's complaint against Arizona due to the Eleventh Amendment of the U.S. constitution, which prohibits federal courts from hearing lawsuits of foreign states against a U.S. state. With respect to Germany's case against the United States, it held that the doctrine of procedural default was not incompatible with the Vienna Convention, and that even if procedural default did conflict with the Vienna Convention it had been overruled by later federal law – the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, which explicitly legislated the doctrine of procedural default. (Subsequent federal legislation overrides prior self-executing treaty provisions, Whitney v. Robertson, ).
The U.S. Solicitor General sent a letter to the Supreme Court, as part of these proceedings, arguing that provisional measures of the International Court of Justice are not legally binding. The United States Department of State also conveyed the ICJ's provisional measure to the Governor of Arizona without comment. The Arizona clemency board recommended a stay to the governor, on the basis of the pending ICJ case; but the Governor of Arizona, Jane Dee Hull, ignored the recommendation.
Germany then modified its complaint in the case before the ICJ, alleging furthermore that the U.S. violated international law by failing to implement the provisional measures. In opposition to the German submissions, the United States argued that the Vienna Convention did not grant rights to individuals but only to states; that the convention was meant to be exercised subject to the laws of each state party, which in the case of the United States meant subject to the doctrine of procedural default; and that Germany was seeking to turn the ICJ into an international court of criminal appeal.
ICJ decision
On June 27, 2001, the ICJ, rejecting all of the United States' arguments, ruled in favor of Germany. The ICJ held that the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of April 24, 1963, granted rights to individuals on the basis of its plain meaning, and that domestic laws could not limit the rights of the accused under the convention, but only specify the means by which those rights were to be exercised. The ICJ also found that its own provisional measures were legally binding. The nature of provisional measures has been a subject of great dispute in international law; the English text of the Statute of the International Court of Justice implies they are not binding, while the French text implies that they are. Faced with a contradiction between two equally authentic texts of the statute, the court considered which interpretation better served the objects and purposes of the statute, and hence found that they are binding. This was the first time in the court's history it had ruled as such.
The court also found that the United States violated the Vienna Convention through its application of procedural default. The court was at pains to point out that it was not passing judgment on the doctrine itself, but only its application to cases involving the Vienna Convention.
 See also 
 Capital punishment in Arizona
 List of people executed in Arizona
 Avena case
 Leal Garcia v. Texas (2011)
 Linda Carty
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 526
 References 
 External links 
 Judgments of the International Court of Justice
 Judgment of U.S. Supreme Court, Federal Republic of Germany vs. United States
 ASIL Insight article on LaGrand case
 Federal Republic of Germany v. United States, 526 U.S. 111 (1999) The opinion by the Supreme Court in the matter referenced in the article.
 Stewart v. LaGrand, 526 U.S. 115 (1999) The Companion Case
 Breard v. Greene, 523 U.S. 317 (1997) The earlier case of the execution of a Paraguayan on which the LaGrand decisions rest.
Category:Capital punishment in Arizona
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:International Court of Justice cases
Category:1999 in case law
Category:2001 in case law
Category:2001 in Germany
Category:2001 in the United States
LaGrand
Category:Germany–United States relations
Category:2001 in international relations
Category:History of Pima County, Arizona
Category:Diplomatic immunity and protection treaties
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Laidlaw v. Organ" ==> """
Laidlaw v. Organ, 15 U.S. (2 Wheat.) 178 (1817), is a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that established the rule that buyers need not disclose advantageous information to sellers. This rule should not be confused with either caveat emptor—a rule placing the burden of due diligence on the purchaser of goods—or caveat venditor—the rule that vendor sales come with an implied warranty.
Facts
On December 24, 1814, delegations from the United States and United Kingdom signed the Treaty of Ghent, presumptively ending the War of 1812. At the war's outset, U.K. forces had blockaded major U.S. ports, including New Orleans. In consequence of the blockade, tobacco crops coming down the Mississippi River intended for export amassed in New Orleans, thereby depressing their price by 23 to 33 percent. 
On the evening of February 18, 1815, three Americans—Livingston, White, and Shepherd—received news from the British fleet of the war's end. White arranged for the publication of a handbill the following morning beginning at 8 a.m. detailing the news of the treaty. In the meantime, Shepherd informed his brother of the peace, who in turn informed Hector Organ.
Organ had been in negotiations with Francis Girault, a tobacco broker at Laidlaw's firm. Within the hour after publication of the handbill on February 19, Organ finalized a contract with Girault to purchase 111 hogsheads of tobacco (120,000 pounds). When making the contract, Girault had asked Organ if he knew of information that might tend to increase the price of the tobacco. Organ did not disclose any news of the treaty.
With the war's end and the lifting of the blockade, the pent-up tobacco supply in the city would fetch higher global prices and consequently increased in price 30 to 50 percent after news of the treaty broke within the city. The subsequent increase in price represented a substantial loss to Laidlaw and a lucrative windfall for Organ. When Organ appeared on February 20 to take possession of the tobacco, Laidlaw refused delivery.
Procedural history
By February 21, Organ had filed a petition in the United States District Court for the District of Louisiana on grounds of breach of contract. The judge issued a writ of sequestration and ordered Laidlaw to surrender the tobacco into the marshal's possession. The judge also later ordered Organ to post a bond payable to Laidlaw for its expenses should the case go in their favor.
The court tried the petition before a jury on April 20, 1815, resulting in a verdict for the plaintiff, awarding him the sequestered tobacco. During the trial, the judge refused to admit Girault to testify on grounds of incompetency. Counsel for Laidlaw objected to this. Based on the evidence admitted, the judge charged the jury to find for the plaintiff. Counsel for Laidlaw then entered a bill of exceptions.
Holding
Writing for a unanimous court, Chief Justice Marshall held in a short opinion of 120 words that Organ had no duty to disclose information known exclusively to him about circumstances affecting the price of the commodity he was purchasing. The Court viewed a rule requiring purchasers to disclose such information when it was readably discoverable to the seller as judicially unmanageable. The rule instead was only that neither party imposed upon the other through any statements actively made.
However, the Court also thought the judge erred in directing the jury to find for the plaintiff. The question of whether Organ had imposed upon Girault to Laidlaw's detriment was a question of fact to be decided by the jury. For that reason, the Court vacated the verdict and directed retrial before a new jury—venire facias de novo.
Significance
Laidlaw has been recognized by U.S. legal scholars as a central case in the history of U.S. contract law. It was "one of the first cases to come before the [Supreme] Court involving a contract for future delivery of a commodity."Morton J. Horwitz. The Transformation of American Law: 1780-1860. 1977. p. 182. It is also the first case to start to articulate a doctrine of forbidding active concealment.
Laidlaw has been cited by 110 different cases and maintains great importance in U.S. legal scholarship and education (including law school contracts courses). It has also appeared over 100 times in law review articles, appellate court briefs, and other academic materials.Kaye, loc. cit.
Laidlaw has also faced criticism from an economic perspective on the idea that nondisclosure of information that will shortly become public does not encourage overall efficiency because it merely affects distribution.  Earlier disclosure could have resulted in more efficient planting decisions by farmers, and nondisclosure served only to enrich Organ.Kronman, Anthony T.  Mistake, Disclosure, Information, and the Law of Contracts.  7 J. Legal. Stud. 1, 13 1978.
Trivia
Organ, the vendee, was represented by Francis Scott Key.Ayres & Klass. Studies in Contract Law 490.
Quote
"[E]ach party must take care not to say or do anything tending to impose upon [i.e. take advantage of] the other"
-Marshall
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 15
References
1. 
References
External links
Category:1817 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States contract case law
Category:United States tobacco case law
Category:United States in the War of 1812
Category:19th century in New Orleans
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
"""

From "Laird v. Tatum" ==> """
Laird v. Tatum, 408 U.S. 1 (1972), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court dismissed for lack of ripeness a claim in which the plaintiff accused the U.S. Army of alleged unlawful "surveillance of lawful citizen political activity."  The appellant's specific nature of the harm caused by the surveillance was that it chilled the First Amendment rights of all citizens and undermined that right to express political dissent.
Background
Arlo Tatum,An obituary for Arlo Tatum appears in The Cornish Quaker, May 2014, giving his vital dates as 21.2.23-2.4.14. A contributed obituary also appears in The Guardian, 7-05-2014. the executive secretary of the Central Committee for Conscientious Objectors, sued Melvin Laird, the Secretary of Defense. Tatum sued after Washington Monthly published an article revealing that US military intelligence units were gathering intelligence on civilians and civil organizations in the US.
Opinion
The Court was initially divided into three camps.  Justices Rehnquist and Powell initially urged the conservatives to determine that the surveillance program was constitutional.  However, Chief Justice Burger, and Justices Blackmun and White determined that it would be more controversial for the Court to enter into a political question."  After further reflection Powell concluded that it was unwise to rule on the constitutionality of the surveillance program and that the issue was best decided on the principle of ripeness.  That is, in the absence of a discernable injury, the issue was too speculative for the Court to rule upon.  Burger eventually prevailed on Rehnquist to abandon a concurrence and join with the majority.Joshua E. Kastenberg, Shaping U.S. Military Law: Governing a Constitutional Military. (London: Ashgate Press, 2013), 164-5
The Court determined that the plaintiff's claim was based on the fear that sometime in the future the Army might cause harm with information retrieved during their surveillance, but that there was no present threat. Therefore, the claim was too "speculative."
Mr. Justice Douglas wrote in dissent, with Mr. Justice Marshall concurring:
Participation by Justice Rehnquist
The dismissal of the case was made possible by the timely nomination by Richard Nixon of Assistant Attorney General William Rehnquist to the Supreme Court. Rehnquist had previously testified to Senator Sam Ervin's committee that there were no "serious constitutional problems with respect to collecting data or keeping under surveillance persons who are merely exercising their right of a peaceful assembly or petition to redress a grievance." He further stated that he felt that Laird v. Tatum should be dismissed on the procedural ground that the plaintiffs lacked standing to sue. Yet he later refused to recuse himself from the case as legal ethicists almost unanimously agreed that he should. After a petition for rehearing was filed based on his participation, Rehnquist issued a memorandumhttps://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/409/824/case.html 409 U.S. 824 (1973) (in chambers) stating that the attack on his impartiality was essentially a criticism of his conservative judicial philosophy, and there had been no actual bias towards the litigant.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 408
Surveillance-related
Amnesty v. Blair
Clapper v. Amnesty International
COINTELPRO
Fusion center
PRISM (surveillance program)
Recusal-related
appearance of impropriety
conflict of interest
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States ripeness case law
Category:Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War
Category:Conscientious objection
"""

From "Lakeside v. Oregon" ==> """
Lakeside vs. Oregon (435 U.S. 333) was a decision in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that trial judges may instruct a jury to not find a defendant guilty in any way based on his refusal to testify against himself, even if the defendant objects to the instruction.
The defendant was in a Multnomah County Corrections Center when he was charged with escape in the second degree. His defense council, as requested by the defendant, requested that the trial judge not inform the jury of the privilege against self-incrimination, claiming that it would raise a red flag to the jurors of his guilt. The trial judge denied the defendant's request and informed jury, claiming that procedural due process under the Constitution requires that jurors understand the defendant's rights. The jury subsequently found the defendant guilty of escape in the second degree.
The defendant appealed, claiming that his Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights were violated by the trial judge. The Oregon Court of Appeals vacated the ruling of jury based on this claim and ordered a new trial. The Oregon Supreme Court, however, reversed the Court of Appeals, arguing that no due process rights could be violated by instructing the jury of the defendant's due process rights. The defendant appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which, due to conflicting rulings in various Courts across the Country, granted 𝘤𝘦𝘳𝘵𝘪𝘰𝘳𝘢𝘳𝘪.
Justice Stewart wrote the opinion of the court. In a 6-2 decision, they upheld the ruling of the Oregon Supreme Court, stating that the due process rights under the Fifth and Sixth Amendments are not violated during jury instruction.
References
External links
Lakeside v. Oregon
Category:United States judiciary case law
Category:Due Process Clause 
Category:United States criminal constitutional case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:Multnomah County, Oregon 
Category:Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution 
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:1978 in Oregon 
Category:Oregon Supreme Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Lamb's Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School District" ==> """
Lamb's Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School District, 508 U.S. 384 (1993), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States concerning whether the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment was offended by a school district that refused to allow a church access to school premises to show films dealing with family and child-rearing issues faced by parents. In a unanimous decision,There were nine votes for the result, but the court split 6-3 on the reasoning. (Justices Kennedy and Scalia filed opinions concurring in the judgment; Justice Thomas joined Scalia's opinion) the court concluded that it was.
Summary of case
The case arose in New York, where state law authorized school boards to promulgate regulations for the use of school property outside of school hours. The Lamb's Chapel evangelical church sought to show a series of family lectures by James Dobson on school property. The local board refused on the grounds that the film "appear[ed] to be church related," 508 U.S. at 389, whereafter the church sued. The district court rejected their claims, finding that the school was a limited public forum, and that because "the District had not opened its facilities to organizations similar to Lamb's Chapel for religious purposes, ... the denial ... was viewpoint neutral and, hence, not a violation of the Freedom of Speech Clause." Id. at 389-90. The Court of Appeals affirmed, and the matter came before the Supreme Court.
Writing for the court, Justice Byron White observed that the courts below missed the point: "That all religions and all uses for religious purposes are treated alike ... does not answer the critical question whether it discriminates on the basis of to permit school property to be used for the presentation of all views about family issues and child rearing except those dealing with the subject matter from a religious standpoint." The subject of the films was permitted; the viewpoint was the problem: "[the] exhibition was denied solely because the series dealt with the subject from a religious standpoint." This constituted viewpoint discrimination and could not withstand First Amendment scrutiny.
Three justices concurred in the judgment. The Court had, in passing, invoked the landmark Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971) case, which remained good law, to the consternation of some of the concurring justices. Justice Antonin Scalia, joined by Justice Clarence Thomas, wrote:
Like some ghoul in a late-night horror movie that repeatedly sits up in its grave and shuffles abroad, after being repeatedly killed and buried, Lemon stalks our Establishment Clause jurisprudence once again, frightening the little children and school attorneys of Center Moriches Union Free School District. Its most recent burial, only last Term, was, to be sure, not fully six feet under: Our decision in Lee v. Weisman conspicuously avoided using the supposed "test" but also declined the invitation to repudiate it. Over the years, however, no fewer than five of the currently sitting Justices have, in their own opinions, personally driven pencils through the creature's heart (the author of today's opinion repeatedly), and a sixth has joined an opinion doing so. 
The secret of the Lemon test's survival, I think, is that it is so easy to kill. It is there to scare us (and our audience) when we wish it to do so, but we can command it to return to the tomb at will. When we wish to strike down a practice it forbids, we invoke it; when we wish to uphold a practice it forbids, we ignore it entirely. Sometimes, we take a middle course, calling its three prongs 'no more than helpful signposts.' Such a docile and useful monster is worth keeping around, at least in a somnolent state; one never knows when one might need him. (Citations omitted.)
See also
 Freedom of speech in the United States
 School speech cases:
 Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District (1969)
 Bethel School District v. Fraser (1986)
 Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier (1988)
 Rosenberger v. University of Virginia (1995)
 Guiles v. Marineau (2d. Cir. 2006)
 Morse v. Frederick (2007)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 508
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:1993 in religion
Category:Education in Suffolk County, New York
Category:Establishment Clause case law
"""

From "Lambert v. California" ==> """
Lambert v. California, 355 U.S. 225 (1957), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the defense of ignorance of the law when there is no legal notice.Criminal Law, 7th edition, 2012; John Kaplan, Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder The court held that, when one is required to register one's presence, failure to register may only be punished when there is a probability that the accused party had knowledge of the law before committing the crime of failing to register.
Circumstances
Lambert had previously been convicted of forgery, a felony in California. She was unaware that a Los Angeles city ordinance required that she, being a felon, register if she remained in the city for more than five days. The ordinance stipulated that she, as a convicted criminal, could be fined $500 and sentenced to up to six months in jail for every day she remained in the city after the five-day limit. When she was arrested on suspicion of committing another offense she was convicted for failure to register. As Lambert was not allowed to use her lack of knowledge as a defense, she was convicted, fined $250 and sentenced to three years probation. Lambert appealed her case,  arguing that she had no knowledge that she had to register her name and  that convicting her would deprive her of due process under the Fourteenth Amendment.
Decision
The Supreme Court reversed Lambert's conviction,  holding that knowledge or probability of knowledge of a statute is required to convict someone of a notice offense. Justice William Douglas, who delivered the majority opinion for the court, wrote:
However, the court did not overturn the right of states and municipalities to force occupants to register for a given purpose. The court held that because the ordinance that forced convicted felons to register was not accompanied by any action, nor were there circumstances that would lead a felon to be aware of his or her duty to register, the ordinance was unconstitutional. The Justice continued:
Significance
This case is an exception to the legal principle ignorantia legis non excusat—that the ignorance of the law is not a suitable excuse for breaking it. Because it deals with the motives (or lack thereof) for committing a crime, it addresses mens rea, the degree of legal culpability that arises from the motivation of a criminal.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 355
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States due process case law
Category:1957 in United States case law
Category:1957 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:History of Los Angeles
Category:Ignorance
"""

From "Lambert v. Yellowley" ==> """
Lambert v. Yellowley, 272 U.S. 581 (1926),  was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that reaffirmed the National Prohibition Act's limitation on the dispensation of alcoholic medicines. The five-to-four decision, written by Justice Louis D. Brandeis, affirmed the dismissal of a suit in which New York City physician Samuel Lambert sought to prevent Edward Yellowley, the acting federal prohibition director, from enforcing the Prohibition Act so as to preclude him from prescribing alcoholic medicines. The decision affirmed the police powers of the individual states, as well as the power of the Necessary and Proper Clause of the United States Constitution, which was cited in upholding the Prohibition Act's limitations as a necessary and proper implementation of the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
 Background 
The Eighteenth Amendment, which made illegal in the United States the production, transport and sale of alcohol, went into effect on January 17, 1920. Accompanying legislation under the National Prohibition Act stated that physicians with appropriate permits could prescribe alcoholic medicines, but not more than once every 10 days to the same patient.
In November 1922, Lambert brought suit in federal court to prevent Yellowley and other officials from interfering with him prescribing liquors to his patients in excess of those allowed under the act, claiming that prescribing liquors more frequently than once every 10 days was sometimes necessary for treating patients, and that the ability to do so was a part of his rights as a physician..
In May 1923, the district court issued an injunction for Lambert, which was overturned by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in December 1924. Lambert's appeal contended that in passing the disputed provision of the National Prohibition Act, Congress exceeded the authority granted by the Eighteenth Amendment, and that the provision was thus unconstitutional.
 Decision 
In ruling against Lambert, the court rejected his claim that the prescription of medicinal liquors was unrelated to the enforcement of the Eighteenth Amendment, stating that such prescriptions opened the door to "frauds, subterfuges and artifices" that hampered enforcement of the amendment.
The court also rejected a right to practice medicine that trumped police power in the United States, or the right of Congress to enact laws that are necessary and proper for fulfilling the intent of the 18th Amendment:
Four Justices dissented, in an opinion authored by Justice George Sutherland. The dissent focused on the wording of the 18th Amendment, which provided that "... the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors ... for beverage purposes is hereby prohibited." In his view, the amendment left any regulation of liquor sales other than "for beverage purposes" to state law.Lambert, 272 U.S. at 597 (Sutherland, J., dissenting).
 Later history 
The ruling was later cited in cases upholding state prohibitions on birth control, such as in Commonwealth v. Gardner (1938), where the Supreme Court unanimously upheld Massachusetts' complete ban on contraceptives, rejecting claims that physicians should be able to prescribe contraceptives to patients in order to save their lives or protect their well-being, and declaring that physicians should not in any way be excepted from enforcement of the statute.
Connecticut's contraception ban was similarly upheld by the Connecticut Supreme Court in State v. Nelson (1940), which also cited Lambert in its ruling. As in Massachusetts, the court recalled Lambert in saying such laws were "a legitimate exercise of the state's police power to preserve and protect public morals."
More recently, Lambert has been cited in Supreme Court cases by justices arguing for the legitimacy of state laws banning late term abortions..
 References 
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:1926 in United States case law
Category:United States Eighteenth Amendment case law
Category:Healthcare in New York (state)
Category:Alcohol and health
Category:Medical regulation in the United States
"""

From "Lamont v. Postmaster General" ==> """
Lamont v. Postmaster General, 381 U.S. 301 (1965), was a landmark First Amendment Supreme Court case, in which the ruling of the Supreme Court struck down § 305(a) of the Postal Service and Federal Employees Salary Act of 1962, a federal statute requiring the Postmaster General to detain and deliver only upon the addressee's request unsealed foreign mailings of "communist political propaganda.".
Background
39 U.S.C. 4008 (1964) required the U.S. Postmaster General to detain and not deliver "communist political propaganda," unless a recipient affirmatively indicated their consent to receive such materials through the mail.  Dr. Corliss Lamont had a copy of the Peking Review detained and declined to respond to the government's inquiry as to whether he wished to receive the delivery.  Lamont subsequently filed suit alleging that Section 4008 violated his 1st Amendment and 5th Amendment rights.
Opinion of the court
The Court held:the Act, as construed and applied, is unconstitutional, since it imposes on the addressee an affirmative obligation which amounts to an unconstitutional limitation of his rights under the First Amendment.
The Court was unanimous in the judgment (8-0, with Justice White recused). Justice Brennan wrote a concurring opinion (which Justice Goldberg joined) and Justice Harlan also wrote a concurring opinion.
 See also 
Chilling effect
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:Anti-communism in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1965 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Postal Service litigation
Category:China–United States relations
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
"""

From "Lamps Plus, Inc. v. Varela" ==> """
Lamps Plus, Inc. v. Varela, 587 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the use of class arbitration proceedings. In a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit’s decision and held that arbitration on a classwide basis could not be compelled based on the provision’s ambiguous language., 139 S. Ct. 1407, 1415 (2019). The Court relied on its previous decision in Stolt-Nielsen S.A. v. AnimalFeeds Int'l Corp. which held that class arbitration procedures could not be compelled without indication that the parties to the arbitration had agreed to these procedures..
 Background 
Although class procedures are not explicitly referenced in the Act, Section 4 of the Federal Arbitration Act (“FAA”) grants courts the power to compel arbitration “in accordance with the terms of the agreement.”. Class arbitrations, like class actions, purport to resolve disputes on behalf of a group of claimants.See Supplementary Rules for Class Arbitration, Am. Arb. Ass’n, (October 8, 2003). In Stolt-Nielsen S.A. v. AnimalFeeds Int'l Corp., the Supreme Court noted that class arbitrations are inherently different than traditional bilateral arbitration because some of the key features of bilateral arbitration, such as efficiency and confidentiality, are no longer guaranteed.Stolt-Nielsen, 559 U.S. at 686. Given these differences, and that arbitration is based on consent by the parties, the Court held that silence on the issue of class arbitration could not be interpreted to permit the use of class arbitration procedures.Stolt-Nielsen, 559 U.S. at 687. At least one scholar, however, takes the view that concerns over class arbitration are perhaps overstated. Not only does the Federal Arbitration Act not demand a specific timeline for resolution of arbitration claims but the current practice of publishing arbitration awards suggests that the concern over confidentiality is not exclusive to class arbitration.
 Facts 
In 2016 Frank Varela, a Lamps Plus Inc. employee, filed a class action lawsuit against the company after a data breach exposed sensitive tax information of approximately 1,300 employees, including Mr. Varela’s, and led to the filing of a fraudulent federal income tax return on his behalf.Lamps Plus, 139 S. Ct. at 1413. Lamps Plus moved to compel arbitration based on the employment contract which included an agreement to arbitrate disputes. Although the court granted the request to compel arbitration, it allowed the arbitrator to conduct the arbitration on a classwide basis rather than on an individual basis. Lamps Plus appealed the decision to the Ninth Circuit, which held that given the ambiguous language of the arbitration provision regarding availability of class arbitration procedures and that California law allowed courts to construe ambiguity against the drafter, the court could compel class arbitration based on Plaintiff’s interpretation of the provision. According to the Ninth Circuit majority, Stolt-Nielsen was not controlling in this case because ‘silence’ on the issue of class arbitration meant that the parties in that case had not agreed to class arbitration procedures rather than just failed to include explicit reference in the provision.
 Supreme Court 
 Majority Opinion 
The issue in front of the Supreme Court was whether arbitration on a classwide basis could be compelled based on ambiguous language in the arbitration provision.Lamps Plus, 139 S. Ct. at 1415. Although Plaintiff tried to distinguish its case from Stolt-Nielsen, Chief Justice Roberts concluded that like silence, ambiguity could not support the use of class arbitration procedures. Here, the Court relied heavily on the concerns regarding the fundamental differences between class and bilateral arbitration described in Stolt-Nielsen. As Chief Justice Roberts noted, class arbitrations not only sacrificed the informality of traditional bilateral arbitration, which led to lower costs and speedier resolution of disputes, but also distinctively affected the rights of absent class members.Lamps Plus, 139 S.Ct. at 1416. Thus, the majority concluded, agreement to such procedures could not be inferred from an ambiguous provision.
The Court also rejected the application of the contra proferentem doctrine, which states that ambiguity in a contract provision is to be construed against the drafter, to support the use of class arbitration provisions. It found that application of contra proferentem would be inconsistent with the FAA because it does not attempt to resolve what the intent of the parties actually was. This reasoning highlighted the Court’s commitment to the policy favoring enforcement of arbitration agreements, codified in the FAA, in spite of the fact that as Justice Kagan argued in dissent, contra proferentem is a neutral state contract interpretation ruleSee Bookman, at 1159–60. which is not displaced by the FAA.See Lamps Plus, 139 S.Ct. at 1431 (J. Kagan dissenting).
Dissents
Although the dissenting Justices generally supported each other’s dissenting opinions, each of the four dissenting Justices wrote their own dissent. Justice Ginsburg’s dissent emphasized what she viewed as the oppressive nature of arbitration clauses that denied employees and consumers the ability to band together.Lamps Plus, 139 S. Ct. at 1420–21 (J. Ginsburg dissenting). Justice Sotomayor joined this opinion and Part II of Justice Kagan’s dissent to emphasize that given that the provision was ambiguous, the Court should have applied contra proferentem to resolve the ambiguity.Lamps Plus, 139 S. Ct. at 1427 (J. Sotomayor dissenting). Although he joined the dissents of Justice Ginsburg and Justice Kagan in full, Justice Breyer wrote separately regarding the Court’s lack of jurisdiction to hear the case.Lamps Plus, 139 S. Ct. at 1422–23 (J. Breyer dissenting).
 Significance 
The decision in Lamps Plus is the court’s latest iteration on restricting the availability of class arbitration procedures. The Court has repeatedly highlighted the inherent differences between class and bilateral arbitrations in AT&T Mobility LLC v. Concepcion,. Stolt-Nielsen,Stolt-Nielsen, 559 U.S. at 684–85. and in Epic Systems Corp. v. Lewis,, 138 S. Ct. 1612, 1640 (2018). as well as upheld class arbitration waivers in AT&T Mobility LLC v. Concepcion.AT&T, 563 U.S. at 352. Given the Court’s emphasis on the consensual nature of arbitration in this case and in Stolt-Nielsen, there is now a presumption against the use of class arbitration absent explicit reference.See DiLeo, at 178.
 See also 
List of Supreme Court cases
 References 
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States class action case law
Category:Data breaches in the United States
"""

From "Landmark Communications, Inc. v. Virginia" ==> """
Landmark Communications v. Virginia, 435 U.S. 829 (1978), was a United States Supreme Court case that was argued on January 11, 1978 and decided on May 1, 1978.Floyd Abrams, Speaking Freely, published by Viking Press, Page 65.
The court reversed a lower court's conviction of the publisher of Norfolk's The Virginian-Pilot for illegal disclosure of confidential proceedings before the Judicial Inquiry and Review Commission about a judge's misconduct.Landmark Communications v. Virginia, 435 U.S. 829 (1978).
Background
Floyd Abrams represented Landmark Communications, which owned The Virginian-Pilot. The Pilot had reported on October 4, 1975, that Judge H. Warrington Sharp, who sat on the Virginia Juvenile and Domestic Relations District Court, was under an investigation by a judicial fitness panel. They were deciding whether or not to begin disciplinary proceedings against Sharp.
Under Virginia statute, each complaint against a judge was to be reviewed in secret; it would be announced only if it deemed serious enough to require a public hearing. All states had confidentiality requirements to avoid use of the disciplinary inquiry as retribution against a judge, but only Virginia and Hawaii provided for criminal penalties for disclosure.
There was a quick trial and conviction of the publisher of a misdemeanor and a $500, fine plus the costs of prosecution. Landmark appealed to the Supreme Court of Virginia, which affirmed the conviction by 6–1. The court concluded that the "requirement of confidentiality in Commission proceedings" served three purposes:
 protection of the judge's reputation;
 protection of public confidence in the judicial system; and
 protection of complainants and witnesses from possible recriminations.
Arguments
Abrams wrote that his primary argument was straightforward: the newspaper published a true account and had obtained the information legally, and the alleged offense was simply reporting a complaint about how a public official performed his civic role. In his brief, Abrams argued that the case raised "anew a question which penetrates to the core of our concept of self-government: whether the press may be punished for printing the truth about a public official with his public duties."
In his memoir Speaking Freely, Abrams stated that it was the first case he argued by himself before the Supreme Court. He continued that he devoted most of their preparation for the case with three overlapping issues, "ones that have consumed my attention in every later Supreme Court argument as well."
The first was jurisprudential: what rule of law would they urge the Court to adopt? What would be its effect as stare decisis and its impact on the First Amendment.
The second was tactical. Justices are known for taking up the 30 minutes of allotted argument time with question-and-answer sessions. Abrams felt he needed to figure out his core message.
The Third question was what the court might ask that would be exceptionally difficult to respond to, and what should such responses be?
Assistant Attorney General James Kulp defended the Virginia Supreme Court opinion with the above-mentioned three reasons for the statute. Justice Byron White questioned Kulp about whether the case was really about not criticizing public officials, a constitutional right, and whether he would defend a statute calling for confidentiality for protection of the judge. "No, sir," responded Kulp. "I think the cases from this Court have been clear in that respect, that, in other words, a judge, as any public official, may certainly be criticized, the administration of justice may be criticized, and we don't have any argument about that." White said if that was so, his arguments about protection the judiciary and the system held no weight. Kulp agreed.
Virginia's time before the Court dealt with the scope of the statute.
Abrams declined his rebuttal time, as he was confident in Landmark's victory.
"During one exchange, Justice William Rehnquist asked a question for which Mr. Abrams said he was "totally unprepared," but Justice Potter Stewart came to his rescue. Of all the justices, Mr. Abrams found Justice Byron R. White the most unnerving. White "invariably asked questions that were both pointed and powerful," he recalls, and Mr. Abrams never once "had the sense that anything I said pleased him." He confides that during oral argument he often felt like a mouse with "a tormenting cat." Nonetheless, he won a unanimous victory."
"It had been quite an introduction for me to arguing for a complete thirty minutes in the Supreme Court: fifty-four judicial questions and comments. Years later, when I saw Albert Brooks play a television journalist in Broadcast News who perspired so much when on the air that his shirt looked like he had just returned from a swim, I wondered if I had presented the same appearance after my Landmark argument."
Decision
The Court held unanimously in favor of Landmark. Chief Justice Burger wrote the opinion for himself and the other five members (Justices Brennan and Powell recused themselves). The Court did not adopt Abrams's categorical approach (all truth reporting in reference to public duties was insulated from criminal sanctions by the First Amendment). However, the Court rejected the argument that these interests were sufficient grounds for criminal sanctions on nonparticipants in proceedings.
In its conclusion, the Court wrote: "the [clear and present danger] test requires a court to make its own inquiry into the imminence and magnitude of the danger said to flow from the particular utterance and then to balance the character of the evil as well as its likelihood against the need for free and unfettered expression."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 435
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:History of mass media in the United States
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:History of Norfolk, Virginia
Category:Judicial misconduct
"""

From "Lane v. Franks" ==> """
Lane v. Franks, 573 U.S. 228 (2014), is a U.S. Supreme Court case involving public employee's freedom of speech rights. Edward Lane sued Steve Franks for unfairly firing him, out of retaliation for sworn testimony Lane gave during a federal fraud case. The Eleventh Circuit originally ruled in favor of Franks, “denying [Lane] first amendment protection to subpoenaed testimony” (Page 6, section I). The case was argued before the Supreme Court on April 28, 2014. The case was decided on June 19, 2014.
The Supreme Court sided with Lane that he was not responsible for something he said during a federal trial. However, the court could not award damages, because Frank's qualified immunity protected him from being sued in his personal capacity. The case is an important vote of confidence from the Supreme Court about governmental employees not being held responsible for speech that is made as a public citizen on a matter of public concern. It is in line with the Pickering v. Board of Education ruling of 1968 (Opinion para. 1)..
 Background 
Edward Lane accepted a role at Central Alabama Community College (CACC) in 2006, as the director of Community Intensive Training for Youth (CITY). Lane proceeded to terminate Suzanne Schmitz. Schmitz was a state representative and on the programs payroll, despite not performing any duties. Lane was then subpoenaed to testify “regarding the events that led to his terminating Schmitz” in two federal trials for fraud (Section 1, para. 5). In 2009 after the conclusion of the trials Steve Franks, the CACC president, terminated 29 employees.
Lane was among the employees that got termination letters. Franks rescinded 27 of the 29 terminations, but two, including Lane's were not rescinded. Lane then sued Franks in “federal district court and alleged that his termination from the CITY program was in retaliation for his testimony against Schmitz and therefore violated his First Amendment right to free speech. Lane sued Franks in his official and private capacities as the president of CACC.
 District Court and Circuit Court rulings 
The Federal District Court for the Northern District of Alabama ruled on behalf of Franks. Citing that because Lane learned of the information on the job he was not protected as a citizen on a matter of public concern. They also ruled that Franks was protected because he had qualified immunity. The Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district court’s decision.
 Supreme Court ruling 
“The critical question is whether the speech at issue is itself ordinarily within the scope of an employee’s duties, not whether it merely concerns those duties. Corruption in a public program and misuse of state funds involve matter of significant public concern; the form and context of the speech, sworn testimony in a judicial proceeding, fortify that conclusion” (Summary).
In a unanimous decision on behalf of Franks, the court affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded in part, for further judicial ruling (Section 5, para. 2). The court said that Lane's speech was protected under the first amendment. However, “previous precedent, specifically Morris v. Crow, had held that public employee testimony was unprotected speech, and thus when Franks fired Lane, he was not violating a clearly established constitutional right” (Para. 4).
Since that is the case Franks was entitled to qualified immunity, so the Supreme Court affirmed the Eleventh Circuit’s ruling about “claims against Franks in his individual capacity” (Section 5). The court remanded the case for further proceedings dealing with Frank's defense of sovereign immunity in his official capacities. This ruling does chip away at the precedent set by the Supreme Courts ruling in Garcetti v. Ceballos, just eight years earlier.
 Amicus briefs 
Multiple amicus briefs were filed, mostly on the part of Lane. Nine briefs were filed in support of Lane, while one was filed in support of Franks. One was filed by the American government on a neutral ground, both advocating for affirming and reversing part of the Eleventh Circuit’s decision. Among the most notable organizations to file briefs in support of Lane were the ACLU, Alliance Defending Freedom, and National Whistle Blowers Center. All three of these amicus briefs, point out the importance of protecting employee speech made in the context of a federal trial. With the ACLU saying “[a]t a minimum, the State of Alabama certainly had no interest in preventing Edward Lane from complying with a subpoena issued by the United States and providing truthful testimony about public corruption in a federal criminal trial” (Page 29).
 Media coverage 
Multiple media outlets covered the case when it first broke. Those included NPR, The Washington Post, and The New York Times. All of those media outlets applauded the Supreme Court for protecting the public employee's freedom of speech rights, while also noting the hurdle Lane faced in actually winning damages. With the New York Times writing “[w]hile Mr. Lane established an important legal principle, he will not benefit from it. In the second part of her opinion, Justice Sotomayor wrote that Mr. Franks, the official who fired him, was protected by qualified immunity” (Para. 16). There was even a law review done by Thomas A. Schweitzer, of Touro College. The review really sums up the idea that all the decision really did was show the convoluted nature that the courts now have to consider because of previous precedent set in multiple cases, including the Garcetti case. Schweitzer does agree with the court's decision of protecting Mr. Lane's freedom of speech rights. Edward Lane has written a book about his Supreme Court victory in Whistleblower: Having Ethics Regardless of the Outcome.
 Subsequent developments 
With the case being decided relatively recently, there have not been many subsequent opinions on the matter of governmental employee speech. Lane v. Franks has not been referenced directly in any subsequent court cases, at any level. The most recent development comes from Heffernan v. City of Paterson, decided in April 2016, which dealt with a similar issue. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of Heffernan who had been fired because he supported a certain candidate that was running for mayor. Justice Breyer said “The Constitution prohibits a government employer from discharging or demoting an employee because the employee supports a particular political candidate” (Section 2, para. 1)..
 See also 
 Qualified Immunity
 Sovereign Immunity
 1st Amendment
References
External links
Supreme Court Sides With Whistleblower In Retaliation Case
Former Alabama House Rep. Sue Schmitz released from federal custody
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:United States state sovereign immunity case law
"""

From "Lane v. Wilson" ==> """
Lane v. Wilson, 307 U.S. 268 (1939), was a United States Supreme Court case that found a 12-day one-time voter registration window to be discriminatory for black citizens and repugnant to the Fifteenth Amendment..
Background
In 1915, the Supreme Court of the United States held in Guinn v. United States that a grandfather clause to Oklahoma's literacy test for voting was unconstitutional, violating the Fifteenth Amendment. In response, the Oklahoma legislature passed a law giving citizens of the state a 12-day period, from April 30 to May 11, 1916, in which they were allowed to register to vote. Individuals who missed that registration period would be barred permanently from voting. But, a grandfather clause exempting citizens who had voted in 1914, that is, before Guinn, largely exempted white voters from the provisions of the narrow registration window. In practice the registration period worked against black citizens.
I. W. Lane, a black citizen of Oklahoma, was banned from voting under Oklahoma's rules, and sued for $5,000 in damages. The district court found against him, and the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the ruling of the district court. Lane appealed to the US Supreme Court.
Decision
Justice Frankfurter delivered the ruling of the court, which held that Oklahoma's registration window and grandfather clause violated the Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Fifteenth Amendment case law
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:Legal history of Oklahoma
Category:African-American history of Oklahoma
Category:African-American history between emancipation and the civil rights movement
Category:Oklahoma elections
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Lange v. California" ==> """
Lange v. California, 594 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the exigent circumstances requirement related to the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Court ruled unanimously that the warrantless entry into a home by police in pursuit of a misdemeanant is not unequivocally justified.
Background
In October 2016, a California highway patrol officer witnessed Arthur Lange driving while playing loud music and honking his horn. Believing Lange to be in violation of California traffic law, the officer attempted to perform a traffic stop. Lange drove to his garage and then closed the garage but the officer, who had followed him to his home, entered the garage and began to question Lange. After smelling alcohol on his breath and conducting a field sobriety test, the officer arrested Lange and charged him with driving under the influence and a noise infraction. 
Lange attempted to argue at trial that the officer's entry into his garage without a warrant had violated his Fourth Amendment rights and therefore evidence related to the case had to be suppressed. The prosecution argued that under the "hot pursuit doctrine" the officer had probable cause to enter the garage because Lange had committed a misdemeanor when he failed to stop for the officer. The court subsequently denied Lange's motion to suppress the evidence. As a result, Lange's driver's license was suspended for a period of one year.
Initial appeals
Lange filed a suit to overturn the suspension of his license in civil court which was accepted after the court determined his arrest to be unlawful. However the Sonoma County Superior Court affirmed the decision of the trial court to deny Lange's motion to suppress. The California Court of Appeal also upheld the conviction. In July 2020, Lange applied for a writ of certiorari from the Supreme Court which was granted in October 2020.
Opinion of the Court
Certiorari was granted in the case on October 19, 2020. The case was argued on February 24, 2021, and decided on June 23, 2021. In a unanimous decision, Justice Elena Kagan delivered the majority opinion. 
The Fourth Amendment ordinarily requires that police officers get a warrant before entering a home without permission. But an officer may make a warrantless entry when “the exigencies of the situation” create a compelling law enforcement need. Kentucky v. King, 563 U.S. 452, 460 (2011). The question presented here is whether the pursuit of a fleeing misdemeanor suspect always—or more legally put, categorically—qualifies as an exigent circumstance. We hold it does not. A great many misdemeanor pursuits involve exigencies allowing warrantless entry. But whether a given one does so turns on the particular facts of the case.
The flight of a suspected misdemeanant does not always justify a warrantless entry into a home. An officer must consider all the circumstances in a pursuit case to determine whether there is a law enforcement emergency. On many occasions, the officer will have good reason to enter— to prevent imminent harms of violence, destruction of evidence, or escape from the home. But when the officer has time to get a warrant, he must do so—even though the misdemeanant fled. Because the California Court of Appeal applied the categorical rule we reject today, we vacate its judgment and remand the case for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
Chief Justice Roberts' concurrence
Chief Justice John Roberts filed a concurring opinion, joined by Justice Samuel Alito. Roberts argued that police should have the flexibility to pursue suspected criminals regardless of the crime while noting that the ruling will confound law enforcement. 
Suppose a police officer on patrol responds to a report of a man assaulting a teenager. Arriving at the scene, the officer sees the teenager vainly trying to ward off the assailant. The officer attempts to place the assailant under arrest, but he takes off on foot. He leads the officer on a chase over several blocks as the officer yells for him to stop. With the officer closing in, the suspect leaps over a fence and then stands on a home’s front yard. He claims it’s his home and tells the officer to stay away. What is the officer to do?
The Fourth Amendment and our precedent—not to mention common sense—provide a clear answer: The officer can enter the property to complete the arrest he lawfully initiated outside it. But the Court today has a different take. Holding that flight, on its own, can never justify a warrantless entry into a home (including its curtilage), the Court requires that the officer: (1) stop and consider whether the suspect—if apprehended—would be charged with a misdemeanor or a felony, and (2) tally up other “exigencies” that might be present or arise, ante, at 1, 4, before (3) deciding whether he can complete the arrest or must instead seek a warrant—one that, in all likelihood, will not arrive for hours. Meanwhile, the suspect may stroll into the home and then dash out the back door. Or, for all the officer knows, get a gun and take aim from inside.
The Constitution does not demand this absurd and dangerous result. We should not impose it. As our precedent makes clear, hot pursuit is not merely a setting in which other exigent circumstances justifying warrantless entry might emerge. It is itself an exigent circumstance. And we have never held that whether an officer may enter a home to complete an arrest turns on what the fleeing individual was suspected of doing before he took off, let alone whether that offense would later be charged as a misdemeanor or felony. It is the flight, not the underlying offense, that has always been understood to justify the general rule: “Police officers may enter premises without a warrant when they are in hot pursuit of a fleeing suspect.”
Justice Thomas' concurrence
I join the majority opinion, except for Part II–A, which correctly rejects the argument that suspicion that a person committed any crime justifies warrantless entry into a home in hot pursuit of that person. I write separately to note two things: the general case-by-case rule that the Court announces today is subject to historical, categorical exceptions; and under our precedent, the federal exclusionary rule does not apply to evidence discovered in the course of pursuing a fleeing suspect.
I join the relevant parts of the majority on the understanding that its general case-by-case rule does not foreclose historical, categorical exceptions. Although the majority unnecessarily leads with doctrine before history, it does not disturb our regular rule that history—not court-created standards of reasonableness—dictates the outcome whenever it provides an answer.
Justice Kavanaugh's concurrence
Kavanaugh sided with Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Thomas in his concurring opinion, noting that a felon fleeing law enforcement is in itself an exigent circumstance. 
The Court holds that an officer may make a warrantless entry into a home when pursuing a fleeing misdemeanant if an exigent circumstance is also present—for example, when there is a risk of escape, destruction of evidence, or harm to others. I join the Court’s opinion. I also join Part II of JUSTICE THOMAS’s concurrence regarding how the exclusionary rule should apply to hot pursuit cases.
I add this brief concurrence simply to underscore that, in my view, there is almost no daylight in practice between the Court’s opinion and THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s opinion concurring in the judgment.
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "Lapides v. Board of Regents of University System of Georgia" ==> """
Lapides v. Board of Regents of University System of Georgia, 535 U.S. 613 (2002), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States which ruled that a state voluntarily waives at least part of its Eleventh Amendment immunity when it invokes a federal court's removal jurisdiction. There has subsequently been a "circuit split" in federal courts regarding whether a state waives immunity from liability or only a federal forum.Stroud v. McIntosh, No. 12-10436 (11th Cir. 2013)
 Background 
A professor filed suit in state court claiming that adding  when they placed sexual harassment allegations in his personnel files violated state tort laws. The university system voluntarily moved the case to federal court and sought dismissal there.
 Opinion of the court 
Justice Stephen Breyer delivered the opinion of the Court.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 535
List of United States Supreme Court cases
 References 
External links
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:United States federal jurisdiction case law
Category:United States state sovereign immunity case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:University System of Georgia
Category:2002 in United States case law
Category:Sexual harassment in the United States
Category:Kennesaw State University
"""

From "Largent v. Texas" ==> """
Largent v. Texas, 318 U.S. 418 (1943), was a case involving Jehovah's Witnesses in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a city ordinance of Paris, Texas, requiring permits in order to solicit orders for books is unconstitutional as applied to the distribution of religious publications.. The church members were represented by Hayden C. Covington.
 See also 
 Jamison v. State of Texas: A similar case in Dallas
References
External links
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:Paris, Texas
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
Category:1943 in religion
"""

From "Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc." ==> """
Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc., 459 U.S. 116 (1982), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with the enforcement of liquor laws by a non-government entity. Massachusetts had established a law that allowed any church or school located within  of an establishment seeking a liquor license to object to that license. The Supreme Court, in an 8–1 decision, ruled that Massachusetts' law violated the Establishment Clause as it delegated powers normally reserved to the government to non-government entities, and would allow decisions to be made along religious lines, effectively advancing religious purposes.
Background
Massachusetts' liquor laws are overseen by the Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission (ABCC). Many of these laws are based on "blue laws", designed to prevent people from drinking on Sundays due to the state's Puritan heritage. After the end of Prohibition in the 1930s, the state began loosing liquid laws but still kept numerous blue laws on the books. One such law was Section 16C, first introduced in 1954, which prohibited any establishment within  of a church or school from having a liquor license. The absolute ban on liquor licenses was amended in 1968 and 1970, allowing intuitions near churches or schools to have a license, but only if no church or school within that distance filed a formal objection to the license with the ABCC.
thumb|Grendel's Den in Cambridge, Massachusetts
Grendel's Den, a restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts, opened in 1971 and became a popular spot for students and professors of nearby Harvard University. In 1977, the owners applied for a liquor license through the local Cambridge License Commission. Holy Cross Church, which shared a -wide alley with the restaurant, filed an objection to the license, stating that there already too many establishments with liquor licenses in the area as part of their rationale. Pursuant to Section 16C, the Cambridge License Commission denied Grendel's Den the license due to the church's objection.
The owners appealed to the ABCC, addressing that numerous other establishments within the 500-ft range of Holy Cross Church had successfully received licenses. The ABCC upheld the Cambridge License Commission's decision. The owners then took their case to the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts, claiming that Section 16C violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment, the Equal Protection Clause and the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and antitrust components of the Sherman Act. The District Court found in favor of Grendel's Den in 1980, ruling that Section 16C was unconstitutional and violated the Establishment Clause. The judge used a three-pronged test that the Supreme Court had previously established in Everson v. Board of Education (330 U.S. 1 (1947)) and later enumerated in Lemon v. Kurtzman (403 U.S. 602 (1971)). In the decision, the judge determined that Section 16C had the primary effect of advancing religion, with the objection power one that could be misused, such as if a church did not objected to establishments where the owners shared the same faith or had made a significant donation to the church.
The state appealed to the First Circuit Appellate Court, which initially the three-judge panel decided to reverse the District Court's ruling. The restaurant owners requested an en banc hearing at the First Circuit, and the full panel of judges reversed the three-panel decision, again ruling that Section 13C violated the Establishment Clause.
Supreme Court
The state petitioned to the Supreme Court, which the Court granted certiorari and heard during the 1982 term.
The Court gave its decision on December 13, 1982, upholding the en banc decision of the First Circuit that Section 16C was unconstitutional. Chief Justice Warren E. Burger wrote the majority opinion, joined by all but Justice William Rehnquist. Burger's opinion reviewed only the Establishment Clause considerations that had been at review at the First Circuit and applied the Lemon three-pronged test to determine if Section 16C was unconstitutional. 
 Section 16C was considered to have a secular purpose, as it was in the state's interest to regulate liquor use, though Burger wrote that the state could implement this through other means such as absolute bans of liquor licenses near churches, or to allow churches to voice objections during a license hearing.
 Section 16C failed the second prong of the Lemon test in Burger's opinion as the law advanced religious interest, giving churches a standardless veto power on a function normally performed by the government, and had made no assurance that churches would object in a neutral manner.
 Section 16C also failed the third prong of the Lemon test because it created entanglement between church and state. Besides granting a veto power to the church, Burger stated that the law could also lead to "political fragmentation and divisiveness" along the lines of the church's faith.
Judge Rehnquist, in his dissent, agreed that Section 16C would be better implemented by an absolute ban on liquid licenses within a certain distance from the church, but disagreed with the remaining three-pronged analysis that the law violated the Establishment Clause, particularly that he did not believe the law was advancing any religious interest.
References
External links
Larkin v. Grendel's Den, Inc., 459 U.S. 116 (1982)
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:Legal history of Massachusetts
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:1982 in religion
Category:1982 in Massachusetts
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Religious policy
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:History of Cambridge, Massachusetts
"""

From "Lassiter v. Northampton County Board of Elections" ==> """
Lassiter v. Northampton County Board of Elections, 360 U.S. 45 (1959), was a case challenging the constitutionality of the rule of Northampton County, North Carolina requiring potential voters to pass a literacy test to vote, appealed from the Supreme Court of that state.
Opinion
The opinion of the court, delivered by Justice William O. Douglas, held that provided the tests were applied equally to all races, were not "merely a device to make racial discrimination easy," and did not "contravene any restriction that Congress, acting pursuant to its constitutional powers, has imposed," the literacy test could be an allowable use of the state's power to "determine the conditions under which the right of suffrage may be exercised."
In practice, such tests were administered by white voting officials in a discriminatory manner to disfranchise minorities. Given the results from states' using such devices for decades, Congress subsequently prohibited the use of such tests under the Voting Rights Act of 1965, drafted to protect citizens' constitutional rights to vote and provide federal oversight.
See also
 Civil Rights Movement
 Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era
External links
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Northampton County, North Carolina
Category:African-American history of North Carolina
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:North Carolina elections
Category:1959 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Late Corp. of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints v. United States" ==> """
The Late Corporation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints v. United States, 136 U.S. 1 (1890), was a Supreme Court case that upheld the Edmunds–Tucker Act on May 19, 1890. Among other things, the act disincorporated the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church).
The LDS Church was represented by its chief counsel Franklin S. Richards and former congressman James Broadhead.
Decision
The ruling in Late Corporation would have directed federal escheat of substantially all the property of the legally disincorporated LDS Church, which was estimated at $3 million. Following the decision, the U.S. Attorney for The Utah Territory reported seizing only $381,812 in assets.Paul G. Kauper & Stephen C. Ellis, "Religious Corporations and the Law," 71 Mich. L. Rev. (1972-1973), 1499, 1517.  This figure includes seized stock and cash in bank accounts as well as $10,000 "credits due on sheep." Real property, including LDS temples, was never seized, although the ruling authorized it.  Within five months, the LDS Church officially discontinued the practice of plural marriage with the 1890 Manifesto. On October 25, 1893, a congressional resolution authorized the release of assets seized from the LDS Church because, "said church has discontinued the practice of polygamy and no longer encourages or gives countenance to any manner of practices in violation of law, or contrary to good morals or public policy."Jt. Res 11., 53d Cong., 1st Sess., 28 Stat. 980
Chief Justice Fuller's dissent asserted that though Congress has the power to criminalize polygamy, "it is not authorized under the cover of that power to seize and confiscate the property of persons, individuals, or corporations, without office found, because they may have been guilty of criminal practices."
 See also 
1890 Manifesto
Edmunds Act (1882)
Edmunds-Tucker Act (1887)
History of civil marriage in the U.S.
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 136
Morrill Anti-Bigamy Act (1862)
Poland Act (1874)
Reynolds v. United States (1879)
Second Manifesto (1904)
Smoot Hearings (1903–1907)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1890 in United States case law
Category:History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
Category:Utah Territory
Category:United States law and polygamy in Mormonism
Category:The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the United States
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1890 in Christianity
Category:19th-century Mormonism
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Church and state law in the United States
Category:Christianity and law in the 19th century
Category:Mormonism-related controversies
"""

From "Lau Ow Bew v. United States" ==> """
Lau Ow Bew v. United States, 144 U.S. 47 (1892), was a United States Supreme Court case. Occurring at the beginning of the era of Chinese Exclusion as well as the formation of the United States courts of appeals, the case set precedents for the interpretation of the rights of Chinese merchants as well as the jurisdiction of the new courts. The ruling relied heavily the Burlingame Treaty of 1868, the Angell Treaty of 1880, the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 and the amendments to the Act in 1884, as well as the Evarts Act of 1891.  The case helped to establish not only the rights of the Chinese merchant class, but also informed future cases about the power of the Circuit Court of Appeals as well as the perception of Chinese immigrants.
 Background 
In 1890, Lau Ow Bew, a Chinese merchant who had resided in San Francisco for seventeen years traveled to China to visit relatives “with the intention of returning as soon as possible to [the United States]” (Lau Ow Bew).  Even though Bew possessed proof of his merchant status from the United States, he neglected to obtain proof of his merchant status from the Chinese government before returning.  As a result, he was not allowed to reenter the United States, due to a new provision in section 6 of the Chinese Exclusion Act amended in 1884 (Lau Ow Bew).  The case was originally heard by the Circuit Court of the United States for the Northern District Court of California which determined that Bew could not be admitted into the country without the certificate of permission from the Chinese government  (United States.  Congress).  Lau Ow Bew filed for a writ of Habeas Corpus and was denied.  Circuit Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed the original ruling.  The Supreme Court files a writ of certiorari, and the Supreme Court heard the case in January, 1892.  	
 Prior Treaties and Acts
The Burlingame and Angell Treaties of 1868 and 1880, respectively, outlined the rights of immigrants and emigrants between China and the United States.  The Burlingame Treaty emphasized the “inalienable right of man to change his home and allegiance” as well as the “mutual advantage of free migration and emigration of [Chinese and United States] citizens” (United States Department of States, “English and Chinese”).  After experiencing an influx of Chinese laborers, the United States proposed the Angell Treaty which recognized the right of the United States to limit the immigration of Chinese laborers in order to protect the United States economy (United States Department of State, “Angell Treaty”).  Importantly, the treaty did not limit the movement of merchants and even accorded merchants with “all the rights, privileges, immunities and exemptions which are accorded to citizens and subjects of the most favored nation” (United States Department of State, Angell Treaty).
The Chinese Exclusion Act of May 1882 implemented the limitation permitted by the Angell treaty, by barring Chinese laborers from entering the United States. Amended in 1884, section 6 of the Act requires a certificate of permission from the Chinese government for all Chinese immigrants to enter the United States as “sole permissible evidence”  (United States. Congress).  The certificate must be written in English, or accompanied by an English translation include basic information about the person attempting to enter the United States (United States. Congress).
 Case proceedings 
Chief Justice Fuller delivered the opinion of the court, focusing on whether the court had jurisdiction in the case as well as whether Bew might enter the country without the certificate of permission from China.  	
The Evarts Act created the Circuit Courts of Appeals to act as an intermediary between the Circuit Courts and the Supreme Court (“Landmark Judicial Legislation).  That the Supreme Court issued a writ of certiorari granted the court jurisdiction it otherwise would not have had due to the new Act (Lau Ow Bew).      
To determine whether Bew might reenter the country lacking the specified paperwork, Fuller examines three issues.
Two precedent cases, both decided before the 1884 amendments to the Chinese Exclusion Act, provide skepticism toward the necessity of the paperwork.  Low Yam Chow in the Circuit Court for the District of California in 1882 found that “the certificate mentioned in [section 6] is…not required as a means of restricting [Chinese merchants] coming” as that would violate the freedom of movement outlined in the Burlingame and Angell treaties (Lau Ow Bew). In re Ho King also found that “the certificate…was not the only competent evidence that a Chinese person is not a laborer” (Lau Ow Bew). Considering these findings, Fuller writes that asking a foreign government to certify all of the components stipulated by the amendments is particularly onerous.  
Language used within the Act itself relieves Bew of the burden to demonstrate the certificate of permission from the Chinese government.   Section 6 states that persons “who shall be about to come to the United States” must obtain the certificate of permission from the Chinese government, or in other words, “those who are about to come into the United States for the first time” (Lau Ow Bew).  As Bew had been living in the United States for seventeen years, the language of the Act does not apply to Bew's case.  Additionally, Fuller holds that immigrants should not have to fear that travel abroad means the potential loss of house and home (Lau Ow Bew)  
Lastly, Lau Ow Bew's status as a merchant affords him “all…rights, privileges and immunities enjoyed in this country by the citizenry of subjects of the ‘most favored nation’” as set forth by the Burlingame and Angell treaties (Lau Ow Bew).  Thus the court finds it is unlawful to withhold from Lau Ow Bew his rights to Habeas Corpus.
In the end, the Supreme Court held that “Lau Ow Bew [was]…unlawfully restrained of his liberty.”  The Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, and remands the decision to the Circuit Court of the United States for the Northern District of California, “with directions to reverse its judgment and discharge the petitioner” (Lau Ow Bew).
 Implications 
The ruling made in Lau Ow Bew v. United States as well as Fuller's opinion helped to inform legal rulings concerning the newly created Circuit Courts of Appeals under the Evart's Act as well as immigration rulings at the turn of the century.
In the years following Lau Ow Bew, many questions arose concerning the power of the Circuit Courts of Appeals.  The American Law Review of 1892 cites the Fuller opinion to define the scope of the Circuit Court of Appeals and when the Supreme Court might hear a case (Murfree, 550, 552, 553).  Likewise, the Yale Law Review, also published in 1892, examines Lau Ow Bew as an example of when a writ of certiorari might be used by the Supreme Court to hear a case (Foster, 101–103).  Thus, the case proved important for interpreting the power given to the newly created Circuit Courts of Appeal under the Evart's Act.
Turn of the century courts and scholars also used Lau Ow Bew to discuss the rights of immigrants, especially Chinese immigrants, during the age of Chinese exclusion.  An article in the American Bar Association Journal published in 1930 uses the case to assert that immigrants may use the power of the courts in their favor when legislation is wielded against them (Kohler, “Disability,” 3).   Not only did Lau Ow Bew demonstrate how an immigrant might use the courts in their favor, but it also established ways in which people perceived immigrants.  For example, an article in the American Journal of International Law published in 1930 cites the Fuller Opinion to promote the idea that the place a person lives necessarily engenders allegiance from that person (Cutler, 227).  In these ways Lau Ow Bew helped inform the perception of immigrants in the United States.
 Sources 
Cutler, John Ward.  “The Treatment of Foreigners:  In Relation to the Draft Convention and Conference of 1929.”  The American Journal of International Law 27.2  (Apr., 1993):  225–246.  JSTOR.  Web.  22 Sep. 2013.  
Foster, Roger.  “Recent Decisions under the Evarts Act.”  The Yale Law Journal  1.3 (Feb., 1892):  95–105.  JSTOR.  Web.  22 Sep. 2013.  
Kohler, Max J., “Legal Disabilities of Aliens in the United States.”  American Bar Association Journal 16.1 (1930):  113–117.  HeinOnline.  Web.  22 Sep. 2013.
“Landmark Judicial Legislation, Establishment of the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.”  History of the Federal Judiciary.  Federal Judicial Center.  n.d.   Web.  29 Sep. 2013.  
Lau Ow Bew. v. United States.  144 U.S. 47.  Supreme Court of the United States.  1892.  Lexis Nexus Academic.  Web.  27 Sep. 2013. 
Murfree, Wm. L. Jr.  “Jurisdiction and Practice of the Federal Courts of Appeal.”  American Law Review  26.4 (1892):  544–554.  HeinOnline.  Web.  22 Sep. 2013.
United States.  Congress.  House.  “Chinese Exclusion Act of 1884.”  The Avalon Project.  Yale Law School.  2008.  Web.  29 Sep. 2013.  
United States.  Department of State.  “Angell Treaty.”  Treaty Doc.  Federal Judicial Center.  n.d.  Web.  29 Sep. 2013.  
United States.  Department of State.  “English and Chinese Text of the Burlingame Treaty 1868.”  Treaty Doc.  American Memory.  n.d.  Web.  29 Sep. 2013.
External links
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1892 in United States case law
Category:Anti-Chinese sentiment in the United States
Category:Chinese-American culture in San Francisco
"""

From "Lau v. Nichols" ==> """
Lau v. Nichols, 414 U.S. 563 (1974), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court unanimously decided that the lack of supplemental language instruction in public school for students with limited English proficiency violated the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The court held that since non-English speakers were denied a meaningful education, the disparate impact caused by the school policy violated Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the school district was demanded to provide students with "appropriate relief"..
 Background 
In 1971, the San Francisco school system desegregated based on the result of Supreme Court case Lee v. Johnson. At that time, 2,856 Chinese students, who were not fluent in English, were integrated back into the San Francisco Unified School District (SFUSD). Only about 1000 of those students were provided supplemental English instruction. Of the other 1800-plus Chinese students who weren't fluent in English, many were placed in special education classes while some were forced to be in the same grade for years.
Even though the Bilingual Education Act was passed by Congress in 1968 to address the needs of Limited English Speaking Abilities students, its application was limited. School participation in those programs was also voluntary, and, by 1972, "only 100,391 students nationally, out of approximately 5,000,000 in need were enrolled in a Title VII-funded program."
Edward H. Steinman, a public-interest lawyer, reached out to the parents of Kinney Kinmon Lau and other Chinese students with limited English proficiency. He encouraged them to challenge the school district, and they filed a class action suit against Alan H. Nichols, the president of the SFUSD at the time, and other officials in the school district. The students claimed that they were not receiving special help in school due to their inability to speak English, and they argued they were entitled to special help under the Fourteenth Amendment and the Civil Rights Act of 1964 because of equal protection and the ban on educational discrimination.
The District Court for the Northern District of California denied the relief and the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed the decision. The District Court argued that since a uniform policy was used for all students in SFUSD and that the district didn't intentionally discriminate against students with limited English proficiency, equal protection was provided and the Fourteenth Amendment was not violated. The Court of Appeals claimed that since the school district provided the same treatment for all students, even though some students were disadvantaged due to their limited fluency in English, the school district was not required to make up for the different starting points of students. The students appealed the Court of Appeal's decision to the Supreme Court.
 Decision of the Supreme Court 
thumb|245x245px|Justice Harry Blackmun, who concurred with the decision and stated that the number of students affected in this case was substantial enough to deem affirmative remedies necessary.
The Supreme Court issued its decision on January 21, 1974, with the Court unanimously ruling in favor of Lau. Instead of examining the equal protection clause from the 14th Amendment, the Court relied on Section 601 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Since the school system received federal funding, it was required to provide equal opportunities and access to all students. The Court claimed that even though the school districts provided equal treatment for all students, it still imposed disparate impact on the non-English speaking students since they were not able to understand the class material as effectively as other students and therefore were deprived of having "meaningful" education. The Court also referenced the guideline established by the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare in 1970, which stated that language could be used as a proxy of discrimination on national origin and that "the district must take affirmative steps to rectify the language deficiency in order to open its instructional program to these students." The Supreme Court demanded the school district to make necessary changes to provide equal education to the non-English speakers, but it didn't state any specific remedies for the district to follow.
Justice Potter Stewart, joined by Chief Justice Burger and Justice Blackmun, concurred with this decision as he stated that affirmative remedial efforts, suggested by the OCR, were constitutional and appropriate in this case as long as the efforts were "reasonably related to the purposes of the enabling legislation." In his concurrence joined by Chief Justice Burger, Justice Blackmun also suggested that "numbers are at the heart of this case" and that if the case only involved a few students, rather than nearly 2,000, the decision would not be the same.
 Legacy 
Lau remains an important decision in bilingual education history. In this case, the Supreme Court found a violation of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 based on the discriminatory effect of the school policy, regardless of the intent of the officials. It prohibited the "sink or swim" policy and set a precedent of finding disparate impact in violation of the Civil Rights Act. The decision was subsequently followed by the passing of Equal Educational Opportunities Act of 1974 in Congress, which specifically prohibited discrimination against faculty and students in public schools and required the school districts to take "appropriate action" to overcome the barriers to equal participation of all students. It increased funding to the Bilingual Education Act and made additional English instruction mandatory, which effectively extended the Lau ruling to all public schools. The Office for Civil Rights then developed a remedial guideline in 1975, otherwise known as the Lau Remedies, that specified methods and approaches for school districts to follow in order to provide a meaningful education to students with limited English proficiency. This led to the development of bilingual programs and additional English instruction in most public schools.United States. Health, Education and Welfare Department. Task Force Findings Specifying Remedies Available for Eliminating past Educational Practices Ruled Unlawful under LAU v. NICHOLS. N.p.: n.p., 1975. Print.
However, there have been challenges to the Lau decision in recent decades. In the Supreme Court case Alexander v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275 (2001), the Court claimed that private plaintiffs did not have the right of action to sue against disparate impact violation under Title VI and they must provide proof of intentional discrimination. It implied that students can no longer sue schools for policies that cause disparate impact, which significantly weakened the foundation of the Lau decision.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 414
 Bilingual education
 Bilingual Education Act
 Castañeda v. Pickard
 References 
 External links 
 Full text of the decision
Category:1974 in education
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:Chinese-American history
Category:Education in San Francisco
Category:Language case law
Category:Linguistic rights
Category:United States education case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Lauro Lines v. Chasser" ==> """
Lauro Lines s.r.l. v. Chasser, 490 U.S. 495 (1989), is the touchstone case in which the United States Supreme Court laid out the law of interlocutory appeals for United States federal courts..
Facts
Plaintiff cruise passengers had filed a lawsuit in a United States district court against the defendant cruise line for injuries sustained when an Italian cruise ship, the Achille Lauro, was hijacked by terrorists. The cruise ticket included a forum selection clause which required that lawsuits against the cruise line be brought in Naples, Italy.
The cruise line filed a motion to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction, based on the forum selection clause. The district court denied the motion, and the cruise line sought an interlocutory appeal of this motion. The appellate court denied the motion based on the final judgment rule, 28 U.S.C. 1291, asserting that the cruise line would have to wait until the case was decided before filing any appeals. This ruling was immediately appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari..
Issue
The Supreme Court was asked to decide whether a party can bring an interlocutory appeal against dismissal of a motion for lack of personal jurisdiction based on the existence of a forum selection clause.
Opinion of the Court
The defendants argued that this fell under the judge-made collateral order doctrine, which allows immediate appeals of rulings that are collateral to the merits of the case, would determine it conclusively, and would not be effectively reviewable unless an immediate appeal were allowed.  This doctrine was originally established in Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp., 337 U.S. 541 (1949).
The Court, in a unanimous opinion by Justice Brennan, held that the collateral order doctrine does not apply to a forum selection clause. This was not a case where the defendant was claiming a right not to be tried at all, like a sovereign immunity case, which would be disposed of before the defendant was even subject to the discovery process. Instead, the defendant was acknowledging that it could be sued, but merely disputing the appropriate forum for the suit.
Justice Scalia, concurring, wrote to express his opinion that the reason an interlocutory appeal would not stand in this case was that "the law does not deem the right important enough to be vindicated" by an interlocutory appeal.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 490
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:United States forum selection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:MS Achille Lauro
Category:Italy–United States relations
"""

From "Lavender v. Kurn" ==> """
Lavender v. Kurn, 327 U.S. 645 (1946), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States dealing with a negligent wrongful death case against a railroad employer under the Federal Employers Liability Act.  L.E. Haney was a switchtender who was killed at Grand Central Station in Memphis, Tennessee. He worked for both the Illinois Central and Frisco railroads.
The Missouri Supreme Court ordered a directed verdict in favor of the employer, claiming lack of evidence of negligence.  The Supreme Court overruled the State Supreme Court's ruling. The court held that there was sufficient evidence of negligence on the part of the defendants to justify the submission of the case to the jury and to require appellate courts to abide by the verdict rendered by the jury.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 327
 Kohn v. McNulta
External links
 Lavender v. Kurn Case Brief at Lawnix.com
 Supreme Court of the United States
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:History of Memphis, Tennessee
Category:Railway accident deaths in the United States
Category:Illinois Central Railroad
"""

From "Law v. Siegel" ==> """
Law v. Siegel, 571 U.S. 415 (2014), is a ruling of the Supreme Court of the United States that describes the extent of the powers of bankruptcy courts in dealing with the bad faith of debtors.
Background
When Law filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2004, his sole asset was a home in Hacienda Heights, California that was said to be worth $363,000. He declared that:
 there was a first mortgage lien (deed of trust) of $150,000 owing to a bank, and a second for $168,000 owing to "Lin’s Mortgage & Associates"
 there were three judgment liens also registered against the property
 as the value of the two mortgage liens, together with California's homestead exemption of $75,000, was greater than the value of the house, there was nothing available for distribution to Law's general creditors.
It was discovered in subsequent litigation that the second mortgage lien did not exist. The house sold for about $680,000, and only one creditor timely filed a proof of claim which was settled for $120,000. The trustee sought to surcharge the homestead exemption in order to be reimbursed for his legal expenses in the matter.
The courts below
The United States Bankruptcy Court for the Central District of California, in accordance with existing jurisprudence within the Ninth Circuit, ordered that Law's homestead must be surcharged in its entirety. This was affirmed by the Bankruptcy Appeals Panel, and subsequently by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
At the Supreme Court
The Ninth Circuit ruling was reversed. In a unanimous ruling, Justice Scalia noted that:USSC, at II.A.
  grants a bankruptcy court authority to "issue any order, process, or judgment that is necessary or appropriate to carry out the provisions of" the Bankruptcy Code,
 the court also has inherent power to sanction abusive litigation practice,Marrama v. Citizens Bank of Massachusetts,  but
 a bankruptcy court may not contravene specific statutory provisions.
As  expressly states that a homestead exemption is "not liable for payment of any administrative expense," the court exceeded the limits of its authority under §105(a) and its inherent powers. The Court's ruling in Marrama would not have led to a different result, as its dictum only "suggests that in some circumstances a bankruptcy court may be authorized to dispense with futile procedural niceties in order to reach more expeditiously an end result required by the Code."USSC, at II.C.
The bankruptcy court still has various sanctions available to enforce its judgments:USSC, at II.D.
  outlines circumstances where the court can deny a discharge from bankruptcy
 Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure § authorizes the court to impose sanctions for bad-faith litigation conduct
 it may also possess further sanctioning authority under either  or its inherent powersChambers v. NASCO, Inc., 
  provides that a bankruptcy court's monetary sanction survives the bankruptcy case and is thereafter enforceable through the normal procedures for collecting money judgments
 Fraudulent conduct in a bankruptcy case may also subject a debtor to criminal prosecution under , which carries a maximum penalty of five years' imprisonment
Justice Scalia acknowledged the seeming unfairness of the result:
Impact
The decision is described as "brisk and workmanlike," and "[t]he absence of qualifications or quibbles in its description of the relevant principles make it just the kind of opinion that is likely to be cited frequently in future briefs to the Court." Law is also seen as forcing trustees and creditors to be more aggressive, early in the case, either to object to exemptions or file a motion to extend the time to object to exemptions in order to provide enough time for investigation.
Justice Scalia did not note another sanction that is available under FRBP § which provides that a trustee may still file an objection to a debtor’s claim of exemption "at any time prior to one year after the closing of the case, if the debtor fraudulently asserted the claim of exemption." However, this provision only came into effect in 2008, and therefore was not applicable in this case.
While equitable subordination is authorized under  as a remedy to ensure that creditors acting in bad faith will not be paid until other valid creditors are paid in full, the Bankruptcy Code does not explicitly provide for a similar "equitable disallowance" remedy with respect to debtors acting in bad faith. Although several of the lower courts had previously ruled in favour of such a remedy, it appears that Law strongly supports the conclusion that equitable disallowance does not exist under the Code.
Law, together with Stern v. Marshall, can also be seen as another limitation on the bankruptcy courts' inherent authority under §105, thereby reducing the courts' flexibility and discretion that are necessary for the proper functioning of the bankruptcy system.
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:History of Los Angeles County, California
"""

From "Lawrence v. Texas" ==> """
Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003), is a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in which the Court ruled that most sanctions of criminal punishment for consensual, adult non-procreative sexual activity (commonly referred to as sodomy laws) are unconstitutional. The Court reaffirmed the concept of a "right to privacy" that earlier cases had found the U.S. Constitution provides, even though it is not explicitly enumerated. It based its ruling on the notions of personal autonomy to define one's own relationships and of American traditions of non-interference with private sexual decisions between consenting adults.
In 1998, John Geddes Lawrence Jr., an older white man, was arrested along with Tyron Garner, a younger black man, at Lawrence's apartment in Harris County, Texas. Garner's former boyfriend had called the police, claiming that there was a man with a weapon in the apartment. Sheriff's deputies said they found the men engaging in sexual intercourse. Lawrence and Garner were charged with a misdemeanor under Texas' anti-sodomy law; both pleaded no contest and received a fine. Assisted by the American civil rights organization Lambda Legal, Lawrence and Garner appealed their sentences to the Texas Courts of Appeals, which ruled in 2000 that the sodomy law was unconstitutional. Texas appealed to have the court rehear the case en banc, and in 2001 it overturned its prior judgment and upheld the law. Lawrence appealed this decision to the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, which denied his request for appeal. Lawrence then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which agreed to hear his case.
The Supreme Court struck down the sodomy law in Texas in a 6–3 decision, and by extension invalidated sodomy laws in 13 other states, making same-sex sexual activity legal in every U.S. state and territory. The Court, with a five-justice majority, overturned its previous ruling on the same issue in the 1986 case Bowers v. Hardwick, where it upheld a challenged Georgia statute and did not find a constitutional protection of sexual privacy. It explicitly overruled Bowers, holding that it had viewed the liberty interest too narrowly. The Court held that intimate consensual sexual conduct was part of the liberty protected by substantive due process under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. Lawrence invalidated similar laws throughout the United States that criminalized sodomy between consenting adults acting in private, whatever the sex of the participants.15 Geo. Mason U. C.R. L.J. 105 2004–2005; 102 Mich. L. Rev. 1555 2003–2004
The case attracted much public attention, and 33 amici curiae ("friends of the court") briefs were filed. Its outcome was celebrated by gay rights advocates, and set the stage for further reconsideration of standing law, including the landmark case of Obergefell v. Hodges (2015), which recognized same-sex marriage as a fundamental right under the United States Constitution, and United States v. Windsor, which invalidated Section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act.
 Background 
Legal punishments for sodomy often included heavy fines, prison sentences, or both, with some states, beginning with Illinois in 1827, denying other rights, such as suffrage, to anyone convicted of the crime of sodomy. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, several states imposed various eugenics laws against anyone deemed to be a "sexual pervert". As late as 1970, Connecticut denied a driver's license to a man for being an "admitted homosexual".
As of 1960, every state had an anti-sodomy law.The New York Times: Supreme Court Strikes Down Texas Law Banning Sodomy", June 26, 2003, accessed July 16, 2012 In 1961, the American Law Institute's Model Penal Code advocated the repeal of sodomy laws as they applied to private, adult, consensual behavior.Illinois in 1961 became the first state to repeal its sodomy law. Laws of Illinois 1961, page 1983, enacted July 28, 1961, effective Jan. 1, 1962. The History of Sodomy Laws in the United States: Illinois. Two years later the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) took its first major case in opposition to these laws. 
In Griswold v. Connecticut (1965), the Supreme Court struck down a law barring the use of contraceptives by married couples. In Griswold,  the Supreme Court recognized for the first time that couples, at least married couples, had a right to privacy, drawing on the Fourth Amendment's protection of private homes from searches and seizures without a warrant based on probable cause, the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantee of due process of law in the states, and the Ninth Amendment's assurance that rights not specified in the Constitution are "retained by the people". Eisenstadt v. Baird (1972) expanded the scope of sexual privacy rights to unmarried persons. In 1973, in Roe v. Wade the US Supreme court extended that supposed right to privacy to protect a woman's right to have an abortion, although the extent to which that might be regulated by the government varied, with almost absolute protection in the first trimester, and allowing for increasing regulation as the pregnancy progressed.
In Bowers v. Hardwick (1986), the Supreme Court heard a constitutional challenge to sodomy laws brought by a man who had been arrested, but was not prosecuted, for engaging in oral sex with another man in his home. The Court rejected this challenge in a 5 to 4 decision. Justice Byron White's majority opinion emphasized that Eisenstadt and Roe had only recognized a right to engage in procreative sexual activity, and that long-standing moral antipathy toward homosexual sodomy was enough to argue against the notion of a right to sodomy. Justice Blackmun, writing in dissent, argued that Eisenstadt held that the Constitution protects people as individuals, not as family units.Eisenstadt v. Baird, 405 U.S. at 453. He then reasoned that because state intrusions are equally burdensome on an individual's personal life regardless of his marital status or sexual orientation, there is no reason to treat the rights of citizens in same-sex couples any differently.Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. at 219.
By the time of the Lawrence decision, ten states—Alabama, Florida, Idaho, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Michigan, Utah, and Virginia—still banned consensual sodomy without respect to the sex of those involved, and four—Texas, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Missouri (partially)—prohibited same-sex couples from engaging in anal and oral sex.
 History 
 Arrest of Lawrence and Garner 
On September 17, 1998, John Geddes Lawrence Jr.,John Geddes Lawrence, August 2, 1943 – November 20, 2011. MetroWeekly: Chris Geidner, "John Geddes Lawrence, of Lawrence v. Texas, Has Died at 68", December 23, 2011 , accessed May 9, 2012 a gay 55-year-old medical technologist, was hosting two gay acquaintances, Tyron Garner,July 10, 1967 – September 11, 2006. New York Times: "Tyron Garner, 39, Plaintiff in Pivotal Sodomy Case, Dies", September 14, 2006, accessed September 14, 2006 age 31, and Robert Eubanks,Robert Royce Eubanks, July 22, 1958 – October 14, 2000. Social Security Death Index 40, at his apartment in northeast Harris County, Texas, east of the Houston city limits. Lawrence and Eubanks had been friends for more than 20 years. Garner and Eubanks had a tempestuous on-again off-again romantic relationship since 1990. Lacking transportation home, the couple were preparing to spend the night. Eubanks, who had been drinking heavily, left to purchase a soda from a nearby vending machine. Apparently outraged that Lawrence had been flirting with Garner, he called police and reported "a black male going crazy with a gun" at Lawrence's apartment.Though Eubanks' report was false, it gave the police probable cause to enter Lawrence's home.
Four Harris County sheriff's deputies responded within minutes and Eubanks pointed them to the apartment. They entered the unlocked apartment toward 11 p.m. with their weapons drawn. In accordance with police procedures, the first to arrive, Joseph Quinn, took the lead both in approaching the scene and later in determining what charges to bring. He later reported seeing Lawrence and Garner having anal sex in the bedroom. A second officer reported seeing them engaged in oral sex, and two others did not report seeing the pair having sex. Lawrence repeatedly challenged the police for entering his home. Quinn had discretionary authority to charge them for a variety of offenses and to determine whether to arrest them. When Quinn considered charging them with having sex in violation of state law, he had to get an Assistant District Attorney to check the statutes to be certain they covered sexual activity inside a residence. He was told that Texas' anti-sodomy statute, the "Homosexual Conduct" law, made it a Class C misdemeanor if someone "engages in deviate sexual intercourse with another individual of the same sex". The statute, Chapter 21, Sec. 21.06 of the Texas Penal Code, had been adopted in 1973 when the state revised its criminal code to end its proscription on heterosexual anal and oral intercourse.
Quinn decided to arrest Lawrence and Garner and charge them with having "deviate sex". In the separate arrest reports he filed for each, he wrote that he had seen the arrestee "engaged in deviate sexual conduct namely, anal sex, with another man".Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 83 Lawrence and Garner were held in jail overnight. At a hearing the next day, they pleaded not guilty to a charge of "homosexual conduct". They were released toward midnight.Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 113–4 Eubanks pleaded no contest to charges of filing a false police report. He was sentenced to 30 days in jail but was released early.Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 131
 Prosecution and appeals 
The gay rights advocates from Lambda Legal litigating the case convinced Lawrence and Garner not to contest the charges and to plead no contest instead. On November 20, Lawrence and Garner pleaded no contest to the charges and waived their right to a trial. Justice of the Peace Mike Parrott found them guilty and imposed a $100 fine and court costs of $41.25 on each defendant. When the defense attorneys realized that the fine was below the minimum required to permit them to appeal the convictions, they asked the judge to impose a higher penalty. Parrott, well aware that the attorneys intended to use the case to raise a constitutional challenge, increased it to $125 with the agreement of the prosecutor.Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 19–40
To appeal, Lawrence and Garner needed to have their cases tried in Harris County Criminal Court. Their attorneys asked the court to dismiss the charges against them on Fourteenth Amendment equal protection grounds, claiming that the law was unconstitutional since it prohibited sodomy between same-sex couples, but not between heterosexual couples. They also asserted a right to privacy and that the Supreme Court's decision in Bowers v. Hardwick that found no privacy protection for consensual sex between homosexuals was "wrongly decided".Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 144–9 On December 22, Judge Sherman Ross denied the defense motions to dismiss. The defendants again pleaded "no contest". Ross fined them $200 each, the amount agreed upon in advance by both sides.Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 150–2
A three-judge panel of the Texas Fourteenth Court of Appeals heard the case on November 3, 1999.Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 162–6 Their 2–1 decision issued on June 8, 2000, ruled the Texas law was unconstitutional. Justice John S. Anderson and Chief Justice Paul Murphy found that the law violated the 1972 Equal Rights Amendment to the Texas Constitution, which bars discrimination based on sex, race, color, creed, or national origin. J. Harvey Hudson dissented.Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 167–70 The Court of Appeals decided to review the case en banc. On March 15, 2001, without hearing oral arguments, it reversed the three-judge panel's decision and upheld the law's constitutionality 7–2, denying both the substantive due process and equal protection arguments.Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 173, 175 Attorneys for Lawrence and Garner asked the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, the highest appellate court in Texas for criminal matters, to review the case. After a year's delay, on April 17, 2002, that request was denied. Lambda Legal's Harlow called that decision "a major abdication of judicial responsibility". Bill Delmore, the Harris County prosecutor who argued the case, called the judges "big chickens" and said: "They have a history of avoiding the hot potato cases if they can."Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 177–9
 Consideration by the Supreme Court 
In a petition for certiorari filed in the U.S. Supreme Court on July 16, 2002, Lambda Legal attorneys asked the Court to consider:Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 184–5
Whether the petitioners' criminal convictions under the Texas "Homosexual Conduct" law—which criminalizes sexual intimacy by same-sex couples, but not identical behavior by different-sex couples—violate the Fourteenth Amendment guarantee of equal protection of the laws;
Whether the petitioners' criminal convictions for adult consensual sexual intimacy in their home violate their vital interests in liberty and privacy protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment;
Whether Bowers v. Hardwick should be overruled.
On December 2, 2002, the Court agreed to hear the case. Lambda Legal coordinated the submission of sixteen amicus curiae briefs to complement their own brief. Submitting organizations included the American Bar Association, the American Psychological Society, the American Public Health Association, the Cato Institute, the Log Cabin Republicans, a group of history professors, and a group of religious denominations.Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 198–200 An op-ed in support by former Senator Alan Simpson appeared in The Wall Street Journal on the morning scheduled for oral argument.Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 200 The attorneys for Texas did not control the amicus briefs submitted in support of their position by representatives of religious and social conservatism, including Jay Alan Sekulow and Robert P. George. Several, including that of Liberty Counsel, depicted homosexuals as self-destructive, disease-prone, and promiscuous. The states of Alabama, South Carolina, and Utah advised the Court that unlike heterosexual sodomy, homosexual sodomy had "severe physical, emotional, psychological, and spiritual consequences".Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 203–206
At oral argument on March 26, 2003, Paul M. Smith, an experienced litigator who had argued eight cases before the Supreme Court, spoke on behalf of the plaintiffs.Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 211 ff. Texas Attorney General John Cornyn, then a candidate for the U.S. Senate, refused to have his office argue the case. Charles A. Rosenthal, District Attorney of Harris County, represented the state.Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 214–216 His performance was later described as "the worst oral argument in years", but some believe his lack of preparation reflected his lack of enthusiasm for the statute he was defending.Mark Tushnet, A Court Divided: The Rehnquist Court and the Future of Constitutional Law (NY: W.W. Norton, 2005), 169–170Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 189–191, 214–216, 234–247
 Decision 
On June 26, 2003, the Supreme Court issued a 6–3 decision in favor of Lawrence that struck down Texas's statute. Five justices held it violated the Due Process Clause, while a sixth, Sandra Day O'Connor, held it violated the Equal Protection Clause.
 Opinion of the Court 
thumb|190px|Justice Anthony Kennedy authored the Court's opinion in Lawrence v. Texas.|left
Five justices formed the majority and joined an opinion written by Justice Anthony Kennedy. The Court ruled that Texas's law prohibiting private homosexual activity between consenting adults violated the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.  The Court did not speak of private sexual activity as a fundamental right that might require the highest "strict scrutiny" standard of judicial review. Instead, it focused on why the Court's decision in Bowers v. Hardwick was wrong.
First, the Court stated that its decision in Bowers went against its statements in cases involving child-rearing (Pierce v. Society of Sisters and Meyer v. Nebraska), contraception (Griswold v. Connecticut and Eisenstadt v. Baird, and abortion (Roe v. Wade) that the Constitution protects a right to privacy and personal autonomy. Next, Kennedy wrote that in Bowers the Court had misread the historical record regarding laws criminalizing homosexual relations. He stated that, after further research, the Court had found that historical American anti-sodomy laws had been directed at "nonprocreative sexual activity more generally," rather than specifically at homosexual acts, contrary to the Court's conclusions in Bowers., quoting Lawrence, 539 U.S. at 568. Combined with the fact that these laws were often unenforced, the Court saw this as constituting a tradition of avoiding interference with private sexual activity between consenting adults.
Lastly, Kennedy noted that Bowers jurisprudential foundation had been weakened by two subsequent cases involving sexuality (Planned Parenthood v. Casey and Romer v. Evans), and that the reasoning of Bowers had been criticized in the United States and rejected by most other developed Western countries. For this reason, Kennedy stated that there was a jurisprudential basis to think that it should be "an integral part of human freedom" for consenting adults to choose to privately engage in sexual activity., quoting Lawrence, 539 U.S. at 566.thumb|150px|Justice O'Connor, argued the statute was unconstitutional under the Equal Protection Clause rather than due process and would have kept Bowers intact.Kennedy wrote: "The petitioners [Lawrence and Garner] are entitled to respect for their private lives. The State cannot demean their existence or control their destiny by making their private sexual conduct a crime." Kennedy reviewed the assumption the court made in Bowers, using the words of Chief Justice Burger's concurring opinion in that case, that "Condemnation of [homosexual practices] is firmly rooted in Judeo-Christian moral and ethical standards." He reviewed the history of legislation that criminalized certain sexual practices, but without regard for the gender of those involved. He cited the Model Penal Code's recommendations since 1955, the Wolfenden Report of 1957, and a 1981 decision of the European Court of Human Rights in Case 7525/76 Dudgeon v United Kingdom.
 O'Connor's concurrence 
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor only concurred in the judgment and wrote a concurring opinion in which she offered a different rationale for invalidating the Texas sodomy statute. She disagreed with the overturning of Bowers—she had been in the Bowers majority—and disputed the court's invocation of due process guarantees of liberty in this context. Rather than including sexuality within protected liberty, she would strike down the law as violating the equal protection clause because it criminalized male–male but not male–female sodomy. O'Connor maintained that a sodomy law that was neutral both in effect and application might be constitutional, but that there was little to fear because "democratic society" would not tolerate it for long. O'Connor noted that a law limiting marriage to heterosexual couples would pass rational scrutiny as long as it was designed to "preserv[e] the traditional institution of marriage" and not simply based on the state's dislike of homosexual persons.
 Scalia's dissent 
thumb|Opening page of Scalia's dissent in Lawrence v. Texas
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a dissent, which Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Clarence Thomas joined. Scalia objected to the Court's decision to revisit Bowers, pointing out many decisions from lower courts that relied on Bowers that might now need to be reconsidered.Williams v. Pryor, which upheld Alabama's prohibition on the sale of sex toys; Milner v. Apfel, which asserted that "legislatures are permitted to legislate with regard to morality ... rather than confined to preventing demonstrable harms"; Holmes v. California Army National Guard, which upheld the federal statute and regulations banning from military service those who engage in homosexual conduct; Owens v. State, 352 Md. 663, which held that "a person has no constitutional right to engage in sexual intercourse, at least outside of marriage." He noted that the same rationale used to overturn BowersHe summarized the majority's criteria as: looking to (1) "whether its foundations have been 'eroded' by subsequent decisions; (2) it has been subject to 'substantial and continuing' criticism; (3) it has not induced 'individual or societal reliance'". could have been used to overturn Roe v. Wade, which some of the Justices in the majority in Lawrence had upheld in Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992). Scalia also criticized the majority opinion for failing to give the same respect to stare decisis that three of those in the majority had insisted on in Casey.Scalia noted that in Casey stare decisis was of the utmost importance because of the divisive nature of the case. The majority in Lawrence, he wrote, "do[es] not bother to distinguish—or indeed, even bother to mention—the paean to stare decisis coauthored by three Members of today's majority in Planned Parenthood v. Casey. There, when stare decisis meant the preservation of judicially invented abortion rights, the widespread criticism of Roe was strong reason to reaffirm it." He continued: "Today, however, the widespread opposition to Bowers, a decision resolving an issue as 'intensely divisive' as the issue in Roe, is offered as a reason in favor of overruling it." O'Connor's concurrence noted that Scalia's dissent conceded that if cases such as Romer v. Evans "have stare decisis effect, Texas' sodomy law would not pass scrutiny under the Equal Protection Clause, regardless of the type of rational basis review" applied.
Scalia wrote that if the court was not prepared to validate laws based on moral choices as it had done in Bowers, state laws against bigamy, same-sex marriage, adult incest, prostitution, masturbation, adultery, fornication, bestiality, and obscenity would not prove sustainable.For a critique of this argument, see Ruth E. Sternglantz, "Raining on the Parade of Horribles: Of Slippery Slopes, Faux Slopes, and Justice Scalia's Dissent in Lawrence V. Texas", University of Pennsylvania Law Review, vol. 153, no. 3 (January 2005), esp. 1118–20.
He wrote that:
He cited the majority opinion's concern that the criminalization of sodomy could be the basis for discrimination against homosexuals as evidence that the majority ignored the views of most Americans:
He continued: "Let me be clear that I have nothing against homosexuals, or any other group, promoting their agenda through normal democratic means." The majority's "invention of a brand-new 'constitutional right'", he wrote, showed it was "impatient of democratic change".
 Thomas's dissent 
Justice Thomas wrote in a separate, two-paragraph dissent that the law the Court struck down was "uncommonly silly", a phrase from Justice Potter Stewart's dissent in Griswold v. Connecticut, but he voted to uphold it as he could find "no general right of privacy" or relevant liberty in the Constitution. He added that if he were a member of the Texas legislature he would vote to repeal the law. Finally, Thomas concluded that:
 Reactions 
President George W. Bush's press secretary Ari Fleischer refused to comment on the decision, noting only that the administration had not filed a brief in the case. As governor, Bush had opposed the repeal of the Texas sodomy provision, which he called a "symbolic gesture of traditional values".Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct, 269 After quoting Fleischer calling it "a state matter", Linda Greenhouse, writing in The New York Times, commented: "In fact, the decision today ... took what had been a state-by-state matter and pronounced a binding national constitutional principle."The New York Times: Linda Greenhouse, "Justices, 6-3, Legalize Gay Sexual Conduct in Sweeping Reversal of Court's '86 Ruling", June 27, 2003, accessed July 16, 2012
The Lambda Legal's lead attorney in the case, Ruth Harlow, stated in an interview after the ruling that "the court admitted its mistake in 1986, admitted it had been wrong then ... and emphasized today that gay Americans, like all Americans, are entitled to full respect and equal claim to [all] constitutional rights."
Professor Laurence Tribe has written that Lawrence "may well be remembered as the Brown v. Board of Education of gay and lesbian America".Tribe, Laurence H. (2004). "Lawrence v. Texas: The 'Fundamental Right' That Dare Not Speak Its Name". Harvard Law Review. 117:1894–95. Jay Alan Sekulow of the American Center for Law and Justice has referred to the decision as having "changed the status of homosexual acts and changed a previous ruling of the Supreme Court ... this was a drastic rewrite".
The end result of Lawrence v. Texas was "like the Roe v. Wade of the homosexual issue",Robertson, Tatsha (June 27, 2003). "Gays, Lesbians Praise Decision Others Compare It to Roe v. Wade" . The Boston Globe. National/Foreign p. A28. Retrieved February 16, 2011.Shapiro, Ari. (October 13, 2006). "Gay Republicans Feel Heat from the Foley Scandal". All Things Considered. National Public Radio. Retrieved February 16, 2011. according to Peter LaBarbera of the Culture and Family Institute and Americans for Truth about Homosexuality, an organization recognized as a anti-gay hate group by the Southern Poverty Law Center.
Then president of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, Wilton Gregory, released a statement that the supreme court decision was to be deplored.
 Subsequent cases 
Sexual privacy
Age of consent laws
Lawrence invalidated age of consent laws that differed based on the relative sexes of the partners. The day after the Lawrence decision, the Supreme Court ordered the State of Kansas to review its 1999 "Romeo and Juliet" law that reduces the punishment for a teenager under 18 years of age who has consensual sexual relations with a minor no more than four years their junior but explicitly excludes same-sex conduct from the sentence reduction. In 2004, the Kansas Appeals Court upheld the law as is, but the Kansas Supreme Court unanimously reversed the lower court's ruling on October 21, 2005, in State v. Limon.280 Kan. 275, 122 P.3d 22 (2005)
Consensual incest
In Muth v. Frank (2005), following Lawrence a man convicted of criminal behavior by having an incestuous relationship in Wisconsin appealed his ruling in an attempt to apply the logic of sexual privacy in Lawrence. The Seventh Circuit declined to extend the right of privacy stated in Lawrence to cases of consensual adult incest. The case was distinguished because parties were not similarly situated since there is in the latter case an enhanced possibility of genetic mutation of a possible offspring as suggested by geneticists who were witnesses at the trial.
Fornication
In Martin v. Ziherl, the Supreme Court of Virginia ruled the state's fornication law unconstitutional relying on Lawrence and the right to privacy.Grossmann, Johanna (January 25, 2005). "Virginia Strikes Down State Fornication Law". CNN. Retrieved May 9, 2012.
Teacher-student relationships
The Connecticut Supreme Court rejected an argument based on Lawrence that a high school teacher had a constitutional right to engage in sexual activity with his consent-aged students. The court rejected the teacher's privacy and liberty arguments in the context of an "inherently coercive relationship wherein consent might not easily be refused".
Adult entertainment
Upon rehearing Williams v. Pryor after Lawrence, the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals upheld Alabama's ban on the sale of sex toys.Williams v. Attorney General of Alabama, 378 F.3d 1232 (11th Cir. 2004) Facing comparable facts, the Fifth Circuit struck down Texas's sex toy ban holding that "morality is an insufficient justification for a statute" and "interests in 'public morality' cannot constitutionally sustain the statute after Lawrence".Reliable Consultants, Inc., v. Earle, 517 F.3d 738 (5th Cir. 2008)
Bestiality
Lawrence v. Texas should pose no serious obstacle to bestiality prosecutions because such laws "plainly can be upheld on a 'cruelty to animals' justification." Leighann Lassiter, animal cruelty policy director for the Humane Society of the United States, notes, however, the Lawrence ruling may create complications in several states that include human sexual conduct and bestiality in the same "anti-sodomy" statute. As of 2018, 45 states have direct prohibitions on bestiality, while others may prohibit it under broader animal cruelty laws, according to the Animal Legal and Historical Center (Michigan State University College of Law).
Same-sex marriage bans
A few months later, on November 18, 2003, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court ruled that same-sex couples have a right to marry. Although deciding the case on the basis of the state constitution, Chief Justice Margaret Marshall quoted Lawrence in its second paragraph: "Our obligation is to define the liberty of all, not to mandate our own moral code."Linda Greenhouse. "Supreme Court Paved Way for Marriage Ruling With Sodomy Law Decision", The New York Times, November 19, 2003, accessed July 16, 2012
Aside from Massachusetts, other state case law had been quite explicit in limiting the scope of Lawrence and upholding state bans on same-sex marriage regulations. (See Standhardt v. Superior Court ex rel County of Maricopa, 77 P.3d 451 (Ariz. App. 2003); Morrison v. Sadler, 821 N.E.2d 15 (Ind. App. 2005); Hernandez v Robles (7 NY3d 338 2005).)
In the first successful federal court challenge to a state same-sex marriage ban, Judge Vaughn Walker cited Scalia's dissent in his decision in Perry v. Schwarzenegger that found California's Proposition 8 banning same-sex marriage unconstitutional.Perry v. Schwarzenegger Page 63 item 21 c 
 Same-sex adoptive parents 
In the majority decision, Justice Kennedy wrote: "The present case does not involve minors. It does not involve persons who might be injured or coerced or who are situated in relationships where consent might not easily be refused." The "obvious" meaning, as Nancy D. Polikoff wrote, was to point out that Lawrence could not be used to legalize "sex with children". Nonetheless, in 2004, the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals quoted this sentence when saying that Lawrence had not established a right for gay parents to adopt. In an adoption case, the 11th Circuit said, "the involved actors are not only consenting adults, but minors as well...Hence, we conclude that the Lawrence decision cannot be extrapolated to create a right to adopt for homosexual persons."
United States military
The United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces, the last court of appeals for courts-martial before the Supreme Court, ruled that Lawrence applies to Article 125 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice, the article banning sodomy. It also twice upheld prosecutions under Article 125 when applied as necessary to preserve good order and discipline in the armed forces.
 Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization 
On June 24, 2022, the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade (1973) in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization and removed the federal protection of the right to abortion, on the grounds that the "right to privacy" does not extend to that of abortion on the criteria from Washington v. Glucksberg that a right must be "deeply rooted in the Nation's history", and abortion was considered a crime, a view that some historians argued is incomplete. In the majority opinion, Justice Samuel Alito responded to the dissent opinion's concerns, saying that the ruling would not affect other substantive due process cases. In his concurring opinion, Justice Clarence Thomas, wrote, "In future cases, we should reconsider all of this Court's substantive due process precedents, including Griswold, Lawrence, and Obergefell. Because any substantive due process decision is 'demonstrably erroneous' ... we have a duty to 'correct the error' established in those precedents." The three cases Thomas mentioned concerned contraception (Griswold), sodomy (Lawrence), and same-sex marriage (Obergefell). respectively. The joint dissenting opinion of Justices Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan, which criticized the majority for rejecting stare decisis and overruling precedents dating back to Griswold, responded, "Either the majority does not really believe in its own reasoning. Or if it does, all rights that have no history stretching back to the mid-19th century are insecure. Either the mass of the majority's opinion is hypocrisy, or additional constitutional rights are under threat. It is one or the other."
 Level of scrutiny applied in Lawrence 
Justice Scalia and others have noted that the majority did not appear to apply the strict scrutiny standard of review that would be appropriate if the Lawrence majority had recognized a full-fledged "fundamental right". He wrote the majority instead applied "an unheard-of form of rational basis review that will have far-reaching implications beyond this case".Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. at 586.
Nan D. Hunter has argued that Lawrence used a new method of substantive due process analysis, and that the Court intended to abandon its old method of categorizing due process rights as either "fundamental" or "not fundamental" as too restrictive.Hunter, Nan D. (2004). "Living with Lawrence". Minnesota Law Review. 88:1104. This interpretation is more consistent with the open-ended balancing style that the more liberal justices have consistently advocated. San Antonio Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Rodriquez, 411 U.S. 1, 98 (Marshall, J., dissenting) (showing "disagreement with the Court's rigidified approach to equal protection analysis"). Justice Souter, for example, argued in Washington v. Glucksberg that the role of the Court in all cases, including unenumerated rights cases, is to ensure that the government's action has not been arbitrary.Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702 (1997) (Souter, J., concurring). Justice Stevens had repeatedly criticized tiered scrutiny and preferred a more active judicial balancing test based on reasonability.City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Ctr., 473 U.S. 432, 451 (1985) (Stevens, J., concurring): "I have never been persuaded that these so-called 'standards' adequately explain the decisional process."
Lower courts have read Lawrence differently on the question of scrutiny. In Lofton v. Secretary of the Department of Children and Family Services, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit upheld a state law barring adoption of children by homosexuals, holding explicitly that Lawrence did not apply strict scrutiny. In Witt v. Department of the Air Force, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held that Lawrence applied intermediate scrutiny.Witt v. Department of the Air Force, No. 06-35644.
 Plaintiffs 
John Lawrence died of complications from a heart ailment in 2011, aged 68. Tyron Garner died of meningitis in 2006, aged 39, and Robert Eubanks was beaten to death in 2000, in a case that was never solved.
 See also 
 Obergefell v. Hodges
 Sodomy laws in the United States
 LGBT rights in the United States
 List of sex-related court cases in the United States
 2003 in LGBT rights
 Dobbs v. Jackson
 Baker v. Wade
 Notes and references
Notes
Citations
Works cited
 Original case links 
 [ Official oral arguments (Transcript)]
 Reading of opinion (Transcript)
 Oral arguments (MP3 file)
 Reading of opinion (MP3 file)
 Further reading 
  A lengthy review of Carpenter, Flagrant Conduct.
 Wilkes Jr., Donald E. (2003). Lawrence v. Texas: An Historic Human Rights Victory.
 External links 
 The Invasion of Sexual Privacy
Category:2003 in LGBT history
Category:2003 in Texas
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Discrimination against LGBT people in the United States
Category:LGBT in Texas
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:Harris County, Texas
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:Right to privacy under the United States Constitution
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Le Roy v. Tatham" ==> """
Le Roy v. Tatham, 55 U.S. (14 How.) 156 (1852), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court holding that a principle in the abstract cannot be patented, and no one can claim in it an exclusive right. The inventors had discovered the principle that hot, but congealed, lead under pressure would re-unite as an unbroken solid material, which permitted manufacture of a superior lead pipe. The apparatus to make lead pipe was old and obvious: the inventors, by making slight changes in the old machinery to provide sufficient heat and pressure to remelt the lead, in effect, invented a new use of an old machine. The claim was to the old or obvious apparatus (as an apparatus) "when used to form pipes of metal under heat and pressure in the manner set forth or in any other manner substantially the same." It was not lawful to patent the old apparatus again, however used, so that the patent amounted to an attempt to patent the principle. That made the patent invalid..
Background
John and Charles Hanson, of Huddersfield, England, made the alleged invention in 1837. Having been the first to discover that heating lead under pressure would eliminate discontinuities, such as a seam in cast lead pipe, and that this effect could be achieved by making and using the old, well-known machinery with slight adjustments, obtained a patent in which the specification stated that the inventors "do not claim any of the parts—the cylinder, core, die, or bridge, but that they claim the combination when used to form pipes of metal, under heat and pressure, in the way they have described." They assigned their rights to Tatham, who sued the defendants, Le Roy and Smith, in the Circuit Court for the Southern District of New York for patent infringement.55 U.S. at 156-57.
The judge charged the jury: "That the originality did not consist in the novelty of the machinery, but in bringing a newly discovered principle into practical application by which a useful article of manufacture is produced, and wrought pipe made, as distinguished from cast pipe." The jury rendered a verdict against the defendants for $11,394.55 U.S. at 157. The defendants then appealed to the Supreme Court.
Ruling of the Supreme Court
thumb|150px|right|Justice John McLean 1849
Justice McLean delivered the opinion of the Court. Justice Nelson, joined by Justices Wayne and Grier, dissented.
Majority opinion
The Court emphasized the inventors' statement in the patent:
We do not claim as our invention and improvement, any of the parts of the above-described machinery independently of its arrangement and combination above set forth. What we do claim as our invention and desire to secure is the combination of the following parts above described, to-wit, the core and bridge or guide piece, with the cylinder, the piston, the chamber and the die, when used to form pipes of metal under heat and pressure in the manner set forth or in any other manner substantially the same."33 U.S. at 172 (emphasis added).
The Court said that it was reversible error for the trial judge to charge the jury that "it was not material whether the mere [prior] combinations of machinery referred to were similar to the combination used by the Hansons, because the originality did not consist in the novelty of the machinery, but in bringing a newly discovered principle into practical application by which a useful article of manufacture is produced and wrought pipe made, as distinguished from cast pipe." Rather:
 It is admitted that a principle is not patentable. A principle, in the abstract, is a fundamental truth; an original cause; a motive; these cannot be patented, as no one can claim in either of them an exclusive right. Nor can an exclusive right exist to a new power, should one be discovered in addition to those already known. Through the agency of machinery, a new steam power may be said to have been generated. But no one can appropriate this power exclusively to himself under the patent laws. The same may be said of electricity and of any other power in nature, which is alike open to all and may be applied to useful purposes by the use of machinery.
In all such cases, the processes used to extract, modify, and concentrate natural agencies constitute the invention. The elements of the power exist; the invention is not in discovering them, but in applying them to useful objects. Whether the machinery used be novel or consist of a new combination of parts known, the right of the inventor is secured against all who use the same mechanical power or one that shall be substantially the same.
55 U.S. at 174-75.
Contrary to the charge to the jury, whether the apparatus is novel does make a difference. Here, the inventors conceded that the apparatus was old and they did "not claim as our invention and improvement any of the parts of the above described machinery"; they claimed the old machinery "when used to form pipes of metal, under heat and pressure."55 U.S. at 176-77.
The Court quoted Justice Story, sitting on circuit, in Bean v. Smallwood,2 Story Rep. 408. 2 F. Cas. 1142 (C.C.D. Mass. 1843). for the proposition that "Now I take it to be clear that a machine or apparatus or other mechanical contrivance, in order to give the party a claim to a patent therefor, must in itself be substantially new. If it is old and well known, and applied only to a new purpose, that does not make it patentable."See 55 U.S. at 177. The instruction was wrong, so the judgment had to be reversed.
thumb|right|150px|Justice Nelson
Dissent
Justice Samuel Nelson argued that the principle was what the inventors contributed and the particular apparatus used was trivial and unimportant:
[W]e see that the leading feature of the invention consists in the discovery of a new property in the article of lead and in the employment and adaptation of it, by means of the machinery described, to the production of a new article, wrought pipe, never before successfully made. Without the discovery of this new property in the metal, the machinery or apparatus would be useless, and not the subject of a patent. It is in connection with this property and the embodiment and adaptation of it to practical use that the machinery is described and the arrangement claimed. The discovery of this new element or property led naturally to the apparatus by which a new and most useful result is produced. The apparatus was but incidental and subsidiary to the new and leading idea of the invention. And hence the patentees set forth as the leading feature of it, the discovery that lead in a solid state, but under heat and extreme pressure in a close vessel, will reunite after separation of its parts as completely as though it had never been separated. It required very little ingenuity, after the experiments in a close vessel, by which this new property of the metal was first developed, to construct the necessary machinery for the formation of the pipe. The apparatus essential to develop this property would at once suggest the material parts, especially in the state of the art at the time. Any skillful mechanic, with [the prior art] before him, would readily construct the requisite machinery.55 U.S. at 180.
Nelson argued that the Court ought to "construe specifications benignly, and to look through mere forms of expression, often inartificially used, to the substance, and to maintain the right of the patentee to the thing really invented, if ascertainable upon a liberal consideration of the language of the specification." These inventors did not suppose that their invention was the arrangement of machinery. "They state distinctly that the leading feature of their discovery consisted of this new property of lead and some of its alloys -- this, they say, is the remarkable feature of their invention -- and the apparatus described is regarded by them as subordinate, and as important only as enabling them to give practical effect to this newly discovered property, by means of which they produce the new manufacture [seamless lead pipe]."55 U.S. at 181.
In Nelson's view:
[W]here a person discovers a principle or property of nature, or where he conceives of a new application of a well known principle or property of nature and also of some mode of carrying it out into practice so as to produce or attain a new and useful effect or result, he is entitled to protection against all other modes of carrying the same principle or property into practice for obtaining the same effect or result.55 U.S. at 185.
He argued further that if someone discovers a "law of nature or property of matter and applied it" to produce a beneficial new result, "he is entitled to be protected against all modes by which the same result is produced by an application of the same law of nature or property of matter."55 U.S. at 186-87.
References
External links
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1852 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
"""

From "League of United Latin American Citizens v. Perry" ==> """
League of United Latin American Citizens v. Perry, 548 U.S. 399 (2006), is a Supreme Court of the United States case in which the Court ruled that only District 23 of the 2003 Texas redistricting violated the Voting Rights Act..  The Court refused to throw out the entire plan, ruling that the plaintiffs failed to state a sufficient claim of partisan gerrymandering.
The opinion requires lawmakers to adjust Congressional district boundaries in comport with the Court's ruling, though the ruling ultimately did not substantially reduce or reverse the Republican gains as a result of the redistricting in Texas. The Court also declined to resolve a dispute over whether partisan gerrymandering claims present nonjusticiable political questions.
Background
After the 2000 United States Census Democrats and Republicans in the Texas Legislature could not reach an agreement on redistricting and a new plan had to be drawn by a federal three-judge court made up of U.S. Circuit Judge Patrick Higginbotham, and U.S. District Judges John H. Hannah, Jr. and T. John Ward. When Tom DeLay and his Texans for a Republican Majority helped Republicans win total control of the state in the 2002 election, however, they sought to replace the court's redistricting plan. Democratic lawmakers known as the "Killer Ds" and the "Texas Eleven" fled the state to deny the legislature of a quorum, but the clerk of the Texas House of Representatives issued arrest warrants for the legislators and DeLay had federal agencies track their movements. Governor Rick Perry called three special sessions and ultimately passed the new plan. Career staff at the United States Department of Justice Civil Rights Division advised the plan failed preclearance under Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 but were overruled by acting Assistant Attorney General Bradley Schlozman.
At the November 2004 election, Republican seats increased from fifteen to twenty-one, with even Martin Frost, the third-ranking Democrat in the House, losing his seat.  Private plaintiffs sued, alleging any mid-decade redistricting was illegal, the plan was an unconstitutional partisan gerrymander, and it was in violation of Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 243 (2006).   On January 6, 2004, a three-judge district court now made up of Circuit Judge Higgenbotham, and District Judges Ward and Lee H. Rosenthal rejected all the plaintiffs’ claims, with Judge Ward concurring in part and dissenting in part.  On October 18, 2004, however, the Supreme Court vacated and remanded the case after its new plurality decision in Vieth v. Jubelirer readdressed the political question doctrine. On June 9, 2005, the three-judge court rejected all the plaintiffs’ claims again, with Judge Ward writing a special concurrence.
Plaintiffs appealed directly to the U.S. Supreme Court, where two hours of argument were heard on March 1, 2006, with Paul M. Smith appearing for the statewide plaintiffs, Nina Perales of the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund appearing for the District 23 plaintiffs, Texas Solicitor General Ted Cruz appearing for the state, and then-Deputy U.S. Solicitor General Gregory G. Garre appearing as a friend of Texas.
Supreme Court
On June 28, 2006, the second to last day of the term, a highly fractured Court rejected all of the plaintiffs’ claims except for the vote dilution claim in Texas's 23rd congressional district, producing six different opinions spanning 121 pages of the United States Reports.
Statewide claims
Justice Anthony Kennedy, joined by Justices David Souter and Ruth Bader Ginsburg, rejected plaintiff’s claim that the statewide plan was an unconstitutional partisan gerrymander.  Chief Justice John G. Roberts and Samuel Alito did not join that part of the opinion but concurred in the judgment, while noting that they were “taking no position” on if political gerrymandering claims were even justiciable.  Justice Antonin Scalia, joined by Clarence Thomas, also concurred in the judgment but felt that the case should be dismissed because political gerrymandering claims are not justiciable.  Justice John Paul Stevens, joined by Stephen Breyer, dissented, arguing that because the plan’s “sole intent” was explicitly partisan, it violated the Equal Protection Clause and that Republicans had created “their own impermissible stranglehold on political power.”
 The plaintiff's argument of this being a statewide unconstitutional partisan gerrymander  was rejected 7-2.
 The plaintiff's argument that states can redistrict only once per census under the federal constitution or acts of Congress was explicitly rejected. States can redistrict as often they please as long as they do it at least once every ten years.
 Districts 23 & 25 
The Court, now of Justice Kennedy, joined by Justices Souter, Ginsburg, Stevens and Breyer, applied Thornburg v. Gingles (1986) to find vote dilution in District 23 in violation of Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act.
By a 5–4 vote the majority ruled that:
 Old district 23 was a qualified protected majority-minority Latino district (indeed in 2002 on the verge of throwing out the incumbent that wasn't of their choice).
 New district 25 wasn't compact enough to be considered a qualifying replacement majority-minority Latino district.  The two Latino communities within new district 25 were more than 300 miles apart, raising the appearance that the district was drawn to pick up as many Latinos as possible without regard to compactness.
 And therefore new District 23 is a section 2 violation of the Voting Rights Act and must be redrawn.
 There is no need to rule on whether or not new district 25 is itself a racial gerrymander in violation of section 2 because the changes to district 23 will of necessity affect district 25 and it is therefore moot. However, the lower court decision that it was not in violation of section 2 is vacated.
 The case is remanded for further proceedings.
Dissents on Districts 23 & 25
Chief Justice Roberts, joined by Alito dissented.  Justice Scalia also dissented and, joined by the Chief Justice and Justices Thomas and Alito, argued that District 23 violated neither the Voting Rights Act nor the Equal Protection Clause.
 Nowhere in the Voting Rights Act or its legislative history is compactness of districts mentioned and that the majority is causing the jurisprudence of section 2 to diverge more and more from the legislative history.
 New district 25 is more than an adequate replacement for old 23 (if necessarily),  and indeed the majority accepts that new district 25 performed better for Latinos in 2004 than old district 23 from 1992—2002.
District 24
Justice Kennedy, joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Alito, found that the plan did not crack Texas's 24th congressional district in violation of Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act.  Justice Scalia, joined by Thomas, concurred in that judgment but felt the case should be dismissed as non-judicable.  Justice Souter, joined by Ginsburg, dissented, arguing to vacate and remand.  Justice Stevens dissented, arguing to reverse.
The majority of the court noted that old district 24 had three separate communities to begin with (Whites, Blacks, Latino) and Martin Frost (a White Democrat) never having been challenged in 22 years in a primary made it impossible to dispute the state legislative history that it was specifically created for a White Democrat.
Practical result
On August 4, 2006, the three-judge court made its remedial order.  The three-judge court adjusted the lines of the 23rd and four other districts — the 28th (represented by Democrat Henry Cuellar), 25th (Democrat Lloyd Doggett), 15th (Democrat Ruben Hinojosa) and 21st (Republican Lamar S. Smith) — all of which held new primary elections on November 7. Cuellar, Doggett, Hinojosa, and Smith were all reelected, while Henry Bonilla, the Republican representative for the 23rd District, was defeated by Democrat Ciro Rodriguez in a newly 61% Latino district.
See also
 Bush v. Vera (1996)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 548
References
External links
State of Texas – Texas Redistricting
JURIST – Paper Chase: Supreme Court leaves Texas redistricting map largely intact
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:United States political question doctrine case law
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:Congressional districts of Texas
Category:Rick Perry
Category:Ted Cruz
"""

From "Leal Garcia v. Texas" ==> """
Leal Garcia v. Texas, 564 U.S. 940 (2011), was a ruling in which the Supreme Court of the United States denied Humberto Leal García's application for stay of execution and application for writ of habeas corpus. ("The applications for stay of execution presented to JUSTICE  SCALIA and by him referred to the Court are denied. The petition for a writ of habeas corpus is denied.") Leal was subsequently executed by lethal injection.McGreal, Chris Humberto Leal Garcia executed in Texas despite White House appeal The Guardian, "Humberto Leal Garcia was executed by lethal injection for the rape and murder of a 16-year-old girl..." The central issue was not Leal's guilt,Cohen, Andrew Humberto Leal Garcia: The Supreme Court Makes a Bad Situation Worse The Atlantic, "...though this is not an evident case of an innocent man wrongly convicted -- no one seriously claims that Texas prosecutors got the wrong man -- the matter of consular notification has been a vibrant topic of international discussion and angst for years." but rather that he was not notified of his right to call his consulate as required by international law.Cohen, Andrew Humberto Leal Garcia: The Supreme Court Makes a Bad Situation Worse The Atlantic, "Leal, convicted of murder in Texas 16 years ago, was denied the right to access to the Mexican consulate at the time of his arrest. In 2004, the International Court of Justice at the Hague declared that such rights were valid under the Vienna Convention." The Court did not stay the execution because Congress had never enacted legislation regarding this provision of international law.Cohen, Andrew Humberto Leal Garcia: The Supreme Court Makes a Bad Situation Worse The Atlantic, "Congressional action was necessary to allow Leal to fully vindicate his right.... [Congress] was working through the legislation that would expressly adopt consular rights." The ruling attracted a great deal of commentaryCohen, Andrew Humberto Leal Garcia: The Supreme Court Makes a Bad Situation Worse The Atlantic, "There has been a great deal of analysis and commentary on the Leal case -- some of it better than the rest -- but at heart, Thursday's dramatic events are simple to explain." and Leal's case was supported by attorneys specializing in international law  and several former United States diplomats.Tillman, Zoe Supreme Court Denies Stay of Execution for Humberto Leal Garcia The National Law Journal, "Leal’s request for a stay garnered support from international law attorneys as well as former U.S. diplomats. In a statement Thursday, a group of five former diplomats and attorneys – including former U.S. ambassador to Mexico James Jones, former Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Thomas Pickering and Arnold & Porter partner and former State Department legal advisor John Bellinger III – called on Congress to ensure the U.S. observes the Vienna Convention."
Background
Leal García was a Mexican nationalLeal Garcia v. Texas, Opinion United States Supreme Court, p. 1, "Petitioner Humberto Leal Garcia (Leal) is a Mexican national who has lived in the  United States since before the age of  two." who kidnapped, raped, and killed a 16-year-old girl.Leal Garcia v. Texas, Opinion United States Supreme Court, p. 1,    In 1994, he kidnapped 16-year-old Adria Sauceda, raped her with a large stick, and bludgeoned her to death with a piece of asphalt.  He was convicted of murder and sentenced to  death by a Texas court." He was arrested, convicted, and sentenced to death. Citing Concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals, a decision by the International Court of Justice, Leal argued that his conviction was obtained in violation of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.Leal Garcia v. Texas, Opinion United States Supreme Court, p. 1-2, "He now  seeks a stay of execution on the ground that his conviction was obtained in violation of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations... He relies on Concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals... in which the International Court of Justice (ICJ) held that the United States had violated the Vienna  Convention by failing to notify him of his right to consular assistance." Specifically, Leal argued that the United States had violated the Vienna Convention by failing to notify him that he had the right to call his consulate. Leal and the United States asked the Supreme Court to stay his execution so that Congress could consider legislation to implement the Avena decision.Leal Garcia v. Texas, Opinion United States Supreme Court, p. 2, "Leal and the United States ask us to stay the execution so that Congress may consider whether to enact legislation implementing the Avena decision."
The Court previously ruled in Medellín v. Texas that international legal obligations are not binding unless Congress enacts them in a statute.Leal Garcia v. Texas, Dissent United States Supreme Court, p. 3, "This Court subsequently held that, because Congress had not embodied our international legal obligations in  a statute, the Court lacked the power to enforce those obligations as a matter of domestic law." Thus the primary focus of Leal's Supreme Court appeal was a bill introduced by Senator Patrick Leahy that would enact the obligations of the Vienna Convention as law (henceforth referred to as Avena legislation).Peralta, Eyder. "Mexican National Is Executed, Despite White House's Appeal to High Court." National Public Radio. July 7, 2011. Accessed 2011-07-29.
Opinion
The opinion of the Court was delivered per curiam. First, the Court considered Leal's claim that executing him while 'Avena' legislation was under consideration violated due process. The Court rejected this claim, stating that due process does not prevent a State from carrying out a lawful judgment in light of unenacted legislation.Leal Garcia v. Texas, Opinion United States Supreme Court, p. 2, "Leal and the United States ask us to stay the execution so that Congress may consider whether to enact legislation implementing the Avena decision.  Leal contends that the Due Process Clause prohibits Texas from executing him while  such legislation is under consideration.   This argument is meritless.  The Due Process Clause does not prohibit a  State from carrying out a lawful judgment in light of unenacted legislation that might someday authorize a collateral attack on that judgment." Second, the Court considered an argument by the United States which claimed that the Court should issue a stay in execution so that the Court could issue a ruling after the 'Avena' legislation had passed. The Court rejected this argument, holding that the Court is tasked with ruling with the law at present, not what it might become in the future.Leal Garcia v. Texas, Opinion United States Supreme Court, p. 2, "First, we are doubtful that it is ever appropriate to stay a lower court judgment in light of unenacted legislation.  Our  task is to rule on what  the law is, not what it might eventually be." Further, the Court expressed its skepticism that such legislation would ever be enacted.Leal Garcia v. Texas, Opinion United States Supreme Court, p. 3, "If 
a statute implementing Avena had genuinely been a priority for the  political branches, it would have been enacted by now."Leal Garcia v. Texas, Opinion United States Supreme Court, p. 3, "The United States and JUSTICE BREYER  complain of the grave international consequences that will follow from Leal’s execution.  Post, at 4.  Congress evidently did not find these consequences sufficiently grave to prompt its enactment of implementing legislation, and we will follow the law as written by Congress." Having rejected all arguments, the Court denied Leal's application for stay of execution and application for writ of habeas corpus.
Dissent
Associate Justice Stephen Breyer dissented, joined by Justice Ginsburg, Justice Sotomayor, and Justice Kagan. Breyer held that a stay would be appropriate.Leal Garcia v. Texas, Dissent United States Supreme Court, p. 1, He asks this Court to stay his execution pending resolution of his petitions for writs of certiorari and habeas corpus. I would grant the applications and stay the execution." Breyer drew a distinction between Medellín v. Texas and Leal's case, noting that the Court had refused to grant a stay of execution in Medellín in significant part because the President had not told the Court there would be likely congressional action.Leal Garcia v. Texas, Dissent United States Supreme Court, p. 3, "And the Court later refused to grant a stay of execution in a similar case in significant part because 'the President... has [not] represented to us that there is any likelihood of congressional... action.'" Breyer pointed out that in Leal's case congressional action was a reasonable possibility. Further, Breyer argued that under Federal Trade Commission v. Dean Foods Co., the Court could take action to preserve its future jurisdiction that would result upon Congress passing the Avena legislation.Leal Garcia v. Texas, Dissent United States Supreme Court, p. 3, "Finally, this Court has adequate legal authority to grant the requested stay. Should Senator Leahy’s bill become law by the end of September (when we would consider the petition in the ordinary course), this Court would almost certainly grant the petition for a writ of certiorari, vacate the judgment below, and remand the case for further proceedings consistent with that law. Indeed, were the Solicitor General to indicate at that time that the bill was about to become law, I believe it likely that we would hold the petition for at least several weeks until the bill was enacted and then do the same. And this Court, under the All Writs Act, 28 U. S. C. §1651, can take appropriate action to preserve its 'potential jurisdiction.' FTC v. Dean Foods Co"
Breyer also argued that the Court should defer to the executive branch, per the President's constitutionally based authority in matters of foreign relations.
See also
 Avena case
 LaGrand case
References
Further reading
External links
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Capital punishment in Texas
Category:Mexico–United States relations
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:International Court of Justice
Category:2011 in international relations
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Lear, Inc. v. Adkins" ==> """
Lear, Inc. v. Adkins, 395 U.S. 653 (1969), is a decision of the U.S. Supreme Court overturning the doctrine of licensee estoppel and holding that public interest considerations require that licensees be free to challenge the validity of possibly spurious patents under which they are licensed.. This entailed the overruling of Automatic Radio Mfg. Co. v. Hazeltine Research, Inc. (holding that licensee estoppel is the general rule). and prior cases that it had reaffirmed.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court recognized that a conflict existed between the demands of contract law, which “forbids a purchaser to repudiate his promises simply because he later becomes dissatisfied with the bargain," and federal policy, which “requires that all ideas in general circulation be dedicated to the common good unless they are protected by a valid patent.” Past efforts at compromise to reconcile these competing interests led to “a chaos of conflicting case law.” The Court found guidance in a 19th-century decision stating that “[i]t is as important to the public that competition should not be repressed by worthless patents as that the patentee of a really valuable invention should be protected in his monopoly.”.  It concluded that the equities of the licensor under contract law were outbalanced by “the important public interest in permitting full and free competition in the use of ideas which are in reality a part of the public domain.” It explained:
Licensees may often be the only individuals with enough economic incentive to challenge the patentability of an inventor's discovery. If they are muzzled, the public may continually be required to pay tribute to would-be monopolists without need or justification.
Based on “the strong federal policy favoring the full and free use of ideas in the public domain,” the Court therefore held that the licensee Lear must be permitted not to pay patent royalties to Adkins if it could prove that the patent for a gyroscope was invalid.
 References 
External links
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Gyroscopes
"""

From "Leary v. United States" ==> """
Leary v. United States, 395 U.S. 6 (1969), is a U.S. Supreme Court case dealing with the constitutionality of the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937. Timothy Leary, a professor and activist, was arrested for the possession of marijuana in violation of the Marihuana Tax Act. Leary challenged the act on the ground that the act required self-incrimination, which violated the Fifth Amendment. The unanimous opinion of the court was penned by Justice John Marshall Harlan II and declared the Marihuana Tax Act unconstitutional. Thus, Leary's conviction was overturned. Congress responded shortly thereafter by replacing the Marihuana Tax Act with the newly written Controlled Substances Act while continuing the prohibition of certain drugs in the United States.
Background
On December 20, 1965, Leary left New York by automobile, intending to take a vacation trip to the Mexican state of Yucatán. He was accompanied by his daughter and son, both teenagers, and two others. On December 22, 1965, the party drove across the International Bridge between the United States and Mexico at Laredo, Texas. They stopped at the Mexican customs station and, after apparently being denied entry, drove back across the bridge. They halted at the American secondary inspection area, explained the situation to a customs inspector, and stated that they had nothing from Mexico to declare. The inspector asked to search the car, examined its interior, and saw what appeared to be marijuana seeds on the floor. Small amounts of marijuana were also found on the car floor and in the glove compartment. A personal search of Leary's daughter revealed a silver snuff box containing semi-refined marijuana and three partially smoked marijuana cigarettes. Though Leary was arrested for violating the Marijuana Tax Act, it was also illegal in the state of Texas to possess marijuana. Hence, compliance under federal law would have provided self-incriminating evidence.
Legal decision
a. If read according to its terms, the Marijuana Tax Act compelled petitioner to expose himself to a "real and appreciable" risk of self-incrimination;
b. [The statute] required him, in the course of obtaining an order form, to identify himself not only as a transferee of marijuana but as a transferee who had not registered and paid the occupational tax;
c. Compliance with the transfer tax provisions would have required petitioner unmistakably to identify himself as a member of [a]..."selective" and "suspect" group, we can only decide that when read according to their terms these provisions created a "real and appreciable" hazard of incrimination.
Later development
The Marihuana Tax Act ultimately was repealed by the U.S. Congress in the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970.See Pub. L. No. 91-513, 84 Stat. 1236, 1292 (October  27, 1970). See also Lynn v. West, 134 F.3d 582 (4th Cir. 1998).
References
External links
Category:Cannabis law reform in the United States
Category:Marihuana Tax Act of 1937
Category:Timothy Leary
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1969 in United States case law
category:1969 in cannabis
Category:Laredo, Texas
Category:Cannabis in Texas
"""

From "Lebron v. National Railroad Passenger Corp." ==> """
Lebron v. National Railroad Passenger Corporation, 513 U.S. 374 (1995), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that Amtrak is a government agency and thus is subject to the First Amendment.
 Background 
Michael A. Lebron rented a large billboard in Amtrak's Penn Station. The advertisement was highly critical of the Coors Brewing Company for their support of the Contras in Nicaragua. The railroad turned down the ad because it was political, although the particular point of view was not an issue.
The District Court ruled that Amtrak, because of its close ties to the Federal Government, was a Government actor for First Amendment purposes, and that its rejection of the display was unconstitutional. The Court of Appeals reversed, noting that Amtrak was, by the terms of the legislation that created it, not a Government entity, and concluding that the Government was not so involved with Amtrak that the latter's decisions could be considered federal action.
 Decision 
Even though Amtrak is not incorporated as a government agency, it largely functions as one. Similar to the ruling in Burton v. Wilmington Parking Authority, the court found that the public and private entities functioned together to the point where Amtrak was covered by the First Amendment.
Later, in Department of Transportation v. Association of American Railroads, the court held that Amtrak is a governmental entity for purposes of determining the validity of the metrics and standards.
 References 
External links
Category:1995 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Amtrak
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:Railway litigation in 1995
Category:Pennsylvania Plaza
Category:Billboards
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
"""

From "Lechmere, Inc. v. NLRB" ==> """
Lechmere, Inc. v. National Labor Relations Board, 502 U.S. 527 (1992), is a US labor law case of the Supreme Court of the United States on union rights and private property rights. It forbids nonemployee union organizers from soliciting support on private property unless no reasonable alternatives exist.. 
Background
Lechmere, Inc. owned a retail store in a shopping plaza in Newington, Connecticut, a metropolitan area near Hartford, and it also was part owner of the plaza's parking lot. Employees of Lechmere, Inc. who drove to work used the lot to park their vehicles during their shifts. The parking lot was separated from a public highway by a strip of land that was almost entirely public property. Local union organizers, not employees of Lechmere, Inc., attempted to organize Lechmere employees by placing promotional handbills on the windshields of cars parked in the employee area of the lot. Lechmere then denied the organizers access to the lot. This act caused the organizers instead to distribute their handbills from the aforementioned strip of public land between the lot and the highway.
Local 919 of the United Food and Commercial Workers filed an unfair labor practice charge to the NLRB (the National Labor Relations Board), claiming that Lechmere had violated §7 of the NLRA (the National Labor Relations Act) by barring them access to the parking lot. The applicable language of the law cited was the guarantee of the NLRA that employees have "the right to self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations" (§7) and that it is an unfair labor practice for an employer "to interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees" in exercising their §7 rights. The NLRB affirmed the union's grievance, and the Court of Appeals enforced the NLRB's decision.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court reversed the lower court's decision based on three primary faults observed with the complaint:
 The NLRA "confers rights only on employees, not on unions or their nonemployee organizers." They reasoned that the NLRA guarantees that employees would be free to organize if they so chose, but the employer is not obligated to allow nonemployee union representatives access to their private property.
 §7 of the NLRA does not apply to nonemployee union organizers unless "the inaccessibility of employees makes ineffective the reasonable attempts by nonemployees to communicate with them through the usual channels." The Court reasoned it was improper to even begin a balancing test and private property rights unless "reasonable access to employees is infeasible."
 The union failed in demonstrating that there were any "unique obstacles" that prevented reasonable union access to the employees. The employees did not live in the shopping plaza and so they were not beyond the union's reach, and the Court further reasoned that the mere size of the city itself did not render the employees "inaccessible." The Court cited the fact that the union had been able to contact at least 20 employees directly regarding the organization.
The opinion of the Court was delivered by Justice Thomas, who was joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices O'Connor, Scalia, Kennedy and Souter. Justice White filed a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Blackmun. Justice Stevens filed a separate dissenting opinion.
Significance
After the decision, the Court of Appeals remanded the case to the NLRB to consider whether the Lechmere Company had violated Section 8(a)(1) by directing the non-employee union organizers to leave the public grassy area. The NLRB reaffirmed its previous ruling, holding that "the Supreme Court's vindication of the [employer's] private-property rights, if anything, elevates the gravity of [the employer's] attempt to bar union access to public property."
See also
US labor law
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 502
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States property case law
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:Montgomery Ward
Category:United Food and Commercial Workers
Category:Newington, Connecticut
"""

From "Ledbetter v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co." ==> """
Ledbetter v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., 550 U.S. 618 (2007), is an employment discrimination decision of the Supreme Court of the United States..   Employers cannot be sued under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 over race or gender pay discrimination if the claims are based on decisions made by the employer 180 days ago or more. Justice Alito held for the five-justice majority that each paycheck received did not constitute a discrete discriminatory act, even if it was affected by a prior decision outside the time limit. Ledbetter's claim of the “paycheck accrual rule” was rejected. The decision did not prevent plaintiffs from suing under other laws, like the Equal Pay Act, which has a three-year deadline for most sex discrimination claims, The Supreme Court's Ledbetter ruling specifically noted that the plaintiff could have sued instead under the Equal Pay Act, observing that plaintiff "having abandoned her claim under the Equal Pay Act, asks us to deviate from our prior decisions in order to permit her to assert her claim under Title VII." Ledbetter, 550 U.S. at 621. or 42 U.S.C. 1981, which has a four-year deadline for suing over race discrimination.See .
This was a case of statutory rather than constitutional interpretation, explaining the meaning of a law, not deciding its constitutionality. The plaintiff in this case, Lilly Ledbetter, characterized her situation as one where "disparate pay is received during the statutory limitations period, but is the result of intentionally discriminatory pay decisions that occurred outside the limitations period."  In rejecting Ledbetter's appeal, the Supreme Court said that "she could have, and should have, sued" when the pay decisions were made, instead of waiting beyond the 180-day statutory charging period.  The Court did leave open the possibility that a plaintiff could sue beyond the 180-day period if she did not, and could not, have discovered the discrimination earlier.See Ledbetter, 550 U.S. at 642 n.10 (“we have previously declined to address whether Title VII suits are amenable to a discovery rule. . . .Because Ledbetter does not argue that such a rule would change the outcome in her case, we have no occasion to address this issue.”)  The effect of the Court's holding was reversed by the passage of the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act in 2009.
Background of the case
In 1979 Lilly Ledbetter, the plaintiff, began work at the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company in its Gadsden, Alabama location, a union plant. She started with the same pay as male employees, but by retirement, she was earning $3,727 per month compared to 15 men who earned from $4,286 per month (lowest paid man) to $5,236 per month (highest paid man). During her years at the factory as a salaried worker, raises were given and denied based partly on evaluations and recommendations regarding worker performance. From 1979 to 1981 Ledbetter received a series of negative evaluations, which she later claimed were discriminatory. Although her subsequent evaluations were good, in part because of those early negative evaluations, her pay never reached the level of similar male employees. All merit increases had to be substantiated by a formal evaluation. In March 1998, Ledbetter inquired into the possible sexual discrimination by the Goodyear Tire Company. In July she filed formal charges with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. In November 1998, after early retirement, Ledbetter sued, claiming pay discrimination under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Equal Pay Act of 1963. The Supreme Court did not rule on whether discrimination had occurred, just on whether the statute of limitations had expired.
Statutory provisions at issue
"It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer… --to discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or national origin....".
"A charge under this section shall be filed within one hundred and eighty days after the alleged unlawful employment practice occurred.".
"it shall not be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to apply different standards of compensation...provided that such differences are not the result of an intention to discriminate because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.".
Lower court proceedings
The District Court found in favor of Goodyear on the Equal Pay Act claim, because that Act allows pay differences that are based on merit. The court allowed the Title VII and other claims to proceed to trial. Ledbetter claimed that she had been evaluated unfairly because of her sex and therefore had been paid significantly less than her male colleagues. Goodyear claimed that their evaluations were non-discriminatory and focused only on worker competence. The jury found for Ledbetter and awarded back pay and damages. Goodyear appealed, arguing that all claims for damages before September 26, 1997, were void due to the statute of limitations on discrimination claims.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit reversed the lower court's decision, stating that Ledbetter could sue only for allegations regarding pay decisions that occurred less than 180 days before her beginning the EEOC process in March 1998. Ledbetter, as the court ruled, could not sue on decisions that merely affected pay in the 180-day period.  Furthermore, all decisions made concerning pay in the 180-day period could not be unequivocally linked to her gender. Ledbetter sought a writ of certiorari, but did not contest the sufficiency of the evidence concerning decisions in the 180-day period. The Supreme Court granted the writ and heard the appeal.
Supreme Court precedent
In United Airlines v. Evans, Justice Stevens wrote for the Court: "A discriminatory act which is not made the basis for a timely charge ... is merely an unfortunate event in history which has no present legal consequences.". The Court in Ledbetter said that "it would be difficult to speak to the point more directly."
The Supreme Court's decision
Justice Alito delivered the opinion of the court.  The Court held that according to Title VII, discriminatory intent must occur during the 180-day charging period.  Ledbetter did not claim that Goodyear acted with discriminatory intent in the charging period by issuing the checks, nor by denying her a raise in 1998.  She argued that the discriminatory behavior occurred long before but still affected her during the 180-day charging period.  Prior caselaw, the Court held, established that the actual intentional discrimination must occur within the charging period.  The Court also stated that according to those prior cases, Ledbetter's claim that each check is an act of discrimination is inconsistent with the statute, because there was no evidence of discriminatory intent in the issuing of the checks. Alito was joined in his opinion by Justices Antonin Scalia, Anthony M. Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, and Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr.
Ginsburg's dissent
Justice Ginsburg wrote the dissent and read it from the bench, an infrequent practice.  Joined by Justices Stevens, Souter, and Breyer, she argued against applying the 180-day limit to pay discrimination, because discrimination often occurs in small increments over time.Ledbetter, 550 U.S. at 645 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting). Furthermore, the pay information of fellow workers is typically confidential and unavailable for comparison. Ginsburg argued that pay discrimination is inherently different from adverse actions, such as termination. Adverse actions are obvious, but small pay discrepancies are often difficult to recognize except over time. Ginsburg argued that the broad remedial purpose of the statute was incompatible with the Court's "cramped" interpretation.Ledbetter, 550 U.S. at 661. Her dissent asserted that the employer had been "[k]nowingly carrying past pay discrimination forward" during the 180-day charging period and therefore could be held liable.Ledbetter, 550 U.S. at 660.
Reaction and subsequent legislation
thumb|President Obama signs the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act into law on January 29, 2009; to his right is the new law's namesake, Lilly Ledbetter.
thumb|right|Ledbetter speaks during the second day of the 2008 Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado.
In 2007, several Democratic members of Congress introduced the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act, which revised the law to state that if a present act of discrimination pertains, prior acts outside of the 180-day statute of limitations for pay discrimination can be incorporated into the claim.
The bill was an issue in the 2008 Presidential election campaign, with Barack Obama supporting the bill, and John McCain opposed to it.  The plaintiff in the case, Lilly Ledbetter, appeared in campaign ads for the Obama campaign and had a speaking role at the Democratic National Convention.
In January 2009, Congress passed and President Obama signed the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act into law.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 550
List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Notes and references 
External links
CRS Report: Pay Discrimination Claims Under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act: A Legal Analysis of the Supreme Court's Decision in Ledbetter v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., Inc.
A documentary on Ledbetter v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co.
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company
Category:Abrogated United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Lee v. Washington" ==> """
Lee v. Washington, 390 U.S. 333 (1968), is a United States Supreme Court decision that upheld an appeals court decision to forbid segregation of public prisons..
Background
The state of Alabama segregated its jails, juvenile jails, and prisons based on race.  White prisoners were housed separately from African-American prisoners.  In 1966, American Civil Liberties Union leader Charles Morgan, Jr. filed suit against Alabama, asking that the jails and prisons be desegregated.   This was 12 years after the landmark Supreme Court case Brown v. Board of Education which outlawed school segregation.
The United States District Court for the Northern District of Alabama found in favor of the prisoners, and ordered Alabama to desegregate its jails and prisons. Alabama had argued that segregation was necessary in order to maintain security and minimize violence, but the Appeals court held that "this Court can conceive of no consideration of prison security or discipline which will sustain the constitutionality of state statutes that on their face require complete and permanent segregation of the races in all the Alabama penal facilities. We recognize that there is merit in the contention that in some isolated instances prison security and discipline necessitates segregation of the races for a limited period. However, recognition of such instances does nothing to bolster the statutes or the general practice that requires or permits prison or jail officials to separate the races arbitrarily. Such statutes and practices must be declared unconstitutional in light of the clear principles controlling."
 Opinion of the Court 
Alabama appealed to the Supreme Court, which upheld the Appeals court decision in a very brief per curiam opinion. Justices Black, Harlan, and Stewart collectively wrote a concurring opinion in which they explicitly say that "prison authorities have the right, acting in good faith and in particularized circumstances, to take into account racial tensions in maintaining security, discipline, and good order in prisons and jails."
 See also 
 Brown v. Board of Education
References
External links
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:African-American history of Alabama
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Penal system in Alabama
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
"""

From "Lee v. Weisman" ==> """
Lee v. Weisman, 505 U.S. 577 (1992), was a United States Supreme Court decision regarding school prayer. It was the first major school prayer case decided by the Rehnquist Court. It held that schools may not sponsor clerics to conduct even non-denominational prayer..  The Court followed a broad interpretation of the Establishment Clause that had been standard for decades at the nation's highest court, a reaffirmation of the principles of such landmark cases as Engel v. Vitale. and Abington v. Schempp..
Background
Robert E. Lee was the principal of Nathan Bishop Middle School in Providence, Rhode Island. He invited a rabbi to deliver a prayer at the 1989 graduation ceremony, but the parents of student Deborah Weisman requested a temporary injunction to bar the rabbi from speaking. The question being reviewed was whether or not this was constitutional. The Rhode Island district court denied the Weismans' motion. The family did attend the graduation ceremony, and the rabbi did deliver the benediction.
The Weismans continued their litigation after the graduation and won a victory at the First Circuit Court of Appeals. The school district appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, arguing that the prayer was nonsectarian and was doubly voluntary: Deborah was free not to stand for the prayer and because participation in the ceremony itself was not required. Arguments were heard on November 6, 1991. Justice Anthony Kennedy had been critical of the Court's decisions on school prayer, and many court watchers thought that he would provide the crucial fifth vote to reverse the lower court's ruling and deal a major blow to the twin separationist pillars of Engel and Abington.
Decision
The 5–4 decision was announced on June 24, 1992. It was somewhat surprising as a victory for the Weismans and a defeat for the school district. Justice Kennedy wrote the majority opinion, which maintained previous Supreme Court precedents sharply limiting the place of religion within the nation's public schools—far from joining those who favored curtailing restrictions on school prayers. The Blackmun papers reveal that Kennedy switched his vote during the deliberations, as he also did in Planned Parenthood v. Casey,. saying that his draft majority opinion upholding the prayer exercise "looked quite wrong." Instead, Kennedy wrote an opinion that repudiated the school district's main arguments. He found fault with Principal Lee's decision to give the rabbi who was planning to offer the graduation invocation a pamphlet on composing prayers for civic occasions:
Through these means, the principal directed and controlled the content of the prayers. Even if the only sanction for ignoring the instructions were that the rabbi would not be invited back, we think no religious representative who valued his or her continued reputation and effectiveness in the community would incur the State's displeasure in this regard. It is a cornerstone principle of our Establishment Clause jurisprudence that it is no part of the business of government to compose official prayers for any group of the American people to recite as a part of a religious program carried on by government, and that is what the school officials attempted to do.505 U.S. at 588 citation omitted).
Kennedy also noted that the nonsectarian nature of the prayer was no defense, as the Establishment Clause forbade coerced prayers in public schools, not just those representing a specific religious tradition. He addressed the State's contention that attendance was voluntary at the graduation exercises:
To say a teenage student has a real choice not to attend her high school graduation is formalistic in the extreme. True, Deborah could elect not to attend commencement without renouncing her diploma; but we shall not allow the case to turn on this point. Everyone knows that, in our society and in our culture, high school graduation is one of life's most significant occasions. A school rule which excuses attendance is beside the point. Attendance may not be required by official decree, yet it is apparent that a student is not free to absent herself from the graduation exercise in any real sense of the term "voluntary," for absence would require forfeiture of those intangible benefits which have motivated the student through youth and all her high school years.505 U.S. at 595.
Finally, Kennedy formulated what is now known as the coercion test in answering the argument that participation in the prayer was voluntary:
The school district's supervision and control of a high school graduation ceremony places subtle and indirect public and peer pressure on attending students to stand as a group or maintain respectful silence during the invocation and benediction. A reasonable dissenter of high school age could believe that standing or remaining silent signified her own participation in, or approval of, the group exercise, rather than her respect for it. And the State may not place the student dissenter in the dilemma of participating or protesting. Since adolescents are often susceptible to peer pressure, especially in matters of social convention, the State may no more use social pressure to enforce orthodoxy than it may use direct means. The embarrassment and intrusion of the religious exercise cannot be refuted by arguing that the prayers are of a de minimis character, since that is an affront to the rabbi and those for whom the prayers have meaning, and since any intrusion was both real and a violation of the objectors' rights.505 U.S. 577, Syllabus.
The principle that government may accommodate the free exercise of religion does not supersede the fundamental limitations imposed by the Establishment Clause. It is beyond dispute that, at a minimum, the Constitution guarantees that government may not coerce anyone to support or participate in religion or its exercise, or otherwise act in a way which "establishes a [state] religion or religious faith, or tends to do so."505 U.S. at 587 (citations omitted and emphasis added).
As we have observed before, there are heightened concerns with protecting freedom of conscience from subtle coercive pressure in the elementary and secondary public schools. Our decisions in [Engel] and [Abington] recognize, among other things, that prayer exercises in public schools carry a particular risk of indirect coercion. The concern may not be limited to the context of schools, but it is most pronounced there. What to most believers may seem nothing more than a reasonable request that the nonbeliever respect their religious practices, in a school context may appear to the nonbeliever or dissenter to be an attempt to employ the machinery of the State to enforce a religious orthodoxy.505 U.S. at 592 (citations omitted).
Concurring opinions
Justice Blackmun's concurrence stressed that "our decisions have gone beyond prohibiting coercion, however, because the Court has recognized that 'the fullest possible scope of religious liberty,' entails more than freedom from coercion."505 U.S. at 606 (Blackmun, J., concurring; internal citation omitted). Blackmun emphasized that the government was without power to place its imprimatur on any religious activity, even if no one was compelled to participate in a state-sponsored religious exercise, directly or indirectly.
Justice Souter devoted his concurring opinion to a historical analysis, rebutting the contention that the government could endorse nonsectarian prayers. He cited the writings of James Madison and pointed to the changing versions of the First Amendment that the First Congress considered, as opposed to the version which was eventually adopted. Souter, too, took issue with the school district's defense of non-coercive religious exercises, dismissing the position as without precedential authority.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Scalia's dissent argued against the coercion test:
In holding that the Establishment Clause prohibits invocations and benedictions at public school graduation ceremonies, the Court - with nary a mention that it is doing so - lays waste a tradition that is as old as public school graduation ceremonies themselves, and that is a component of an even more longstanding American tradition of nonsectarian prayer to God at public celebrations generally. As its instrument of destruction, the bulldozer of its social engineering, the Court invents a boundless, and boundlessly manipulable, test of psychological coercion.505 U.S. at 632 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
Scalia pointed to several historical examples of calling on divine guidance by American Presidents, including Washington's proclamation of the Thanksgiving holiday in 1789 and the inaugural addresses of both Madison and Thomas Jefferson. He disputed the Court's contention that attendance at high school graduation ceremonies was effectively required as part of social norms, and also the conclusion that students were subtly coerced to stand for the rabbi's invocation. In Scalia's view, only official penalties for refusing to support or adhere to a particular religion created an Establishment Clause violation.
Subsequent developments
The coercion test is now used to determine the constitutionality of certain government actions under the Establishment Clause, along with Justice O'Connor's "endorsement or disapproval" test. The test "seeks to determine whether the state has applied coercive pressure on an individual to support or participate in religion."
A broad reading of the Establishment Clause won out, but it seems to have its greatest current application in a public school context. The Court has ruled against the separationist position in several key funding cases since Lee, including the school voucher case Zelman v. Simmons-Harris.. However, a majority of the Court continues to maintain a strict ban on most forms of state-sponsored religious exercises in schools themselves, as evidenced by the 6–3 ruling in Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe, which struck down student-led prayers before public school football games..
See also
 Ahlquist v. Cranston (D.R.I. 2012) a school prayer case in Cranston, Rhode Island
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 505
Notes
References
Further reading
.
External links
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States education case law
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:1992 in religion
Category:1992 in education
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:History of Providence, Rhode Island
Category:Graduation
Category:Education in Providence, Rhode Island
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Religion and education
Category:Prayer
"""

From "Leegin Creative Leather Products, Inc. v. PSKS, Inc." ==> """
Leegin Creative Leather Products, Inc. v. PSKS, Inc., 551 U.S. 877 (2007), is a US antitrust case in which the United States Supreme Court overruled Dr. Miles Medical Co. v. John D. Park & Sons Co.. Dr Miles had ruled that vertical price restraints were illegal per se under Section 1 of the Sherman Antitrust Act. Leegin established that the legality of such restraints are to be judged based on the rule of reason.
Facts
Leegin, a manufacturer of leather apparel, concluded that its interests would be best served by opting out of a price war "race to the bottom," focusing instead on quality and brand cachet. Accordingly, with specific exceptions, it decided to refuse sale to retailers if they intended to discount its products below their recommended retail price. Five years after this policy was introduced, Leegin discovered that Kay's Kloset was violating the policy by marking down the Leegin products by 20%. When Kay's refused to comply with Leegin's policy, Leegin cut them off. PSKS, the parent company of Kay's, sued charging that Leegin had violated antitrust laws when it entered into "agreements with retailers to charge only those prices fixed by Leegin." After the district court refused to hear testimony describing the procompetitive effects of Leegin's pricing policy, Leegin appealed seeking to have Dr. Miles overruled.
Judgment
Dr. Miles had become obsolete almost as soon as it was decided; the court started moving away from rigid per se rules in antitrust, both generally, see Standard Oil v. United States (decided only a month after Dr. Miles), and in the particular area of vertical restraints, see United States v. Colgate & Co. (1919). After a brief mid-century hiatus in which the court imposed a more social goals-oriented jurisprudence,United States v. Alcoa (2d Cir. 1945), for example, which inveighed that antitrust serve "the helplessness of individual before" "great aggregations of capital" by restricting industry to "small units"; see also United States v. Columbia Steel Co., 334 U.S. 495, 535-36 (1948) (Douglas, J., dissenting). the court tacked back to an understanding of antitrust based on economics and allocative efficiency, primarily under the influence of Robert Bork's book The Antitrust Paradox. As this process rolled through cases like Continental Television, Inc. v. GTE Sylvania, Inc. (1977), State Oil Co. v. Khan (1997), and Verizon Communications Inc. v. Law Offices of Curtis V. Trinko, LLP (2004), Dr. Miles became more and more anomalous.
In Leegin, the court resolved the tension by overruling Dr. Miles. Citing Bork, Ronald Coase, and others, the Court held that manufacturer-imposed minimum resale prices can lead retailers to compete efficiently for customer sales in ways other than cutting the retail price.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 551
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 United States v. Apple Inc. (S.D.N.Y., 2013)
References
Further reading
External links
Oral Argument, March 26, 2007 (Transcript)
Brief for Petitioner Leegin Creative Leather Products, Inc.
Brief for Respondent PSK Inc. D/B/A Kay's Kloset, Kay's Shoes
Reply Brief for Petitioner Leegin Creative Leather Products, Inc.
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:Leather clothing
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Lefkowitz v. Newsome" ==> """
Lefkowitz v. Newsome, 420 U.S. 283 (1975), is a U.S. Supreme Court case which held that when  state law permits a defendant to plead guilty without giving up his right to judicial review of specified constitutional issues, such as the lawfulness of a search or the voluntariness of a confession, the defendant is not prevented from pursuing those constitutional claims in a federal habeas corpus proceeding..
Legal background
Most states require that a defendant must plead not guilty and go to trial to maintain the right to have state appellate review of  constitutional challenges he might make to arrest, admissibility of evidence, or the voluntariness of a confession. New York is unique in allowing a defendant to plead guilty while still maintaining these rights.
Facts of the case
Leon Newsome was arrested on the charge of loitering in the lobby of a New York City Housing Authority apartment building. Upon search, a small quantity of heroin and  narcotics paraphernalia was found on his person. Thus  he was  charged with possession of a dangerous drug and drug paraphernalia, in addition to loitering. Newsome pleaded not guilty on all charges, claimed the loitering law was unconstitutional,  and made a motion to suppress the evidence leading to the drug charges. Upon a non-jury trial by New York City Criminal Court, Newsome was convicted of loitering. In a hearing, the same court rejected the motion to suppress evidence related to the drug charges. One month later,  Newsome withdrew his not guilty pleas, pleading guilty to a lesser charge of attempted possession of dangerous drugs. At the sentencing proceeding, Newsome announced that he would appeal both the loitering conviction and the denial of his motion to suppress the evidence related to the drug charges.
Appeals
The loitering charge was reversed upon appeal for lack of evidence by Appellate Division of the New York Supreme Court, but the drug convictions were upheld on the grounds that there was probable cause for the original arrest and search. Newsome petitioned for review of the drug conviction to the New York Court of Appeals, but this was denied. The Court also denied a petition for a writ of certiorari.
Newsome subsequently filed a writ of habeas corpus in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York. The petition repeated the claim that because the loitering statute was unconstitutional, Newsome's arrest was therefore invalid, and that as a result, the evidence seized relating to that arrest should be suppressed. Meanwhile, the New York Court of Appeals declared New York's loitering statute unconstitutional before the District Court could render a decision on the merits of Newsome's petition; considering this, the District Court granted Newsome's application for a writ of habeas corpus.
The District Court decided that because Newsome was searched on suspicion for probable cause during an arrest for the violation of a statute subsequently found to be unconstitutional, Newsome's search was unconstitutional and the evidence should be suppressed. The District Court granted the writ of habeas corpus.
The Attorney General of New York sought review of both decisions: the decision that Newsome had not waived his right to file a federal habeas corpus petition by pleading guilty and also the decision  that New York's loitering statute was unconstitutional. Since there was a conflict between Newsome's case and a previous decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, the US Supreme Court granted certiorari restricted to the question of Newsome's right to file a federal habeas corpus petition challenging the issues in his case; that is, was the search lawful and  was the confession voluntary,  when a state provides for appellate review of those issues after a guilty plea?
Decision
The Supreme Court held the following:
... when state law permits a defendant to plead guilty without forfeiting his right to judicial review of specified constitutional issues, the defendant is not foreclosed from pursuing those constitutional claims in a federal habeas corpus proceeding. The judgment of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit is affirmed.
Footnotes
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 420
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
Category:Public housing in New York City
"""

From "Legal Services Corp. v. Velazquez" ==> """
Legal Services Corp. v. Velazquez, 531 U.S. 533 (2001), is a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States concerning the constitutionality of funding restrictions imposed by the United States Congress. At issue were restrictions on the Legal Services Corporation (LSC), a private, nonprofit corporation established by Congress. The restrictions prohibited LSC attorneys from representing clients attempting to amend (or challenge) existing welfare law. The case was brought by Carmen Velazquez, whose LSC-funded attorneys sought to challenge existing welfare provisions since they believed that it was the only way to get Velazquez financial relief.
The Court ruled that the restrictions violated the free speech guarantees of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. Because LSC facilitated "private" speech, that of its grantees, the restrictions did not simply regulate government speech.
Because the restrictions blocked attempts to change only a specific area of law, the Court held, they could not be considered viewpoint-neutral, and the government is prohibited from making such viewpoint-based restrictions of private speech.
Reactions to the decision were mixed within Congress, with Republicans and Democrats disagreeing on the propriety of the decision. Several law review articles argued that the use of a "distortion principle" to decide violations of free speech was an unreasonable and unconstitutional rule whose conditions on funding might "distort" speech advocacy. Others contended that the Court mishandled the interpretation of the statute at issue.
Background
History of funding restriction jurisprudence
The first major test of the federal government's power over funding restrictions based on speech was the 1991 case Rust v. Sullivan. In Rust, the Supreme Court had upheld a restriction on the use of Department of Health and Human Services funds for counseling, referring patients to, or advocating the use of abortion services. The Court reasoned that the restriction "merely [chose] to fund one activity to the exclusion of the other."531 U.S. at 541–543. Here, the government was using private speakers to transmit information about the government's own program.531 U.S. at 541–542.
Six years later, the Court reviewed another restriction, this time about funding restrictions imposed by a public university. In the 1997 case Rosenberger v. University of Virginia, a government supported university sought to withhold funds from religious student publications although it funded similar secular publications. The Court said that the government could seek to shape funding to support a government message, such restrictive steps could not be imposed to the exclusion of a particular viewpoint.531 U.S. at 542.
Legal Services Corporation
In 1974 the United States Congress passed the Legal Services Corporation Act, which established the Legal Services Corporation. The purpose of the Act was to provide government-funded legal aid to indigent clients that would be funded through grants to regional entities throughout the country. In 1996, Congress amended the act with that year's appropriations bill, which imposed restrictions on the LSC. The restrictions included prohibitions against filing class action lawsuits, providing legal assistance to immigrants in particular types of cases, collecting attorney's fees, soliciting clients, providing advocacy training programs, and attempting to reform welfare laws. The restrictions affected only a small portion of the caseload.Houseman, Alan W. "What Can and Cannot Be Done: Representation of Clients by LSC-Funded Programs", "Center for Law and Social Policy," August 9, 2001. The restrictions prohibited funding cases:
... initiating legal representation or participating in any other way, in litigation, lobbying, or rulemaking, involving an effort to reform a Federal or State welfare system, except that this paragraph shall not be construed to preclude a recipient from representing an individual eligible client who is seeking specific relief from a welfare agency if such relief does not involve an effort to amend or otherwise challenge existing welfare law in effect on the date of the initiation of the representation.
Lower-court proceedings
In 1997, Carmen Velazquez lost welfare benefits from the government under the provisions of the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Act (TANF). An attorney from an LSC grantee, Bronx Legal Services, litigated her claim. Bronx Legal Services, on behalf of Velazquez, filed suit in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York to seek a declaration that the provision of the Act prohibiting challenges to existing welfare law was unconstitutional under the First Amendment. It argued that there was no way to help Velazquez without challenging the welfare system itself, and it sought to challenge the provisions under which Velazquez lost her benefits, a challenge that they could not make because of the 1996 restrictions.164 F.3d at 764 (2d Cir. 1999). The district court denied an injunction.164 F.3d at 762 (2d Cir. 1999).
The court's decision was affirmed in part and reversed in part by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which unanimously held that the welfare-advocacy restriction was unconstitutional,531 U.S. 535 at 537 but upheld other restrictions that Bronx Legal Services had challenged (such as the lobbying restriction) by a 2–1 vote. The Second Circuit also rejected the claim that any funding conditions would be illegitimate by instead preferring a case-by-case analysis. LSC asked the Supreme Court for a review and argued that the Second Circuit had been wrong in striking only down the welfare-advocacy restriction.531 U.S. 535 at 537, 540.
Supreme Court decision
The Supreme Court heard oral arguments in the case on October 4, 2000 and issued its decision four months later.531 U.S. at 535.
The Court affirmed the decision of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals by holding 5-4 that the restriction on pursuing welfare advocacy was unconstitutional because of the First Amendment.531 U.S. at 549.
120px|thumb|right|Justice Kennedy wrote the majority opinion in Velazquez.|alt=Justice Kennedy
Justice Kennedy delivered the majority opinion. It distinguished a 1991 Supreme Court case, Rust v. Sullivan, which upheld a prohibition on federally funded family planning services from discussing abortion with their patients. The majority reasoned that in Rust, the government was attempting to use its funds to express its own message, but the purpose of the Act was to promote a diversity of private views with its funding, not an attempt to restrict any views. The Court said that the government can only issue "content-neutral" conditions on such speech and that the specific prohibition on welfare-reform litigation was viewpoint-based by restricting only support for welfare reform advocacy. "If the restriction on speech and legal advice were to stand, the result would be two tiers of cases... there would be lingering doubt whether the truncated representation had resulted in complete analysis of the case, full advice to the client, and proper presentation to the court."531 U.S. at 546.
The Court also criticized the fact that the restriction functionally barred attorneys from participating in the courts.531 U.S. at 548. Any attorney receiving LSC funding would not be able to litigate welfare claims that challenged welfare rules, thereby preventing certain cases from being filed. "The restriction imposed by the statute here threatens severe impairment of the judicial function.... We must be vigilant when Congress imposes rules and conditions which, in effect, insulate its own laws from legitimate judicial challenge."
Dissent
Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion from the decision of the Court and believed that Rust mandated a ruling upholding the restriction. Scalia was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Associate Justices Sandra Day O'Connor and Clarence Thomas and wrote, "The [act] is a federal subsidy program, not a federal regulatory program... regulations directly restrict speech; subsidies do not." He disagreed with the majority's contention that there was viewpoint discrimination and argued that no specific viewpoint was restricted. Scalia was also concerned with dicta in the majority opinion that seemed to him to indicate a "fondness" for the concept of reform by using the courts.531 U.S. at 563.
He argued that the majority's holding was "unprecedented" because it was the first time the government would be limited in advocating its own message.
Reactions
The immediate reaction was mixed among members of Congress. Democratic supporters of the decision were optimistic of future victories against funding restrictions and stated that they were glad the restriction had fallen but that the decision "opens the LSC up to even more attacks."
Republicans in Congress condemned the decision and agreeing to work against it. US Representative Steve Largent (R-OK) said, "It'll be on the radar screen for sure.... Why are we giving taxpayer money to sue taxpayers?" The New York Times described the decision as the end of the "latest chapter, although almost certainly not the last, in a long political struggle over the federally financed program of civil legal services for the poor."
Parties involved in the case also had mixed reactions. LSC, which had sought to protect the restrictions, said that it would "immediately review [their] regulations and then modify them to adhere to the Court's ruling," which it did quickly after the decision. Burt Neuborne, the lawyer who argued against the restriction before the Supreme Court, said that the ruling "really reads like a First Amendment textbook."
Subsequent developments
In the weeks following the Velazquez decision, the Supreme Court rejected appeals related to other LSC restrictions. LSC has engaged in welfare-reform litigation since the original injunction was lifted.
The case provided the basis for other challenges to restrictions imposed on LSC, such as bans against lobbying or class actions.Schwinn, Steven D. "Ninth Circuit Declines Further Review of Legal Services Funding Restrictions", Constitutional Law Prof Blog, June 4, 2010, accessed January 1, 2011 The challenges were rejected by the Ninth Circuit and the Second Circuit in separate suits.Oregon v. Legal Services Corp., 552 F. 3d 965 (9th Cir., 2009; dismissing challenge against restrictions)Brooklyn Legal Services Corp. v. Legal Services Corp., 462 F. 3d 219 (2nd Cir., 2006; dismissing challenge to attorney fee restriction) The challenges failed because the relevant provisions do not regulate a specific type of advocacy; for example, the restriction on LSC grantees from collecting attorney's fees would not raise a speech issue because there is no speech involved in such a process. The argument raised in those challenges was that the Court articulated a new "conditions" principle in Velazquez, a distortion-of-speech test, which they argued would require the restrictions to be struck down. Both courts of appeal reviewing that claim have rejected thar reading of Velazquez. Instead of a distortion-of-speech test, the decision was based on the application of limited public forum principles. When the government provides funds to an entity, and the funding's purpose was to encourage diversity of private views, it must act in a viewpoint-neutral way. Programs funded in this manner are treated as a public forum in which the ability of the government to restrict speech is highly limited.
The implications of those subsequent rulings mandated two new rules, one narrow and one broad. Firstly, restrictions may be imposed on LSC as long as they do not discriminate on the basis of "viewpoint" or "opinion." Because the other restrictions were not based on viewpoint, they were upheld. Secondly, on a broader scale the government may not discriminate against viewpoints in any instance that it is funding a private entity to that a diversity of views. For this reason, the decision in Velazquez set an important binding precedent for how the government may act as subsidizer and speaker.
Analysis and commentary
A Journal of Law and Politics article by Jay Johnson was critical of the decision and the Court's claimed distinction between the speech restriction in Rust and the one on LSC and contended that there was no functional difference between the two. The article highlighted a problem with the Court's interpretation of the statute's purpose at hand: "Even assuming the propriety of invoking legislative purpose in statutory interpretation, the text of the [Act] does not support the Court's understanding of the Act's purpose." The article noted that although the Court looked at a section of the Act discussing attorneys "protecting the best interest of their clients," the same section noted that the program must be free of "political pressures." Because a factor in the Court's reasoning was its understanding of the Act's purpose, that alleged error purportedly misguided the rest of the Court's analysis.
Further criticism from the article was that the Court unduly rested its decision on a separation of powers determination. The Court held in Velazquez that the restriction on welfare advocacy cases disrupted the "vital relationship between the bar and the judiciary."531 U.S. 535 at 545-546 That finding, the article argued, was baseless because there is no connection between preventing some government lawyers from arguing a single point and the deprivation of due process rights. It concluded that the fundamental problems of statutory interpretation and a lack of a credible distinction with Rust in Justice Kennedy's analysis renders the opinion "unconvincing."
An article in the Maryland Law Review by Christopher Gozdor, a lawyer in the Maryland Attorney General's office, was also critical of the decision, but he was concerned with an alleged lack of clarity in the majority opinion. It discussed the case law relating to government speech and examined what it described as the "conditions doctrine" by which certain conditions on receiving federal funds were upheld or struck down.
The article then turned to the Rust distinction. Gozdor explained: "The Court distinguished Velazquez from Rust because Rust involved a subsidy to facilitate private expression of the government's message, while Velazquez involved LSC funding that was designed [for] private speech."531 U.S. 535 at 541–542. The critical question for the court was the characterization of the speech that the law promoted. Because advocacy by LSC grantees to change welfare laws was not in advance of the government's own message, the restriction placed on it essentially prohibited a form of private speech. The relationship that the Court set forth, Gozdor asserted, was that the restriction "distorted" private speech. That "distortion principle" was the main criticism of the article, as was Scalia's dissenting opinion.
Gozdor, agreeing with Scalia's dissent, wrote that the restriction did not create such a distortion of private speech because Congress had still permitted LSC to form affiliate organizations, which would be considered "legally separate." Notwithstanding the difficulty of an organization to classify itself as an "affiliate entity" of LSC, Gozdor argued that there was no real prevention of speech when there were ample alternative means of relaying the message.
Further, in attacking the distortion principle's application, Gozdor also argued against the principle as a legal concept in the first place: "Regardless of the Court's rationale for its distortion principle, determining a First Amendment violation by measuring whether the government used a subsidy 'in ways which distorted the medium's usual functioning' suggests that forum functions become unchangeable once created." He claimed the unworkability of the distortion principle in a hypothetical example, which would moot the very existence of the LSC: "Taking the Velazquez rationale to its logical ends, the LSC subsidy itself could become an unconstitutional speech restriction. If Congress substantially increased LSC appropriations in order to allow LSC to take all of its cases... the functioning of the legal system would be distorted because such a subsidy likely would result in a dramatic increase in the federal courts' caseloads." With that in mind, he concluded with a process by which the Court should have decided the case: a process leading to the upholding of the restriction by finding that LSC's purpose was in promoting the government's message in contrast to a diversity of private views.
An article by Jessica Sharpe in the North Carolina Law Review argued that Kennedy's majority opinion wrongly set forth the understanding of the role of an attorney. Sharpe criticized the Court's thesis that the role of the attorney is that of an advocate such that a restriction on the attorney served as a direct restriction of advocacy. That rationale, Sharpe argued, could undermine the balance of abortion restrictions because state regulations on abortion access also could be seen as an intrusion into doctor–patient speech. Because Velazquez "blurred" this distinction, the privileged nature of doctor–patient conversations could be subjected to future regulations and limitations.
See also
 Legal meaning of 'Forum'
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:History of the Bronx
Category:Welfare in the United States
Category:Legal Services Corporation
"""

From "Legal Tender Cases" ==> """
The Legal Tender Cases were two 1871 United States Supreme Court cases that affirmed the constitutionality of paper money. The two cases were Knox v. Lee and Parker v. Davis.
The U.S. federal government had issued paper money known as United States Notes during the American Civil War, pursuant to the terms of the Legal Tender Act of 1861. In the 1869 case of Hepburn v. Griswold, the Court had held that the Legal Tender Act violated the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. In his majority opinion, Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase did not hold that Congress lacked the power to issue paper money, but rather ruled that the notes could not be used as legal tender for pre-existing debts. The Supreme Court overruled Hepburn v. Griswold in the Legal Tender Cases, holding that United States Notes could be used to re-pay pre-existing debts.
Legal Tender Act of 1862
thumb|right|Obverse of the first $1 bill, issued in 1862 as a legal tender note featuring Treasury Secretary Chase, who later held as Chief Justice that such bills are unconstitutional, before being overturned
The Legal Tender Cases primarily involved the constitutionality of the Legal Tender Act of 1862, , enacted during the American Civil War.Act of Congress, Statutes at Large, Volume 12, 37th Congress, Session II, Chapter 33, pp. 345–348 (1862-02-25). This Act authorized issuance of $150,000,000 in United States Notes, commonly referred to as greenbacks, plus $500,000,000 in interest-bearing bonds. The paper money depreciated in terms of gold and became the subject of controversy, particularly because debts contracted earlier could be paid in this cheaper currency.Legal Tender cases, The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. 2001–05.
Chief Justice Chase described the sequence of events:
Hepburn v. Griswold
In Hepburn v. Griswold (1870), Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase held for a 5–3 majoritySachs, Leon. 1933. "Stare Decisis and the Legal Tender Cases." Virginia Law Review 20: 864–65 of the Court that the Act was an unconstitutional violation of the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment:
Ironically, Chief Justice Chase had played a role in formulating the Legal Tender Act of 1862, in his previous position as Secretary of the Treasury.  On the same day that Hepburn was decided, President Ulysses Grant nominated two new justices to the Court, Joseph Bradley and William Strong, although Grant later denied that he had known about the decision in Hepburn when the nominations were made.Pusey, Merlo.  Matter of Delicacy: The Court Copes With Disability , Supreme Court Historical Society 1979 Yearbook.
Knox v. Lee and Parker v. Davis
Justices Bradley and Strong subsequently voted to reverse the Hepburn decision, in Knox v. Lee and Parker v. Davis, by votes of 5–4..
Juilliard v. Greenman
The constitutionality of the Act was more broadly upheld thirteen years later in Juilliard v. Greenman..
Background about constitutionality of paper money
Article I, Section 10 of the Constitution explicitly forbids the states from issuing "bills of credit" (promissory notes) or making anything but gold and silver coin legal "tender". There are no corresponding explicit prohibitions limiting the power of the federal government, nor are there any explicit authorizations. The Tenth Amendment refers to reserved powers that only the states can exercise, as well as powers not delegated that continue to reside in the people. "Concurrent powers" also exist, which may be exercised by either the states or the federal government, such as the power to repel invasions, and arguably including power to make legal tender (e.g. in federal territories or elsewhere).  Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution specifically gives Congress power to "borrow money" and also power to "coin money and regulate the value" of both U.S. and foreign coins, and regulate interstate commerce, but does not explicitly and unambiguously grant Congress the power to print paper money or make it legal tender.
The federal government first issued paper money in 1861 to fund the Civil War.Friedberg, Arthur and Friedberg, Ira.  Paper Money of the United States: A Complete Illustrated Guide With Valuations. "From the first year of Federal paper money, 1861, to the present. ..." Before that, all U.S. paper money was bank-issued money. For example, paper notes were issued by the First Bank of the United States, which was a private corporation chartered by the federal government.Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, "Fun Facts About Money". Retrieved 2007-02-24. Congress had also authorized paper money (e.g. Continentals) even before the Constitution was adopted. The Continental was issued by both the individual states and the Continental Congress under the Articles of Confederation. Those Articles specifically allowed the issuance of legal tender paper money, at the time called "bills of credit".The Articles of Confederation stated: "The United States in Congress assembled shall have authority ... to borrow money, or emit bills on the credit of the United States"
In Hepburn, Chief Justice Chase noted, "No one questions the general constitutionality, and not very many, perhaps, the general expediency of the legislation by which a note currency has been authorized in recent years. The doubt is as to the power to declare a particular class of these notes to be a legal tender in payment of pre-existing debts."Hepburn, 75 U.S. at 619.
Original intent and original meaning
Originalists like Robert Bork have objected to enforcing the intentions of those framers who may have believed that paper money should be prohibited:  "Scholarship suggests that the Framers intended to prohibit paper money. Any judge who thought today he would go back to the original intent really ought to be accompanied by a guardian rather than be sitting on a bench."Hearings Before Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 100th Congress, 1st Session, Nomination of Robert H. Bork to be Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States (1987).  According to law professor Michael Stokes Paulson, "Among the most common canards in critiques of originalism is that, under the original meaning of the Constitution, the issuance of paper money as legal tender would be unconstitutional, sending our economy into disarray."Paulsen, Michael Stokes. "How to Interpret the Constitution (and How Not To)" , 115 Yale Law Journal 2037, 2061 n. 46 (2006).
Regarding paper money, Nathaniel Gorham explained at the Constitutional Convention that he "was for striking out" an explicit power of Congress to issue paper money, but Gorham was also against "inserting any prohibition".The Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787 , ed. Madison, James (August 16, 1787).  Retrieved February 24, 2007. One delegate at the Constitutional Convention went so far as to say that an express power to emit paper money would be "as alarming as the mark of the Beast in Revelation". That is what ultimately happened at the Convention: language explicitly giving the federal government power to issue legal tender paper money was removed on a vote of 9–2, but an option allowing the issuance together with a prohibition against making it legal tender was not acted upon. Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution gives Congress power to "borrow money on the credit of the United States", and therefore Gorham envisioned that "The power [e.g. to emit promissory paper], as far as it will be necessary or safe, is involved in that of borrowing."Siegan, Bernard.  The Supreme Court's Constitution, (1987), page 36: "The central government would be able to emit promissory paper 'as it will be necessary or safe' pursuant to the borrowing power." The power to emit paper money (e.g. bank notes) has been justified by invoking the Necessary and Proper Clause in combination with the other enumerated powers which include the power to borrow money.Siegan, Bernard.  The Supreme Court's Constitution, (1987), page 27: "Because the power was not banned, Congress could print paper money and designate it legal tender under its necessary and proper power (article I, section 8, clause 18) once the required relationship to an enumerated power had been established." The power to "issue bills of credit" is explicitly mentioned in the Constitution as a prohibition on the States, and could therefore be interpreted as a power so momentous that it would have to be conferred explicitly on the federal government rather than inferred from the Necessary and Proper Clause, although it is not entirely clear whether or not the framers intended such an interpretation, nor did the Supreme Court adopt such an interpretation in the Legal Tender Cases or subsequently.
James Madison's notes, from the Constitutional Convention in 1787, include a footnote where he says that the Constitution would not allow the federal government to use paper as currency or legal tender, though there is no indication whether or not the contents of his footnote were uttered aloud at the Convention.The Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787 , ed. Madison, James (August 16, 1787).  Retrieved February 24, 2007. The full text of Madison's footnote is as follows: "This vote in the affirmative by Virga. was occasioned by the acquiescence of Mr. Madison who became satisfied that striking out the words would not disable the Govt. from the use of public notes as far as they could be safe & proper; & would only cut off the pretext for a paper currency, and particularly for making the bills a tender either for public or private debts." Thereafter, during the ratification debates, the Federalist Papers No. 44 (assumed to be authored by Madison) said that prohibiting states from emitting "bills of credit must give pleasure to every citizen, in proportion to his love of justice and his knowledge of the true springs of public prosperity." He further stated that the issuance of paper money by the states had resulted in "an accumulation of guilt, which can be expiated no otherwise than by a voluntary sacrifice of the power which has been the instrument of it."Madison, James.  Federalist #44 (January 25, 1788).
See also
Legal tender
Commodity money
Demand Note
Federal Reserve Note
Fiat money
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 79
United States Note
References
External links
Legal Tender Acts
"Paper Money and the Original Understanding of the Coinage Clause" by Robert Natelson, Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy (2008).
Act to authorize the Issue of United States Notes, and for the Redemption or Funding thereof, and for Funding the Floating Debt of the United States. 37th Congress, 2d Session, Ch. 33, 12 Stat. 345. [Legal Tender Act]
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Banknotes of the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Lehman v. Shaker Heights" ==> """
Lehman v. City of Shaker Heights, 418 U.S. 298 (1974), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court upheld a city's ban on political advertising within its public transportation system. The Court ruled that ad space on public transit is not a "public forum", meaning that speech within this space receives lower First Amendment protections..
 Background 
The City of Shaker Heights, Ohio sold advertising space on its rapid transit system. The City forbade political advertising on rapid transit cars. However, other types of businesses and organizations could buy advertising space.
In 1970, Harry Lehman, a candidate for the Ohio House of Representatives, wished to purchase advertising space on the rapid transit system to publicize his campaign. He sued the City, claiming the unequal treatment of commercial and political advertising violated the First Amendment.
The Ohio Supreme Court sided with Shaker Heights, ruling that the freedom of speech does not extend to commercial or political advertising on public transit vehicles.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court ruled for Shaker Heights, upholding the ban on political advertising.
Writing for four justices, Harry Blackmun wrote that a rapid transit car is not a public forum, and speech there is subject to a lower level of protection. "The nature of the forum" is "important in determining the degree of protection."Lehman, 418 U.S. at 302–303. In running a rapid transit system, the City is principally "engaged in commerce." The provision of advertising space is "incidental to the provision of public transportation." Thus, speech restrictions designed to keep the rapid transit system "convenient, pleasant, and inexpensive" are justified as long as such restrictions are not "arbitrary, capricious, or invidious."Lehman, 418 U.S. at 303.
Blackmun pointed out that, unlike pedestrians in a traditional public forum such as a park or street corner, commuters are a captive audience. Thus, the City has an interest in protecting commuters from the "blare of political propaganda." Other public interests include avoiding "the appearance of favoritism," and steering clear of controversies that might arise when "parceling out limited space to eager politicians."Lehman, 418 U.S. at 304. The City was also entitled to determine how best to generate revenue from the public transit system. "The decision [to ban political advertising] is little different from deciding to impose a 10¢, 25¢, or 35¢ fare."
Justice William Douglas concurred. He stressed that public transit is a "practical necessity" for millions of Americans, making such commuters a "captive audience." Douglas argued that there is no First Amendment right to speak to a captive audience; thus the City should have authority to restrict speech within the cars, whether political or commercial.Lehman, 418 U.S. at 308 (Douglas, J., concurring).
Justice William Brennan dissented, joined by three other justices. Brennan believed the City had created a public forum when it accepted commercial advertising in the cars.Lehman, 418 U.S. at 310 (Brennan, J. dissenting). Since, in Brennan's view, the transit system was a public forum, the First Amendment prohibited "discrimination based solely on subject matter or content."Lehman, 418 U.S. at 315 (Brennan, J. dissenting).
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 418
 References 
External links
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
"""

From "Lehnert v. Ferris Faculty Ass'n" ==> """
Lehnert v. Ferris Faculty Association, 500 U.S. 507 (1991), deals with First Amendment rights and unions in public employment..
Background
Due to collective bargaining laws in some states (in this case, Michigan), employees in the public sector (in this case Ferris State University) are often required to either join a union or pay a "service fee" to a union (in this case, the Ferris Faculty Association, Michigan Education Association, and National Education Association) for the collective bargaining services. This case pertains to the usage and collection of union dues in the form of "service fees" from dissenting nonmember employees. The Plaintiffs argued that their required "services fees" are not going toward collective bargaining, but rather toward other union activities with which they disagree (such as political lobbying), and thus the compulsory fees are a violation of their freedom of speech rights. The defendant union argued that their non-bargaining activities are "designed to influence the public employer's position at the bargaining table," and therefore that they benefit the collective bargaining process.
Opinion of the Court
In a majority opinion by Justice Blackmun, the Court found that unions may compel contributions from nonmembers only for the costs of performing its duties as exclusive bargaining agent. The Court found largely for the Plaintiff, but also continued to uphold the compulsory "service fee" itself and affirmed some of the questioned uses of the "service fee." In general, freedom of speech rights are found to limit what "service fees" may be used for. The Court ruled that the majority of the "service fees" collected in this case were used unconstitutionally. Also, the court now requires unions to provide an audited accounting report of their "service fee" spending to fee-paying nonmembers.
This case provides broad clarification on the subject of required union fees in the public sector. It strikes down a previously used three-part test in favor of a more practical one-part test. This new test dictates that: "a union may constitutionally compel contributions from dissenting nonmembers in an agency shop only for the costs of performing the union's statutory duties as exclusive bargaining agent." However, much leeway and uncertainty still exists regarding the acceptable use of union "service fees" in the public sector.
Allowed uses of union "service fees"
The court found that "a union may constitutionally compel contributions from dissenting nonmembers in an agency shop only for the costs of performing the union's statutory duties as exclusive bargaining agent." These costs include:
 Expenses directly related to the collective bargaining process. 
 "Program expenditures" of the national union, even those destined for other states.
 Certain sections of the state union’s newsletter. These sections must deal directly with collective bargaining, professional development, education, unemployment, and other non-political topics which "benefit all." 
 Participation by the local delegates in the state and national conventions which are likely to have some benefit to collective bargaining.
 All expenses associated with preparation for, and negotiation of strikes.
Illegal uses of union "service fees"
The court also found that "certain other of the union activities at issue may not constitutionally be supported through objecting employees' funds." These disallowed costs include: 
 Lobbying, electoral, or other union political activities outside the scope of contract negotiations, which "would compel dissenters to engage in core political speech with which they disagree."
 Union activities which serve to secure state, local, or national funds for education and sections of the newsletter which report on these issues.
 Litigation which does not directly relate to the collective bargaining process and union literature which reports on this. 
 Public relations efforts which seek to enhance the reputation of the teaching profession and expenses related to information picketing, media exposure, signs, posters, and buttons.
Rationale
The following cases were cited in the majority opinion:
Machinists v. Street (1961), states that "a union may constitutionally compel contributions from dissenting nonmembers in an agency shop only for the costs of performing the union's statutory duties as exclusive bargaining agent."
Abood v. Detroit Board of Education (1977), upholds the constitutionality of compulsory "service fees" for collective bargaining services.
Ellis v. Railway Clerks (1984), allows local unions to support their national affiliates through nonmembers "service fees" since they often provide support to the bargaining table in a variety of ways both direct and indirect. However, this case does not allow free spending by the unions but limits it somewhat.
See also
US labor law
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 500
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Locke v. Karass, 555 U.S. 207 (2008)
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:National Education Association
Category:Ferris State University
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Leitch Manufacturing Co. v. Barber Co." ==> """
Leitch Manufacturing Co. v. Barber Co., 302 U.S. 458 (1938), is a 1938 decision of the United States Supreme Court extending the tie-in patent misuse doctrine to cases in which the patentee does not use an explicit tie-in license but instead relies on grants of implied licenses to only those who buy a necessary supply from it.Leitch Mfg. Co. v. Barber Co., .
Background
Facts
Barber Asphalt Company acquired Hayden U.S. Patent No. 1,684,671, covering a "Method of preventing evaporation from concrete during curing." The patent describes a process for improving the curing of concrete by retarding the evaporation of water from poured concrete, as in a roadway. The process involves preparing a mixture of bitumen, soap, and water, which forms bituminous emulsion, and spraying this on freshly laid concrete. This forms an insoluble film on the surface of the concrete and by keeping the water in the concrete mixture from evaporating, facilitates a chemical reaction in which water molecules react with calcium hydroxide and other ingredients to form calcium-silicate hydrate. The result is reduced cracking and stronger concrete.See Concrete#Curing.
Barber made and sold bituminous emulsion. The product was long known and not patented, and it has many uses besides the patented process. Leitch Manufacturing Company also made and sold bituminous emulsion. Barber's method of exploiting the patent was to sell bituminous emulsion for road building use. It did not make road builders pay a royalty for employing the patented method. It does not grant to road builders a written license to use the process, nor require them to agree to use only Barber's bituminous emulsion when practicing the process. Under U.S. patent law, when a patent owner sells supplies to customers with the understanding that they will use the supplies to practice the patent, the customers get an implied license to use the patent. " On the other hand, the Barber Company sues as a contributory infringer a competing manufacturer of this unpatented material who sells it to a road builder for such use."302 U.S. at 460-61.
Leitch used Stulz-Sickles Company as a jobber to sell bituminous emulsion to the Standard Bitulithic Company, which used the patented process in road construction, and Barber and Stulz-Sickles knew that Standard would so use it.
Lower court rulings
Barber sued Leitch and Stulz-Sickles. The district court found the patent invalid as anticipated by prior art. On appeal, the Third Circuit reversed (2-1). It found the patent valid and rejected the defense that Barber committed patent misuse by engaging in a tie-in of unpatented supplies, in violation of the rule set out in Carbice Corporation v. American Patents Development Corporation. One judge dissented: "The appellant seeks to restrain the sale of an unpatented ingredient used by it in its process. No patent could have been obtained for bituminous emulsion, a staple article of commerce, and the fact that it is used in the patented process does not entitled the appellant to a monopoly therein. Carbice."Barber Asphalt Co., 89 F.2d at 965.
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|150px|right|Justice Brandeis
Justice Brandeis delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court, reversing the Third Circuit. The first sentence of the opinion telegraphed the result: " The question for decision is whether the owner of a process patent may by suit for contributory infringement suppress competition in the sale of unpatented material to be used in practicing the process."302 U.S. at 459.
Brandeis recognized that Barber did not grant licenses on the process subject to a condition that the licensee buy bit3em from Barber. " But it adopts a method of doing the business which is the practical equivalent of granting a written license with a condition that the patented method may be practiced only with emulsion purchased from it. . . . Thus, the sole purpose to which the patent is put is thereby to suppress competition in the production and sale of staple unpatented material for this use in road building.302 U.S. at 460-61.
The case was settled by Carbice, irrespective of the absence of a formal tie-in condition: "That the patent did not confer upon the Barber Company the right to be free from competition in supplying unpatented material to be used in practicing the invention was settled by the rule declared in the Carbice case."302 U.S. at 461.
Barber argued that  Carbice and Motion Picture Patents were inapplicable "because it has not entered into any contract or agreement aimed at expansion of the patent monopoly" while in those cases:
the attempt to secure the "partial monopoly of an unpatented material, outside of and apart from the patent monopoly" was made by contract or notice, whereas the Barber Company has made no attempt, "by contract, notice or otherwise, to expand its patent monopoly by limitations, or to reserve or create any monopoly in emulsion outside of, and apart from, its patent monopoly," that "its customers for emulsion have no more than the unconditional license to use implied by law and are under no restriction," and that neither the defendant nor its customers "has any relation with the patent owner."302 U.S. at 462-63.
The Court said, "The distinction upon which the Barber Company . .  rests is without legal significance," because "every use of a patent as a means of obtaining a limited monopoly of unpatented material is prohibited. . . . It applies whatever the nature of the device by which the owner of the patent seeks to effect such unauthorized extension of the monopoly."302 U.S. at 463.
Subsequent developments
La Fera Greco case
In Barber Asphalt Co. v. La Fera Grecco Contracting Co., the Third Circuit held that when Barber sold bituminous emulsion to purchasers for a royalty of 2 cents per gallon over the market price, and gave the purchaser a right to use the patented process, while requiring the users of bituminous emulsion purchased from other sources to pay a royalty of 1 cent per square yard of concrete surface over which the bituminous emulsion is spread, the sales practice puts such a burden upon the user of bituminous emulsion purchased from other sources as to prevent free competition. The theory was thatr it was impossible for customers to equalize the royalty of 2 cents per gallon paid by the purchasers from Barber and that required for the use of the patented process by those who purchased the bituminous emulsion elsewhere; this was because a gallon of the bituminous emulsion might be spread over a surface varying from 5 to 20 square yards in practicing the patented process. Consequently, if the product purchased from others were used economically by the purchaser so as to cover 15 or 20 years of concrete, the license fee required would be so great that he could not afford to purchase the product from anyone other than the patentee. The Third Circuit said: "The contractor who does not purchase his emulsions through the Johnson-March Thompson middleman channel is faced with the economic anomaly that upon spreading his emulsions sparingly his cost is increased; thickly, the cost is reduced."
Dehydrators case
In Dehydrators, Ltd. v. Petrolite Corp., the owner of a process patent supplied an unpatented product called Tret-O-Lite Turkey Red Oil at a single price that combined a charge for the use of the process and a charge for the product supplied. The patentee ran afoul of the Leitch case, even though it had publicly offered to any persons who preferred to procure the unpatented product elsewhere the alternative of an unrestricted license to practice the process, upon payment of a royalty based on the difference between the cost of the unpatented product on the open market and the patentee's sale price for the same unpatented product. The court said:
If the appellee had been more interested in promoting or exploiting its patent than in selling its Tret-O-Lite it would have been a very simple matter to fix a royalty fee of so many cents per gallon whether purchased from the appellee or from outsiders. Indeed, no other course on the part of a patentee who is selling a commercial product to use in the patented process he owns would seem to quite meet the claim that the practice of combining the price of a royalty and of the product in the same unit without separation tends to promote a monopoly in the product if the patent monopoly is not waived.Dehydrators, 117 F.2d at 187.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States misuse law
Category:1938 in United States case law
"""

From "Leland v. Oregon" ==> """
Leland v. Oregon, 343 U.S. 790 (1952), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the constitutionality of placing the burden of persuasion on the defendant when they argue an insanity defense in a criminal trial.Bonnie, R.J. et al.  Criminal Law, Second Edition.  Foundation Press, New York, NY: 2004, p. 541 This differed from previous federal common law established in Davis v. United States, in which the court held that if the defense raised an insanity defense, the prosecution must prove sanity beyond a reasonable doubt, but Davis was not a United States constitutional ruling, so only limited federal cases, but not state cases.Criminal Law - Cases and Materials, 7th ed. 2012, Wolters Kluwer Law & Business; John Kaplan, Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder, ,  Oregon had a very high burden on defense, that insanity be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. At that time, twenty other states also placed the burden of persuasion on the defense for an insanity defense.
The defendant was convicted of killing a fifteen-year-old girl in Multnomah County. After being arrested for auto theft, the defendant asked for a homicide officer, verbally confessed to the murder, took the police to the scene of the crime, and signed a written confession. After being indicted, he then spoke to a lawyer for the first time.  At trial, a jury convicted him and recommended the death penalty.
Oregon law required the defendant required proof of insanity beyond a reasonable doubt. The case claimed that the "statute in effect requires a defendant pleading insanity to establish his innocence by disproving beyond a reasonable doubt elements of the crime necessary to a verdict of guilty, and that the statute is therefore violative of that due process of law secured by the Fourteenth Amendment."
 References 
External links
Category:United States criminal burden of proof case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1952 in United States case law
Category:Capital punishment in Oregon
Category:Multnomah County, Oregon
Category:Insanity-related case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "Lemon v. Kurtzman" ==> """
Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602 (1971), was a case argued before the Supreme Court of the United States.. The court ruled in an 8–0 decision that Pennsylvania's Nonpublic Elementary and Secondary Education Act (represented through David Kurtzman) from 1968 was unconstitutional and in an 8–1 decision that Rhode Island's 1969 Salary Supplement Act was unconstitutional, violating the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. The act allowed the Superintendent of Public Schools to reimburse private schools (mostly Catholic) for the salaries of teachers who taught in these private elementary schools from public textbooks and with public instructional materials. Lemon was a major precedent in federal and local courts until it was effectively overturned by Kennedy v. Bremerton School District in 2022.
Lemon test
The Court's decision in this case established the "Lemon test" (named after the lead plaintiff Alton Lemon), which details legislation concerning religion. It is threefold:
 The "Purpose Prong": The statute must have a secular legislative purpose.
 The "Effect Prong": The principal or primary effect of the statute must neither advance nor inhibit religion.
 The "Entanglement Prong": The statute must not result in an "excessive government entanglement" with religion. Factors to be considered include:
 The character and purpose of institution benefited.
 The nature of aid the state provides.
 The resulting relationship between government and religious authority.
If any of these prongs is violated, the government's action is deemed unconstitutional under the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. In the 1985 case Wallace v. Jaffree the Supreme Court further stated that the effect prong and the entanglement prong do not need to be examined, if the law in question doesn't have an obvious secular purpose. In Corporation of Presiding Bishop of Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints v. Amos (1987) the Supreme Court noted that the purpose prong's requirement of a secular legislative purpose doesn't mean that the law's purpose must be unrelated to religion, because this would amount to a requirement, in the words of Zorach v. Clauson, 343 U. S. 306 (1952), at 314, "that the government show a callous indifference to religious groups." Instead, "Lemon's 'purpose' requirement aims at preventing the relevant governmental decisionmaker – here, Congress – from abandoning neutrality and acting with the intent of promoting a particular point of view in religious matters." As observed by the Supreme Court in McCreary County v. American Civil Liberties Union (2005), "When the government acts with the ostensible and predominant purpose of advancing religion, it violates that central Establishment Clause value of official religious neutrality, there being no neutrality when the government’s ostensible object is to take sides." 
The act stipulated that "eligible teachers must teach only courses offered in the public schools, using only materials used in the public schools, and must agree not to teach courses in religion." Still, a three-judge panel found 25% of the State's elementary students attended private schools, about 95% of those attended Roman Catholic schools, and the sole beneficiaries under the act were 250 teachers at Roman Catholic schools.
The court found that the parochial school system was "an integral part of the religious mission of the Catholic Church", and held that the Act fostered "excessive entanglement" between government and religion, thus violating the Establishment Clause.
Agostini v. Felton modification
The Lemon test was modified, according to the First Amendment Center, in the 1997 case Agostini v. Felton in which the U.S. Supreme Court combined the effect prong and the entanglement prong. This resulted in an unchanged purpose prong and a modified effect prong. "The Court in Agostini identified three primary criteria for determining whether a government action has a primary effect of advancing religion: 1) government indoctrination, 2) defining the recipients of government benefits based on religion, and 3) excessive entanglement between government and religion."
Later use
Conservative justices, such as Clarence Thomas and Antonin Scalia, have criticized the application of the Lemon test.. The test was compared to a "ghoul in a late night horror movie" by Justice Scalia in Lamb's Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School District (1993). 
The Supreme Court itself has applied the Lemon test in Santa Fe Independent School Dist. v. Doe (2000),. while in McCreary County v. American Civil Liberties Union (2005) the court did not overturn the Lemon test, even though it was urged to do so by the petitioner..
The test was also central to Kitzmiller v. Dover, a 2005 intelligent design case before the United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania.
The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals applied the test in Int'l Refugee Assistance Project v. Trump (2017) upholding a preliminary injunction against President Donald Trump's executive order banning immigration from certain majority-Muslim countries.
In concurring opinions to The American Legion v. American Humanist Association (2019), some of the Court's more conservative justices heavily criticized the Lemon test. Justice Samuel Alito stated that the Lemon test had "shortcomings" and that "as Establishment Clause cases involving a great array of laws and practices came to the Court, it became more and more apparent that the Lemon test could not resolve them."Am. Legion v. Am. Humanist Ass'n, . See also:
 A "syllabus" 
 The Opinion from Alito ("[This pattern is a testament to the Lemon test's] "shortcomings"; "as Establishment Clause cases involving a great array of laws and practices came to the Court, it became more and more apparent that the Lemon test could not resolve them.") 
 The Concurrence from Gorsuch ("[Lemon was a] misadventure") 
 The Concurrence from Thomas ("[I] would take the logical next step and overrule the Lemon test in all contexts"; "the Lemon test is not good law.") 
 The Concurrence from Kagan ("Although I agree that rigid application of the Lemon test does not solve every Establishment Clause problem, I think that test’s focus on purposes and effects is crucial in evaluating government action in this sphere—as this very suit shows.")
 The Concurrence from Breyer 
 The Concurrence from Kavanaugh ("no longer applies the old test articulated in Lemon v. Kurtzman"; "the Court's decisions over the span of several decades demonstrate that the Lemon test is not good law and does not apply to Establishment Clause cases")  
 The Dissent from Ginsburg Justice Brett Kavanaugh noted that the Court "no longer applies the old test articulated in Lemon v. Kurtzman" and said that "the Court’s decisions over the span of several decades demonstrate that the Lemon test is not good law and does not apply to Establishment Clause cases." Although the Court did not overrule Lemon v. Kurtzman in American Legion v. American Humanist Association, Justice Thomas stated that he "would take the logical next step and overrule the Lemon test in all contexts" because "the Lemon test is not good law." Additionally, Justice Neil Gorsuch called Lemon v. Kurtzman a "misadventure" and claimed that it has now been "shelved" by the Court. Justice Elena Kagan, however, defended the Lemon test, stating that "although I agree that rigid application of the Lemon test does not solve every Establishment Clause problem, I think that test's focus on purposes and effects is crucial in evaluating government action in this sphere—as this very suit shows."
Kennedy v. Bremerton School District
Members of the Supreme Court have long criticized Lemon. In June 2022, the Supreme Court de facto overturned Lemon in Kennedy v. Bremerton School District. While Associate Justice Neil Gorsuch's majority opinion did not explicitly overturn Lemon, it instructed lower courts to disregard Lemon in favor of a new standard for evaluating religious actions in a public school. Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor's dissent, however, explicitly stated that Kennedy had overturned Lemon.Kennedy v. Bremerton School District p. 42
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 403
 Sherbert Test
 Endorsement test
 Lee v. Weisman (1992)
 Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District (M.D. Pa. 2005)
 Summers v. Adams (D.S.C. 2009)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States education case law
Category:Legal history of Pennsylvania
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:1971 in religion
Category:1971 in Pennsylvania
Category:1971 in education
Category:Legal tests
Category:Catholic schools in Pennsylvania
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Religious policy
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Leocal v. Ashcroft" ==> """
Leocal v. Ashcroft, 543 U.S. 1 (2004), held that aliens may not be deported after being convicted of DUI if the DUI statute that defines the offense does not contain a mens rea element or otherwise allows a conviction for merely negligent conduct.
Facts
Josue Leocal is a citizen of Haiti who has been a lawful permanent resident of the United States since 1987.  In 2000, he was convicted in Florida of driving under the influence (DUI).  Proceedings were then instituted to deport Leocal, and an immigration judge concluded that Leocal's DUI conviction constituted a "crime of violence" and hence an aggravated felony under the Immigration and Nationality Act.  Because of his conviction for an aggravated felony, Leocal was ordered deported in October 2001.  The Board of Immigration Appeals affirmed this decision, and Leocal sought review in the Eleventh Circuit.  In an unpublished opinion, the Eleventh Circuit concluded that the DUI conviction was an "aggravated felony," and hence it had no jurisdiction to review the lawfulness of the deportation order.  The U.S. Supreme Court agreed to review the case.
Opinion of the Court
Under the Immigration and Nationality Act, any alien convicted of an aggravated felony is deportable and may be deported upon an order of the Attorney General.  An "aggravated felony" includes any crime classified under federal law as a "crime of violence."  And a "crime of violence," in turn, is any crime that
In order to determine whether Leocal's DUI conviction qualified as a "crime of violence," the Court examined the elements of the statutory definition of the crime rather than the particular facts.
Under Florida law, it is a third-degree felony for any person to operate a vehicle under the influence and, "by reason of such operation, caus[e] ... [s]erious bodily injury to another."  This statute has no mens rea element—it does not require the defendant to have any particular level of intent to commit the crime.  In Florida, DUI does not entail the attempted or threatened use of physical force; if DUI is to qualify as a crime of violence, it must so qualify because it involves the use of physical force.  The "use" of physical force "most naturally suggests a higher degree of intent than negligent or merely accidental conduct."  Likewise, DUI does not entail a "substantial risk" that physical force will be used.  Furthermore, the fact that in another subsection of the Immigration and Nationality Act, Congress expressly distinguished between DUI crimes and "crimes of violence" bolstered the Court's conclusion that Florida's DUI statute was not a "crime of violence" because it did not require proof of any particular mental state, and thus criminalized merely negligent conduct.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 543
List of United States Supreme Court cases
External links
  Transcript of the oral argument
  Brief of Leocal as Petitioner
  Brief of the Government as Respondent
  Amicus brief of the ACLU
 Advice on applying Leocal from the American Immigration Law Foundation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Alcohol law in the United States
Category:Haiti–United States relations
"""

From "Leser v. Garnett" ==> """
Leser v. Garnett, 258 U.S. 130 (1922), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Nineteenth Amendment had been constitutionally established.. 
Prior history
On August 26, 1920, the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution was certified by Secretary of State Bainbridge Colby.  The amendment reads as follows:
Case
The Supreme Court granted certiorari to decide "Whether the Nineteenth Amendment has become part of the federal Constitution."  The plaintiffs disputed the constitutionality of the amendment through three claims:
 The power to amend the Constitution did not cover this amendment, due to its character.
 Several states that had ratified the amendment had constitutions that prohibited women from voting, rendering them unable to ratify an amendment to the contrary.
 The ratifications of Tennessee and West Virginia were invalid, because they were adopted without following the rules of legislative procedure in place in those states.
In a unanimous decision, written by Justice Louis Brandeis, the court addressed each objection in turn.
In response to the first objection, the court declared that since the Fifteenth Amendment had been accepted as valid for more than fifty years, and dealt with a similar matter (in this case, that voting rights could not be denied on account of race), it could not be argued that the new amendment was invalid due to its subject matter.
In response to the second objection, the court decided that when the state legislatures ratified the amendment, they were operating in a federal capacity as laid down in the Constitution, a role which "transcends any limitations sought to be imposed by the people of a state."
As far as the ratifications of Tennessee and West Virginia were concerned, the court remarked that the additional ratifications of Connecticut and Vermont after the proclamation of the amendment rendered the point moot, but the court also addressed the substance of the objection.  The court found that as the Secretary of State had accepted the ratifications by the legislatures of the two states as valid, they were valid, effectively ruling the matter as non-justiciable.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 258
References
External links
See photo .tiff files of all decisions as the case progressed through the courts:  http://msa.maryland.gov/megafile/msa/speccol/sc5300/sc5339/000041/000000/000012/unrestricted/021064.tif
Category:1922 in United States case law
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Nineteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Five case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
"""

From "Levinson v. United States" ==> """
Levinson v. United States, 258 U.S. 198 (1922), was a United States Supreme Court governing the sale by the United States Navy of the yacht USS Wadena (SP-158). The yacht, previously having been used by the Navy in World War I, was auctioned off after the war ended. Levinson and Johnson both submitted bids. Johnson's was the higher bid, but his bid was lost, inadvertently assigned to a different vessel. The Navy subsequently sold and delivered title to the yacht to Levinson. Johnson sued, and the Navy joined in the suit as a stakeholder, supporting Johnson's claim.
The U.S. District Court initially ruled in favor of Levinson. However, on appeal Second Circuit Court of Appeals reversed, removing the government from the suit, on the ground that it was not a party to the controversy, and awarded the yacht to Johnson. The Supreme Court reversed the court of appeals, holding that the district court had been correct on both issues: it was appropriate for the Navy to participate in the suit, and that Levinson should be awarded the boat.
 References 
External links
Category:United States federal case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1922 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Levy v. Louisiana" ==> """
Levy v. Louisiana, 391 U.S. 68 (1968), is a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States. This decision deals primarily with the civil rights of illegitimate children, specifically in regards to their ability to sue on a deceased parent's behalf. It held that the right of recovery may not be denied merely because a person is the illegitimate child of the deceased because such a law would violate the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Background
Louise Levy was the mother of five children, all of them born out of wedlock. She cared for the children herself, maintaining with them a relationship much like any other typical household. After alleged malpractice by Levy's doctor at the Charity Hospital of Louisiana at New Orleans, Louise Levy died. The appellant, on behalf of Levy's children, sought damages for Levy's wrongful death as well as damages for an unsettled case that Levy had not lived to see settled.
The Louisiana District Court dismissed the suit. On appeal, the Court of Appeals affirmed the dismissal, citing Louisiana statute defining a "child" for the purposes of damage recovery as a legitimate child. As the children were born outside of marriage, the courts deemed that they had no standing to sue on Levy's behalf. The Court of Appeals also defended its affirmation, claiming that the law was sound because it furthered the government interest of maintaining morals and general welfare by discouraging bearing children out of wedlock. The Supreme Court of Louisiana denied certiorari, and the case was finally appealed to the US Supreme Court on constitutional grounds. Specifically, the appellant claimed that the Louisiana law violated the Fourteenth Amendment and so was invalid.
Decision
The 6–3 decision in favor of Levy's children was delivered on Monday, May 20, 1968. Justice Douglas wrote the majority opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice Warren and Associate Justices Brennan, White, Fortas, and Marshall. The Court stated that the children involved in the case were clearly "persons" under the Fourteenth Amendment, which entitled them to its full protection.
The Court noted that while states enjoy substantial powers to make classifications, states are not permitted to classify in a way that constitutes "invidious discrimination against a particular class." The objective nature of the "invidious discrimination" test was not clearly outlined, but the Court stated that the classifications states made had to be at least rational.
The Court continued to note the deference historically given to the legislature regarding its ability to draft law. However, when basic civil rights are involved, the Court said that it freely struck down "invidious discrimination," even laws with "history and tradition on [their] side." One precedent cited was the decision the Court made in Brown v. Board of Education, a landmark case in American civil rights.
In the case at hand, the Court attacked the inappropriateness of the Louisiana statute and considered that the children's legitimacy had no bearing on their relationship to their mother. The statute was declared unconstitutional, and the decision of the lower courts was reversed.
Justice Harlan authored a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justices Black and Stewart. Harlan said that the Court had come to its conclusion "by a process that can only be described as brute force." He found two of the Court's arguments to be "frankly preposterous," and another to be "rather far-fetched." He concluded the Louisiana statute served a rational and constitutionally acceptable purpose: "If it be conceded, as I assume it is, that the State has power to provide that people who choose to live together should go through the formalities of marriage and, in default, that people who bear children should acknowledge them, it is logical to enforce these requirements by declaring that the general class of rights that are dependent upon family relationships shall be accorded only when the formalities as well as the biology of those relationships are present." "I could not understand why a State which base's the right to recover for wrongful death strictly on family relationships could not demand that those relationships be formalized."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 391
 Linda R. S. v. Richard D.: Supreme Court case involving child support for children born out of wedlock
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Medical malpractice
Category:Healthcare in New Orleans
Category:Legitimacy law
"""

From "Lewis v. Clarke" ==> """
Lewis v. Clarke, 581 U.S. ___ (2017), is a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled 8–0 that tribal sovereign immunity does not apply in a suit against a tribal employee in his individual capacity, and an indemnification provision cannot extend tribal sovereign immunity to cases in which it would otherwise not apply. Justice Sonia Sotomayor delivered the majority opinion. Justice Clarence Thomas and Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg each wrote concurring opinions that both said that tribal sovereign immunity does not apply in suits arising from commercial activity off of tribal territory. Justice Neil Gorsuch was not involved in the discussion or decision of this case.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2017 in United States case law
Category:United States tribal sovereign immunity case law
"""

From "Lewis v. Lewis & Clark Marine, Inc." ==> """
Lewis v. Lewis & Clark Marine, Inc., 531 U.S. 438 (2001), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States involving an injunction under the Limitation of Liability Act and whether a district court acted properly in dissolving it.
Background
In 1998, James F. Lewis, a deckhand aboard a ship owned by Lewis & Clark Marine, Inc., claimed that he was injured when he tripped over a wire on the boat. Lewis then sued Lewis & Clark in Illinois County Court, for personal injuries claiming negligence under the Jones Act. Lewis & Clark had already filed a complaint for exoneration from, or limitation of, liability in the District Court under the Limitation of Liability Act (Act). Subsequently, the court approved a surety bond of $450,000, representing Lewis & Clark's interest in the vessel, ordered that any claim related to the incident be filed with the court within a specified period, and enjoined the filing or prosecution of any suits related to the incident. The injunction prevented Lewis from litigating his personal injury claims in state court and he moved to dissolve it. Ultimately, the court dissolved the injunction. The Eight Circuit Court of Appeals reversed..
Opinion of the Court
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote the unanimous opinion of the Court which reversed the Eighth Circuit's decision.531 U.S. 438 at 449. The Court held that because state courts may adjudicate claims like Lewis' against vessel owners so long as the owner's right to seek limitation of liability is protected, the Court of Appeals erred in reversing the District Court's decision to dissolve the injunction. Writing for the Court, Justice O'Connor rejected the respondent's proposal to make "run of the mill personal injury actions involving vessels a matter of exclusive federal jurisdiction except where the claimant happens to seek a jury trial."531 U.S. 438 at 456.
See also
 Merchant Marine Act of 1920 (the "Jones Act")
 Personal injury
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:Maritime safety
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Lexecon Inc. v. Milberg Weiss Bershad Hynes & Lerach" ==> """
Lexecon Inc. v. Milberg Weiss Bershad Hynes & Lerach, 523 U.S. 26 (1998), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court unanimously held that a district court conducting coordinated pretrial proceedings in multiple cases by designation of the Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation under 28 U.S.C. § 1407(a) has no authority to reassign a transferred case to itself for the actual trial of the case. The Court's decision overturned numerous lower-court decisions upholding what had become a common practice in multi-district cases.
Background
The case originated when Lexecon Inc., a consulting firm that provided expert services to defense lawyers in securities cases, and Lexecon's principal, Daniel Fischel, sued the Milberg Weiss law firm in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois in Chicago. The suit alleged defamation and other torts arising from allegations that Milberg Weiss had made against Lexecon concerning Lexecon's work for lawyers representing Lincoln Savings Bank.
Many other lawsuits had been filed in federal courts arising from disputes involving the collapse of Lincoln Savings and Loan Association. The Judicial Panel for Multi-District Litigation had previously directed that all these cases be transferred to the United States District Court for the District of Arizona in Phoenix for coordinated pre-trial proceedings, pursuant to the multi-district litigation statute, 28 U.S.C. § 1407. While the case was pending in Phoenix, Milberg Weiss moved that the case be transferred to Phoenix for purposes of the trial itself. Lexecon objected, arguing that the statute allowed for only pre-trial proceedings, not the actual trial, to be held in the "transferee" district and that it was entitled to have the trial in its chosen forum of Chicago. 
The district judge in Phoenix, John Roll,
granted Milberg Weiss's motion to transfer the case to himself, relying on a series of decisions from courts around the country that had approved of such "self-transfers" by judges hearing multi-district actions. The case went to trial before a jury in Phoenix, which decided in Milberg Weiss's favor.
On appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, Lexecon challenged, among other things, the propriety of the District Court's transfer order. The Court of Appeals rejected the appeal and Lexecon then sought review by the Supreme Court. While Lexecon's petition for certiorari was pending, law professor Charles Alan Wright, a leading authority on federal civil practice and procedure, filed an unusual amicus curiae brief on his own behalf, supporting Lexecon's position and opining that the multi-district litigation statute had been misinterpreted to authorize "self-transfers" for more than twenty years. The Supreme Court agreed to hear the case.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion authored by Associate Justice David H. Souter, the Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit and held that under the multi-district litigation statute, the transfer of an action for coordinated multidistrict pretrial proceedings did not authorize the transferree judge to transfer the case to himself or herself for the actual trial. Rather, the statute requires that when all pretrial proceedings are completed, the action must be sent back ("remanded") for trial in the district where it was originally filed. Therefore, the jury trial of Lexecon's claims against Milberg Weiss should have taken place in Chicago rather than Phoenix, and the verdict rendered in Phoenix was invalid. 
The Court also rejected Milberg Weiss's argument that even if the jury trial had taken place in the wrong venue, this was a harmless error that should not result in reversal. The Court concluded that trying a case in the wrong district, over a party's express objection, was not harmless.
Justice Souter's opinion spoke for a unanimous Court, except that Justice Antonin Scalia did not join in a portion of the opinion that addressed the legislative history of Section 1407.
Aftermath
After the Supreme Court remanded the Lexecon case, it was transferred back to the Northern District of Illinois for trial. The case was retried before a jury in Chicago, which decided in favor of plaintiffs Lexecon and Fischel and awarded them $45 million in compensatory damages. The case then settled for a total of $50 million before the jury could decide whether to also award punitive damages.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:Savings and loan crisis
"""

From "Lexmark International, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc." ==> """
Lexmark International, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., is an American legal case involving the computer printer company Lexmark, which had designed an authentication system using a microcontroller so that only authorized toner cartridges could be used. The resulting litigation (described by Justice Scalia in 2014 as "sprawling",Supreme Court ruling, at fn. 2 and by others as having the potential to go on as long as Jarndyce v. Jarndyce) has resulted in significant decisions affecting United States intellectual property and trademark law.
In separate rulings in 2004 and 2012, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit ruled that:
 circumvention of Lexmark's ink cartridge authentication does not violate the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), and
 Static Control Components had standing basis under the Lanham Act to sue Lexmark for false advertising in relation to its promotion of the program, which was unanimously affirmed in 2014 by the Supreme Court of the United States.Lexmark International, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc.,  (March 25, 2014).
The Supreme Court's 2014 ruling also affects statutory interpretation in the area of standing in pursuing lawsuits on statutory grounds in a wide variety of areas in federal court.
Background
Lexmark is a large manufacturer of laser and inkjet printers,Circuit Court ruling, Page 2. and Static Control Components (SCC) is a company that makes "a wide range of technology products, including microchips that it sells to third-party companies for use in remanufactured toner cartridges."
In an effort to control and reduce the refilling and redistribution of toner cartridges, Lexmark began distributing two distinct varieties of its toner cartridges. Under its Prebate Program (now known as the Lexmark Return Program), through a shrinkwrap license, Lexmark sold certain printer cartridges at a discount (as much as $50 less)District Court ruling, Page 3. to customers who agreed to "use the cartridge only once and return it only to Lexmark for remanufacturing or recycling". Lexmark's "Non-Prebate" cartridges could be refilled by the user without restrictions and were sold without any discount.
Lexmark touted the Prebate Program as a benefit to the environment and to their customers, since it would allow customers to get cheaper cartridges, and the benefit to Lexmark was that it could keep empty cartridges out of the hands of competing rechargers. Many users purchased such cartridges under the stated conditions.
To enforce this agreement, Lexmark cartridges included a computer chip that included a 55-byte computer program (the "Toner Loading Program") which communicated with a "Printer Engine Program" built into the printer. The program calculated the amount of toner used during printing: when the calculations indicated that the original supply of Lexmark toner should be exhausted, the printer would stop functioning, even if the cartridge had been refilled.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 3. In addition, if the chip did not perform an encrypted authentication sequence, or if the Toner Loading Program on the chip did not have a checksum matching exactly a value stored elsewhere on the chip, the printer would not use the cartridge.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 4.
In 2002, SCC developed its own computer chip that would duplicate the 'handshake' used by the Lexmark chip, and that also included a verbatim copy of the Toner Loading Program, which SCC claimed was necessary to allow the printer to function. A Prebate cartridge could successfully be refilled if Lexmark's chip on the cartridge was replaced with the SCC chip. SCC began selling its "Smartek" chips to toner cartridge rechargers.
Copyright and DMCA claims: 2004 Circuit Court ruling
At the district court
On December 30, 2002, Lexmark sued SCC in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Kentucky. The suit claimed that SCC had:
 violated copyright law by copying the Toner Loading Program, and
 violated the DMCA by selling products that circumvented the encrypted authentication sequence between the Lexmark cartridge chip and the printer.
On March 3, 2003, Judge Karl S. Forester granted a preliminary injunction to Lexmark, blocking SCC from distributing its cartridge chips. The ruling was seen to be controversial.
On the copyright claim, the court found that:
 the use of the Toner Loading Program was indeed a likely copyright violation,District Court ruling, page 23. because the Toner Loading Program was not a "lock-out code" that SCC was entitled to copy under the DMCA,District Court ruling, page 7.District Court ruling, page 24. and because the Toner Loading Program could be rewritten in different ways (and therefore had enough creativity to qualify for copyright protection).District Court ruling, page 9.
 the Copyright Office's decision to grant copyright registration to the two programs showed that the programs were probably copyrightable.District Court ruling, page 11.
 because of the complexity of the authentication system, SCC could not have known that it could bypass the authentication without using Lexmark's copyrighted program; but it held that this did not matter because "Innocent infringement, however, is still infringement."District Court ruling, page 25.
 fair use did not apply.District Court ruling, page 28.
On the DMCA claims, the court found that the SCC microchip circumvented Lexmark's authentication sequence,District Court ruling, page 18.District Court ruling, page 42. and that the reverse engineering exception to the DMCA did not apply, because it only covers the independent creation of new programs that must interoperate with existing ones, and SCC did not create any new program.District Court ruling, page 47.
Appellate ruling
SCC appealed the district court's ruling to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals. As is usual for federal appeals in the United States, a three judge panel heard the appeal – for this matter, the panel consisted of appellate judges Gilbert S. Merritt and Jeffrey S. Sutton, and John Feikens (a district court judge temporarily assisting the appeals court). On October 26, 2004, the judges issued their ruling, in which all three judges wrote separate opinions.
Majority opinion
In the majority opinion, Judge Sutton (with Judge Merritt agreeing) reversed the lower court's ruling and vacated the temporary injunction, holding that Lexmark was unlikely to succeed in its case. The case was remanded to the district court for further proceedings consistent with the opinion.
On the copyright claim, the court noted that unlike patents, copyright protection cannot be applied to ideas, but only to particular, creative expressions of ideas.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 6. Distinguishing between an unprotectable idea and a protectable creative expression is difficult in the context of computer programs; even though it may be possible to express the same idea in many different programs, "practical realities"—hardware and software constraints, design standards, industry practices, etc.—may make different expressions impractical.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 7. "Lock-out" codes—codes that must be performed in a certain way in order to bypass a security system—are generally considered functional rather than creative, and thus unprotectable.
With these principles in mind, it was held that the district court had erred in three ways:
 It had held that the Toner Loading Program was copyrightable simply because it "could be written in a number of different ways", without considering the practical realities.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 9.
 Because of this mistaken standard, it had refused to consider whether or not the alternative Toner Loading Programs proposed by Lexmark were practical.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 10.
 It had concluded that the Toner Loading Program was not a "lock-out code", because it had not sufficiently considered how difficult it would be for SCC—without Lexmark's knowledge of the code's structure and purpose—to alter the code and still pass the printer's authentication mechanisms.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 11.
On the DMCA claims, the majority first considered Lexmark's claim that the SCC chip circumvented the access controls on the Printer Engine Program. It held that Lexmark's authentication sequence did not "control access" to the program; rather, the purchase of the printer itself allowed access to the program:
Likewise, the majority opinion held that anyone purchasing a printer and toner cartridge could read the Toner Loading Program from the printer; so SCC did not circumvent an access control on the Toner Loading Program either.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 18.
The court also rejected the district court's conclusion that the interoperability defense did not apply. Since SCC had offered testimony that its chips did indeed contain independently-created programs in addition to Lexmark's Toner Loading Program, the Toner Loading Program could be seen as necessary to allow interoperation between SCC's own programs and the Lexmark printer.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 19.
Concurring opinion
In a concurring opinion, Judge Merritt agreed with Judge Sutton on the outcome of this particular case, but also indicated that he would go farther:
He opined that even if the programs involved were more complex (and thus more deserving of copyright protection), the key question would be the purpose of the circumvention technology. Under his proposed framework, if a third party manufacturer's use of a circumvention technology was intended only to allow its products to interoperate with another manufacturer's—and not to gain any independent benefit from the functionality of the code being copied—then that circumvention would be permissible.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 21.
Concurring/dissenting opinion
Judge Feikens also wrote an opinion, agreeing with many of the majority opinion's results (though sometimes for different reasons), but disagreeing with its conclusion on the Toner Loading Program.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 23.
Concerning the copyrightability of the Toner Loading Program, he found that the record supported Lexmark's claim that the program could have been implemented in any number of ways, and therefore Lexmark's implementation was creative and copyrightable. Agreeing that the record was inadequate for the district court to conclude that the Toner Loading Program was a "lock-out code", he noted that Lexmark's expert had testified that the entire Toner Loading Program process could be turned off by flipping a single bit in the chip's code, and that it should have been possible for SCC to discover this; so copying the program may not have been practically necessary too.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 24.
On the DMCA counts, Feikens agreed that Lexmark had not established a violation with regards to the Toner Loading Program, but for a very different reason than that found by the majority opinion. He noted that SCC had testified that it had not even been aware that the Toner Loading Program existed; it had copied the data on the Lexmark printer chip (including the Toner Loading Program) purely in an attempt to bypass the protection on the Printer Engine Program. Since the DMCA requires that an infringer knowingly circumvent access controls on the protected program, SCC could not have knowingly circumvented protections on a program it did not know existed.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 30. With regards to the Printer Engine Program, he agreed with the majority opinion, but also noted in his belief that the consumer had acquired the rights to access this program by purchasing the printer, and therefore the DMCA would not apply to attempts to access it.Sixth Circuit opinion, page 31.
Request for a rehearing
Lexmark filed a request for the full Sixth Circuit to hear the case en banc. The Sixth Circuit rejected this request in February 2005.
Rule 13 of the United States Supreme Court Rules of Procedure requires the losing party in a case before a court of appeals to file a petition for a writ of certiorari within 90 days from the date the court of appeals enters its judgment, or from the date of the denial of a petition for rehearing in the court of appeals. The Sixth Circuit's judgment became final for all purposes when the 90-day period expired without Lexmark filing a cert petition.
Impact
The Sixth Circuit's decision is noteworthy for at least two reasons:
 All three judges took pains to emphasize in their opinions that the DMCA must be interpreted consistently with the broader public purposes of the copyright statute, rather than as a grant of new powers to makers of technology products to impose additional restrictions not contemplated by copyright.
 It represents a rare defeat for large printer manufacturers like Lexmark, Hewlett-Packard and Epson in their ongoing battle with third-party ink sellers.
Lexmark 2004 is also consistent with subsequent jurisprudence in the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in The Chamberlain Group, Inc. v. Skylink Technologies, Inc., and therefore emphasizes that the DMCA was intended to create a new type of liability  not a property right  over durable goods incorporating copyrighted material.
Trademark and false advertising: 2012 Circuit Court ruling
District Court
Before the Sixth Circuit's ruling, Static Control initiated a separate action in 2004 seeking declaratory judgment under federal copyright laws and the DMCA that its newly modified chips did not infringe Lexmark's copyrights, and Lexmark counterclaimed raising patent infringement, DMCA violations, and tort claims, and added three remanufacturers as third-party defendants.
On remand, Lexmark successfully moved to dismiss all of Static Control's counterclaims. During the course of the proceedings, the court ruled that:
 nine of Lexmark's mechanical patents were valid, but two of its design patents were invalid,R. 1008 (D. Ct. Order 4/24/07)
 summary judgment would be granted to Lexmark on its claims of direct patent infringement against three co-defendants,R. 1245 (D. Ct. Order 5/31/07) and
 Lexmark's single-use license for Prebate cartridges was valid, which prevented Lexmark's patents from exhausting following the initial sale of the Prebate toner cartridges to end users. However, this was subsequently modified by the judge later, after the United States Supreme Court's decision in Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc.2009 WL 891811, at *1
Therefore, the trial's issues consisted only of Lexmark's claim of induced patent infringement against Static Control and Static Control's defense of patent misuse. The district judge Gregory Frederick Van Tatenhove instructed the jury that its findings on patent misuse would be advisory; the jury held that Static Control did not induce patent infringement and advised that Lexmark misused its patents. Lexmark renewed its earlier request for a judgment as a matter of law and also filed a motion for a retrial on its patent inducement claim, both of which the district court denied. Both parties timely appealed.
The appellate ruling
In a unanimous ruling, the district court's findings were affirmed, except for its dismissal of Static Control's counterclaims under the Lanham Act and North Carolina state law. These were reversed and remanded for further consideration.
In particular, it was held:
 the 6th Circuit had jurisdiction to hear the appeal under  (as opposed to being referred to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit under ),
 the district court did not abuse its discretion in increasing the amount of the injunction bond entered during the preliminary injunction hearing,
 SCC's federal antitrust counterclaims under  §§ 4 and 16 of the Clayton Act for violations of §§ 1 and 2 of the Sherman Act failed for lack of standing, under the standard set in Associated Gen. Contractors of Cal., Inc. v. Cal. State Council of Carpenters ("AGC"),Associated Gen. Contractors of Cal., Inc. v. Cal. State Council of Carpenters ("AGC"), 
 SCC's counterclaim for false advertising under the Lanham Act is valid, as the 6th Circuit applies a "reasonable interest" standard to determine standing (in common with the 2nd Circuit, as opposed to the categorical test used in the Seventh, Ninth and Tenth Circuits, or the AGC approach used in the Third, Fifth, Eighth and Eleventh Circuits),
 SCC's counterclaim for unfair competition and false advertising under North Carolina's Unfair Deceptive Trade Practices ActN.C. Gen.Stat. §§ 75-1, et seq., analyzed in  is valid under state law, as determined by the North Carolina Court of Appeals, 473 S.E.2d 680, 681-82, rev. denied, 344 N.C. 734, 478 S.E.2d 5 (1996)
Impact
The ruling also let stand the district court's ruling of the impact of Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc. on the exhaustion doctrine in the area of patent law. By finding that the sale of patented goods, even when subject to valid license restrictions, exhausts patent rights, it essentially gives Quanta a broad interpretation, which threatens to render unenforceable through patent law differential licensing schemes that attempt to distinguish separate fields of use for a patented item. However, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit's ruling in Lexmark Int'l, Inc. v. Impression Prods., Inc. reopened the issue. The Court held that after the sale of a patented item, the patent holder cannot sue for patent infringement relating to further use of that item, even when in violation of a contract with a customer or imported from outside the United States.
Scope of federal statutory torts: 2014 ruling at the Supreme Court
Appeal of the 2012 ruling
The Circuit Court's ruling with respect to standing under the Lanham Act was appealed by Lexmark to the Supreme Court of the United States, on which certiorari was granted on June 3, 2013. The case was heard on December 3, 2013, and the question presented to the Court was:
Lexmark argued in favour of the AGC test, while SCC argued that the appropriate test should actually be that of the "zone of interests" protected by the statuteBennett v. Spear, , 162-163 that has been applied in cases involving the Administrative Procedure Act, the Endangered Species Act, and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act. At the hearing, it appeared that Lexmark's submission received more intensive examination than SCC's.
Decision
On March 25, 2014, the US Supreme Court unanimously affirmed the Sixth Circuit's holding that Static Control did have standing to sue under the Lanham Act.
The Court developed a new test for assessing standing in false advertising, rejecting the existing tests, including the Sixth Circuit's "reasonable interest test". In that regard, the approach adopted by Scalia J. consists of several steps:
Under Article III, the plaintiff must have suffered or be imminently threatened with a concrete and particularized "injury in fact" that is fairly traceable to the challenged action of the defendant and likely to be redressed by a favorable judicial decision.Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, , at 560
AGC requires the ascertainment, as a matter of statutory interpretation, of the "scope of the private remedy created by" Congress, and the "class of persons who [could] maintain a private damages action under" a legislatively conferred cause of action.
A statutory cause of action extends only to plaintiffs whose interests "fall within the zone of interests protected by the law invoked,"Allen v. Wright, , at 751 and the "zone of interests" formulation applies to all statutorily created causes of action, as it is a "requirement of general application" and Congress is presumed to "legislat[e] against the background of" it, "which applies unless it is expressly negated."
A statutory cause of action is also presumed to be limited to plaintiffs whose injuries are proximately caused by violations of the statute.Holmes v. Securities Investor Protection Corporation, , at 268270 A plaintiff suing under §1125(a) ordinarily must show that its economic or reputational injury flows directly from the deception wrought by the defendant's advertising; and that occurs when deception of consumers causes them to withhold trade from the plaintiff.
Direct application of the zone-of-interests test and the proximate-cause requirement supplies the relevant limits on who may sue under §1125(a).
In discussing the scope of proximate cause, Scalia noted:
The previous tests adopted by the various Circuit Courts were dismissed as being problematical on several grounds:
 Test Circuits in which adopted  Advocated by  DeficiencyMultifactor balancing test ("AGC")3rd, 5th, 8th and 11thLexmarkExperience has shown that open-ended balancing tests can yield unpredictable and at times arbitrary results.Direct-competitor test7th, 9th and 10thLexmark, in the alternativeProvides a bright-line rule; but it does so at the expense of distorting the statutory language.Reasonable interests test2nd and 6thSeveral amiciA purely practical objection to the test is that it lends itself to widely divergent application. The relevant question is not whether the plaintiff's interest is "reasonable," but whether it is one the Lanham Act protects; and not whether there is a "reasonable basis" for the plaintiff's claim of harm, but whether the harm alleged is proximately tied to the defendant's conduct.
Impact
The Court's ruling was described as being "a tour de force treatment of statutory standing," and being "certain to earn reprinting in casebooks and citations in briefs for decades to come." It was seen to have greater scope than what was directly related to the case at hand:
 it was noted as being unusual for the current Court to open the door to more lawsuits
 the Court has rejected a notable body of existing doctrine relating to standing
 the Court also took the unusual step of rejecting all Circuit Court interpretations on the question through substituting its own take on the matter
 the new standard does not define standing requirements as narrowly as some circuits did, but by adding the proximate causation test, it may ultimately make it more difficult for plaintiffs to show standing
 the Court's focus on statutory purposes and their implication for what a statute authorizes, rather than so-called "prudential" considerations, may limit standing and shift the debate over who can sue under a wide variety of federal laws
See also
Impression Prods., Inc. v. Lexmark Int'l, Inc.: similar ink cartridge case
Chamberlain v. Skylink, another copyright case posing similar DMCA questions
Sega v. Accolade, a copyright case involving interoperability issues with unlicensed Sega Genesis games.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit cases
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:Digital Millennium Copyright Act case law
Category:False advertising law
Category:Consumer protection case law
Category:United States trademark case law
Category:United States competition law
Category:Lexmark
Category:Computer printing
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Liberty Oil Co. v. Condon National Bank" ==> """
Liberty Oil Co. v. Condon National Bank, 260 U.S. 235 (1922), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States dealing with civil procedure and the nature of taking an appeal from the United States District Court.
Factual and procedural background
Liberty Oil Company, a corporation organized under the laws of Virginia contracted to purchase 160 acres, more or less, of oil lands in Butler County, Kansas, for $1,150,000 from the Atlas Petroleum Company of Oklahoma, C. M. Ball, Isadore Litman, P. G. Keith, and J. H. Keith, residents of Kansas. Pursuant to the contract Liberty Oil Company deposited $100,000 in escrow with the Condon National Bank pursuant to the contract. The escrow was pursuant the term of the contract requiring that the vendors furnish an abstract of title to the property showing a good and marketable title in them. Liberty Oil Co. has seven days to review the abstract of title and if it showed good and marketable title Liberty Oil Co. was to pay the remainder of the purchase price and receive the deeds and possession of the land. If the examination showed a good and marketable title, and the vendee should refuse to pay the money then due from it, the $100,000 was to be delivered to the vendors as liquidated damages. In the event that the examination should disclose that the title was not good and marketable, the Liberty Oil was to notify the vendors, and they were to have 30 days in which to perfect the title, and, should they neglect in that time to do so, the $100,000 on deposit was to be returned to the Liberty Oil. In either case the contract was to become null and void. Liberty Oil claims abstract showed that the title of the vendors was not good and marketable, in that in the chain of title the vendors claimed under the deed of an assignee for the benefit of creditors filed in a Colorado court, but never authorized or confirmed by a court of competent jurisdiction under the laws of Kansas, as required by the law of Kansas, that this defect was not remedied by the vendors within the time required.  On July 11, 1918, the plaintiff duly notified Condon National Bank of this and demanded payment of the money deposited. The vendors also demanded the payment of the money deposited. The bank did not pay either.
Liberty Oil brought an action at law against Condon National Bank in the United States District Court for the District of Kansas for the money deposited plus interest. The bank answered admitting the facts alleged except the character of the title.  The bank asked that be discharged from liability in a defensive interpleader  since:
 it claimed no interest in the deposit, 
 offered to pay the sum into court or to such person as the court orders  
 asked the vendors be made parties and required to set up their claim to the deposit
 asked the court make an order as to the disposition of the money, and discharged the bank it be from all liability in connection with the deposit.
The court granted the banks request and the vendors voluntarily appeared, answered, and cross petitioned for the deposits and payment of the purchase price. A jury trial was waived. The court tried the matter and found in a general verdict for the vendors, awarding them the deposit with interest.
Liberty Oil appealed to the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals claiming the court incorrectly decided the issue of the vendors having good and marketable title. The record of appeal was prepared as either bill of exceptions for writ of error from an action at law or a transcript for an appeal from a suit in equity. The Court of Appeals held that the case was reviewed by writ of error and since the bill of exceptions showed no special findings of fact but only a general finding in a case at law tried without a jury, it lacked power to rule as to the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the finding so sustained the verdict. Liberty Oil appealed by certiorari to the United States Supreme Court.
 Holding of United States Supreme Court 
Court held that a defensive interpleader was an equitable defense authorized in an action at law by Judicial Code § 274b added by . An equitable defense should be transferred from the law side of the court to the equity side of the court under Judicial Code § 274a added by  and tried before the legal action and that there was no  constitutional right to a jury trial in interpleader. These statues were a step on the way to merger of law and equity but not as fully as in the states with a code of procedures by creating one form of action.
Judicial Code § 269, as amended  , appellate courts are to give judgment after an examination of the record without regard to technical errors, defects, or exceptions which do not affect the substantial rights of the parties, and Judicial Code § 274b,  provides whether the review is sought by writ of error or appeal, the appellate court is given to render such judgment upon the record as law and justice shall require. It follows that the court should have considered the issue of law and fact upon which the decree of the district court depended whether there was a good and marketable title. The Supreme Court could have determined the issue of whether there was good and marketable title but did not because the case was not of sufficient public interest to justify that, the case was remanded to the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals.
Subsequent history
The case was determined on remand by the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals at 291 F. 293 in 1923.
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 260
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
 [ Official Website of the Supreme Court of the United States]
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:1922 in United States case law
Category:Equitable defenses
Category:United States appellate procedure
Category:Butler County, Kansas
"""

From "Life Technologies Corp. v. Promega Corp." ==> """
Life Technologies Corp. v. Promega Corp., 580 U.S. ___ (2017), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court clarified the application of the Patent Act of 1952 to the sale of components of patented inventions in foreign markets., slip. op. at 1. In an opinion written by Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor, the Court held that the sale of a "single component" in a foreign market "does not constitute a substantial portion of the components that can give rise to liability under [the Patent Act of 1952]."Life Technologies Corp., slip op. at 1, 11 (citing ). Justice Samuel Alito wrote an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment, in which he was joined Justice Clarence Thomas.Life Technologies Corp., slip op. at 1 (Alito, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment). Chief Justice John Roberts took no part in the decision of the case.Life Technologies Corp., slip op. at 11.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2017 in United States case law
"""

From "Lightfoot v. Cendant Mortgage Corp." ==> """
Lightfoot v. Cendant Mortgage Corp., 580 U.S. ___ (2017), was a United States Supreme Court case that clarified whether Fannie Mae can be sued in state courts.Lightfoot v. Cendant Mortgage Corp., No. 14-1055, 580 U.S. ___ (2016), slip. op. at 1. In a unanimous opinion written by Justice Sonia Sotomayor, the Court held that plaintiffs may file lawsuits against Fannie Mae in any state or federal court that is "already endowed with subject-matter jurisdiction over the suit."Lightfoot, slip. op. at 10.
Background
The case arose when two mortgage borrowers filed a lawsuit in state court, which alleged deficiencies in the foreclosure and sale of their home.Lightfoot, slip. op. at 4. Relying upon a federal law that granted Fannie Mae the right "to sue and to be sued, and to complain and to defend, in any court of competent jurisdiction, State or Federal" (the "sue-and-be-sued clause"), Fannie Mae filed a motion to remove the case to federal court.Lightfoot, slip. op. at 1, 4 (citing 12 U.S.C. §1723a(a)). The district court denied the motion, but on appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held that Fannie Mae's sue-and-be-sued clause "confers jurisdiction on the federal courts."Lightfoot, slip. op. at 4-5. District Judge Sidney H. Stein, sitting by designation, dissented, concluding that the sue-and-be-sued clause required an independent source for jurisdiction in cases involving Fannie Mae.Lightfoot, slip. op. at 5. In light of a circuit split on this issue, the Supreme Court granted certiorari in 2016.Lightfoot, slip. op. at 5-6.
Opinion of the Court
In a unanimous opinion written by Justice Sonia Sotomayor, the Court reversed the Ninth Circuit's ruling and rejected Fannie Mae's assertion that it could automatically remove any case to a federal court.Lightfoot, slip. op. at 6, 16. After reviewing other party-specific sue-and-be-sued clauses, Justice Sotomayor stated that the phrase "court of competent jurisdiction" allowed any court with "an existing source of subject-matter jurisdiction" to hear cases against Fannie Mae.Lightfoot, slip. op. at 9 (citing Ex parte Phenix Ins. Co., ). Consequently, Justice Sotomayor held that federal law "permits suit in any state or federal court already endowed with subject-matter jurisdiction over the suit."Lightfoot, slip. op. at 10.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2017 in United States case law
Category:Foreclosure
Category:Subprime mortgage crisis
Category:United States federal jurisdiction case law
Category:Fannie Mae
"""

From "Limtiaco v. Camacho" ==> """
Limtiaco v. Camacho (2007), 549 U.S. 483, is a case of the United States Supreme Court which handled a complex taxation dispute between two Guamanian politicians—Douglas B. Moylan, Guam's first elected Attorney General, and Felix P. Camacho, then-Governor of Guam—involving the proper interpretation of the Guam Organic Act. Guam, an unincorporated territory of the United States, is governed by this Organic Act, a United States federal law passed in 1950; much case law in the territory is based on its interpretation.
The case focused on a seemingly narrow issue: whether for the purposes of the debt ceiling established in §11 of the Guam Organic Act—ten percent of the value of real property in Guam—the real (market) value or tax (assessed) value was to be used to calculate the ceiling. Moylan argued that one must use the tax value (a considerably smaller number, as public buildings had a tax valuation of US$0), while Camacho argued the appraisal value must be used instead.
In a 5–4 ruling, the Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Guam Supreme Court, finding for the Office of the Attorney General of Guam. While the case was originally brought by Moylan to promote fiscal conservatism, ironically, when it reached the Supreme Court of the United States, the minority remarked in its dissent that actually the Government of Guam could, sua sponte, sidestep the debt ceiling by doubling the assessed value of property while halving the tax rate of that same property in one Public Law, entirely contrary to Moylan's stated goals of enforcing federal sovereignty in the unincorporated territory. While the Court found this outcome unlikely, it was put into practice by Guam's government soon after the case was decided; by 2009, Guam had done so twice. 
__TOC__
 Background 
Felix Perez Camacho was elected as the seventh Governor of Guam in 2003. Desiring to raise funds, he wished to issue bonds to investors backed by the Guamanian government, a common practice internationally. 
To issue the bonds, which had been approved by the unicameral Guam Legislature in Public Law 27-19, Camacho, a Republican, required the signature of Douglas Moylan, the then-Attorney General of Guam. Despite being in Camacho's party, as a fiscal conservative, Moylan did not wish to see that Guam take on more debt, and so refused to sign off on the bonds; Guamanian law requires that the Attorney General clear bond issuances as legal.Title 5 GCA § 22601, Guam Code Annotated Camacho filed suit against Moylan for his refusal—Moylan was Guam's first elected attorney general, and so could not be removed by the Governor from office as he could do with any other member of his Cabinet.
Moylan argued that the issuance was illegal as the Guam Organic Act includes within its text the following provision, limiting the amount of outstanding Guamanian bonds that can exist at any one time:
The money from the bonds was intended to have funded, among other things: liabilities of the Guam Memorial Hospital; payment of fines due the Environmental Protection Agency due to the hazard posed by the Ordot Landfill and its cleanup (this issue would later lead to Guam v. United States); and handling the fallout of the previous year's Typhoon Pongsona (a category 4 typhoon which knocked out all electricity in Guam for several weeks).
 Case history 
thumb|right|Camacho v. Moylan (2003 Guam 16)
 In the Supreme Court of Guam 
The case began on 1 July 2003 in the Supreme Court of Guam, where it received the full title In re: request of Governor Felix P. Camacho relative to the interpretation and application of section 11 of the Organic Act of Guam.Governor Felix P. Camacho v. Douglas Moylan, Office of the Attorney General in re: request of Governor Felix P. Camacho relative to the interpretation and application of section 11 of the Organic Act of Guam (2003 Guam 16), Supreme Court of Guam Case No. CRQ03-001 Camacho requested a declaratory judgment from the Court without suing Moylan directly—a declaration that the bonds were in fact legal to issue and Moylan must therefore assent to their indenture. Moylan thereafter became a party in interest to the lawsuit at his request. Argument was heard only eight days later, on 9 July 2003.Limtiaco v. Camacho, Petition for a Writ of Certiorari (2006)
On July 23, in an opinion penned by Chief Justice F. Philip Carbullido, the Court ruled for Camacho, dismissing Moylan's concern, and declared the issuance of the bonds legal.
Moylan appealed in a writ of certiorari to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit on 8 August 2003.Douglas B. Moylan, Attorney General of Guam v. Felix P. Camacho, Governor of Guam, 9th Cir. 2006, Appeal No. 03-72836
 In the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 
On 23 October 2003, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit accepted the appeal, titling the case Moylan v. Camacho. Oral argument was heard before the Ninth Circuit at the James R. Browning United States Court of Appeals Building in Honolulu, Hawaii on 6 May 2004.
 In the Congress of the United States 
While the case was pending a decision, the United States Congress amended the Guam Organic Act. However, Congress did not clarify the meaning of the statute in §11. Instead, it stripped the appellate jurisdiction that the Ninth Circuit previously had over cases originating in the Guam Supreme Court; all such cases now could only be appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States.48 U.S.C. § 1424–2; 108th Congress of the United States; Public Law 108–378 Congress, however, failed to clarify what it intended to happen when cases had already been submitted to and argued before the justices of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. Among the affected cases was Moylan v. Camacho.
 Santos v. Guam 
thumb|Santos v. Guam (9th Cir. 2006)
Facing an unusual jurisdictional question, the Ninth Circuit decided to consolidate Moylan with an unrelated appeal, Anthony Duenas Santos v. The People of the Territory of Guam, for the purposes of determining whether it still had jurisdiction; Santos v. Guam faced the exact same jurisdictional question as Moylan v. Camacho, but was originally argued before the Ninth Circuit a week prior, on 30 April 2004 in Saipan, Northern Mariana Islands.Anthony Duenas Santos v. The People of the Territory of Guam, 9th Cir. 2006, Appeal No. 03-70472
Upon a motion to expedite filed by Camacho on 8 December 2004, the Ninth Circuit's Judge Jerome Farris entered an order in Moylan on 15 December directing the parties to wait until it had ruled on Santos.
In Santos, the Ninth Circuit eventually ruled it lacked jurisdiction on 3 January 2006. Relying on that precedent, on 6 March 2006, the Ninth Circuit dismissed Moylan as well, citing its lack of jurisdiction.
 In the Supreme Court of the United States 
Originally titled Moylan v. Camacho when it was scheduled,Argument Calendar, October Term 2006, Supreme Court of the United States due to the end of Moylan's term in December 2006, the Court would substitute the then-current AG of Guam in his place, Alicia G. Limtiaco, titling the case Limtiaco v. Camacho by the time it was argued.
The Supreme Court case is officially on a writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court of Guam, despite much more than ninety days elapsing between the decision by that Court and the filing of the writ.
 Decision 
On 27 March 2007, more than four years after the initial events in Guam, the Supreme Court ruled for Moylan, reversing and remanding the case to the Supreme Court of Guam. On the question of whether it had jurisdiction, the Court was unanimous; ruling that while there is a ninety day period for the filing of writs of certiorari in 28 U.S.C. § 2101, extendable by sixty days upon the consent of the Court and application of one of the parties, the clock started when the Ninth Circuit dismissed Moylan v. Camacho and not when the Supreme Court of Guam ruled on the case due to the unusual jurisdictional circumstances of the case.
However, on the question of the meaning of §11 of the Guam Organic Act, the Court split 5–4. Writing for the majority, Justice Clarence Thomas, joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Scalia, Kennedy, and Breyer, upheld Moylan's understanding of §11, dismissing concerns that it would lead to the debt ceiling in the statute passed by Congress becoming a statute without a purpose. The ruling of the Court was "almost exclusively semantic [and] textualist" in nature, setting aside the intentions of Congress for the lexical definitions of the words of the statute themselves, even if such interpretation could create a pointless statute in the right circumstances.
In his dissent, Justice David Souter, joined by Justices Stevens, Ginsburg, and Alito, argued that the Court's lack of interest in the intent of Congress would doom the debt ceiling statute to irrelevance and effectively erase it. To rule that the "tax value" is the assessed value of property would put the final decision on the amount of the debt ceiling in the hands of the Guam Legislature, making the whole federal statute trying to impose a Congressional limit on Guamanian debt "serve no purpose". The majority answered these criticisms by writing that "most States have long based their debt limitations on assessed value without incident".Limtiaco v. Camacho, Opinion of Thomas, J. (2007)
 Aftermath 
While the case was originally brought by Moylan to promote fiscal conservatism, ironically, when it reached the Supreme Court of the United States, the minority remarked in its dissent that actually the Government of Guam could, sua sponte, sidestep the debt ceiling by doubling the assessed value of property while halving the tax rate of that same property in one Public Law, entirely contrary to Moylan's stated goals of enforcing federal sovereignty in the unincorporated territory. While the Court found this outcome unlikely, it was put into practice twice by Guam's government in the aftermath of the case.
On 29 September 2007, Guam increased the tax assessment on real property from 35% to 70%, while halving its land tax rate to % and % respectively.Public Law 29-19 (2007), Guam Legislature On 11 May 2009, Camacho signed a nearly identical provision into law, increasing the assessment to 90% while reducing the taxes to % and % respectively.Public Law 30-7 (2009), Guam Legislature
 Notes 
 Further reading 
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:2007 in Guam
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Linda R. S. v. Richard D." ==> """
Linda R. S. v. Richard D., 410 U.S. 614 (1973), was a United States Supreme Court case resulting in a ruling that a particular section of a Texas Penal Code did not apply to mothers with out-of-wedlock children. The case was argued on December 6, 1972 and decided on March 5, 1973.. Linda R. S., the petitioner and appellant, was the mother of the out of wedlock child. Richard D., the respondent and appellee, was the father of the out of wedlock child.
Facts
Linda R. S., the mother of an out of wedlock child, brought an action to enjoin the "discriminatory application" of Art. 602 of the Texas Penal Code, providing that any "parent" who fails to support his "children" is subject to prosecution but by state judicial construction applies only to married parents. Linda R. S. sought to enjoin the local district attorney from refraining to prosecute the father of her child for not providing child support. The three-judge District Court dismissed the action for lack of standing.
Decision
The Supreme Court affirmed the District Court's holding in a 5–4 decision. Justice Thurgood Marshall wrote the majority opinion, joined by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger and Justices Lewis F. Powell, Jr., Potter Stewart, and William Rehnquist. The Court held that "although appellant has an interest in her child's support, application of Art. 602 would not result in support but only in the father's incarceration, and a private citizen lacks a judicially cognizable interest in the prosecution or nonprosecution of another." In December 1981, in Leeke v. Timmerman, the Supreme Court affirmed the precedent in Linda R. S. v. Richard D..
 Justice White's dissent 
Justice White, with Justice Douglas joining, wrote that "children born out of wedlock ... have been excluded intentionally from the class of persons protected by a particular criminal law. They do not get the protection of the laws that other women and children get. Under Art. 602, they are rendered nonpersons; a father may ignore them with full knowledge that he will be subjected to no penal sanctions."
 Justice Blackmun's dissent 
Justice Blackmun, with Justice Brennan joining, saw "no reason to decide that question in the absence of a live, ongoing controversy because of Gomez v. Perez, 409 U.S. 535 (1973)."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 410
 Levy v. Louisiana: Supreme Court case involving malpractice by children out of wedlock
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:Legitimacy law
Category:Legal history of Texas
Category:Child support
"""

From "Linder v. United States" ==> """
Linder v. United States, 268 U.S. 5 (1925), is a Supreme Court case involving the applicability of the Harrison Act. The Harrison Act was originally a taxing measure on drugs such as morphine and cocaine, but it later effectively became a prohibition on such drugs. However, the Act had a provision exempting doctors prescribing the drugs. Dr. Charles O. Linder of Spokane, Washington prescribed the drugs to addicts, which the federal government said was not a legitimate medical practice. He was prosecuted and convicted. Linder appealed, and the Supreme Court unanimously overturned his conviction, holding that the federal government overstepped its power to regulate medicine. The opinion of the court was written by Justice James Clark McReynolds and states, "Obviously, direct control of medical practice in the states is beyond the power of the federal government.".
 Current implication 
With the passage of myriad later laws, including the Controlled Substance Act which gives no exemption whatsoever to Schedule I drugs, and the end of Lochner era, the holding of Linder has now been mostly vitiated. However, the rationale of the case was later used to stop the Department of Justice from interfering with Oregon's assisted suicide laws in the case Gonzales v. Oregon, and the concurring opinion in Ruan v. United States noted that Linder has never been overturned and would apply the rule to that case.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 268
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:1925 in United States case law
Category:History of Spokane, Washington
"""

From "Lindh v. Murphy" ==> """
Lindh v. Murphy, 521 U.S. 320 (1997), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996's amendments to Title 28, Section 2254 of the United States Code applies to cases filed after the Act's effective date.. The amendments "do not apply to pending noncapital cases such as Lindh's."
In his dissent, Chief Justice William Rehnquist argues that "in light of the whole of our retroactivity jurisprudence," pending cases should be subject to the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996's amendments.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1996 in United States case law
"""

From "Lindsey v. Miller" ==> """
Lindsey v. Miller, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 411 (1799), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that: "The fact that the land demanded in a suit was granted by and is claimed under a State, does not make the State a party to the suit, within the meaning of the second section of the third article of the constitution. Nor does an issue upon the point whether the land demanded is within the limits of the State.
A certiorari does not issue to remove a cause, on account of want of jurisdiction in the court in which it is pending."Reports of decisions in the Supreme Court of the United States: with notes, and a digest, Volume 1 (Little, Brown, and Co., 1870) pg. 291 https://books.google.com/books?id=NEQPAAAAYAAJ
Background
The state of Virginia issued patents or deeds for land north of the Ohio River. After the deeds were issued, Virginia ceded that territory to the federal government which subsequently organized the area as the Northwest Territory and, later, as the State of Ohio. The case resolved around Virginia's standing to protect those deeds.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
Category:United States property case law
Category:1799 in United States case law
Category:Borders of Virginia
Category:Borders of Ohio
Category:Northwest Territory
Category:1799 in the Northwest Territory
"""

From "Lingle v. Chevron U.S.A. Inc." ==> """
Lingle v. Chevron U.S.A. Inc., 544 U.S. 528 (2005),.  was a landmark case in United States regulatory takings law whereby the Court expressly overruled precedent created in Agins v. City of Tiburon.. Agins held that a government regulation of private property effects a taking if such regulation does not substantially advance legitimate state interests. Writing for the Court, Justice O’Connor found the test untenable for a number of reasons, but declined to grant Chevron relief because Chevron’s motion before the court (for grant of summary judgment) was limited to a discussion of the “substantially advances” theory which had just been struck down. The Court remanded to the Ninth Circuit for a determination of whether the statute exacted a taking according to the formula of Penn Central..
 Facts 
Because of the distance from the continental United States and the logistical difficulties presented by the numerous islands that make up the state of Hawaii, only two oil refineries and six wholesale distributors were doing business in Hawaii, thus creating an oligopoly of gas providers. Chevron, USA was the largest refiner and marketer of gasoline in Hawaii controlling 60% of the market for gasoline produced or refined in-state and 30% of the wholesale market on Oahu, Hawaii’s most populous island.Lingle, 544 U.S. at 531. 
Half of all of retail service stations in Hawaii are leased from oil companies by independent lessee-dealers, some are owned by the oil companies, and some are owned by dealers who are not affiliated with any specific refinery. Chevron sells most of its products through the independent-lessee program, whereby Chevron charges the lessee  a monthly rent (a percentage of the margin on sales) and requires the lessee to enter into an outputs contract, whereby the Chevron supplies the lessee with all gasoline products.
In 1997, in response to concerns about the effects of concentration of retail service stations and the market implications, the Hawaii Legislature enacted Act 257, restricting, among other things, the amount of rent that an oil company can charge their dealer-lessee to 15% of the dealer’s gross profits from sales, plus an additional 15% of gross sales of other products.
Chevron sued the State in the United States District Court of the District of Hawaii, claimed that the statute’s rent cap effected a taking of Chevron’s property in violation of the 5th and 14th Amendments.
 Decision 
The Fifth Amendment provides that “private property shall not be taken for public use, without just compensation.” It is made applicable to the states through the 14th Amendment. With regard to takings claims asserted as a result of government regulation (regulatory takings), the general rule is that “if a regulation goes too far it will be recognized as a taking.”. As is generally the case, the Court has been searching for exactly when a regulation goes “too far.” The Court has recognized two categories of regulatory takings that are considered per se takings: where the regulation amounts to a permanent physical invasion of private property, and second, where the regulation deprives a property owner of all economically beneficial uses of their property.See ; .  
When a regulation falls short of an entire deprivation of economic use or a permanent physical invasion, the Court has struggled to provide meaningful standards for determining when a regulation has effected a taking. In Agins v. City of Tiburon (1980), the Court declared that government regulation of private property effects a taking if it does not substantially advance legitimate state interests. In the majority opinion in Lingle, Justice O’Connor determined that the Agins test is no longer appropriate for determining whether a taking has occurred (it’s seen more as a due process inquiry than a takings inquiry). In its place, an aggrieved party must assert either a physical taking, a Lucas-type “total deprivation” regulation, a Penn Central-style taking, or a land-use exaction that acts as a taking.See, e.g. ; .
In a concurring opinion, Justice Kennedy wrote separately to emphasize that the Court's decision did not foreclose Chevron's chances of prevailing on a due process claim. Justice Kennedy indicated that, on his view, a regulation of private property could perhaps be so arbitrary or irrational that it violated Constitutional guarantees of due process. This short concurrence seemed to indicate some openness on Justice Kennedy's part to substantive due process claims in the takings context.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States land use case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:Legal history of Hawaii
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:Energy in Hawaii
Category:Chevron Corporation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Linmark Associates, Inc. v. Township of Willingboro" ==> """
Linmark Associates, Inc. v. Township of Willingboro, 431 U.S. 85 (1977), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States found that an ordinance prohibiting the posting of "for sale" and "sold" signs on real estate within the town violated the First Amendment to the United States Constitution protections for commercial speech..
 Background 
Willingboro Township, New Jersey, had been experiencing a shift in its demographics during the 1960s as the proportion of its non-white population increased from less than 1% to 18.2% in 1973. Concerned that white flight might occur, it enacted an ordinance in 1974 that prohibited its residents from having a "for sale" or "sold" sign on any real estate within the township.  During the 1960s and 1970s, many communities in the United States had enacted similar laws in response to the practices of blockbusting.  It was believed that by preventing the posting of these signs, residents would not know if a large number of white homeowners were attempting to sell their houses and move from the township at the same time.  The intent of such laws was to prevent panic selling and to allow integration in a more gradual manner.
Linmark Associates owned property that was for sale when the ordinance was passed, and filed suit in federal district court seeking declaratory and injunctive relief.  The district court granted a declaration of unconstitutionality of the ordinance, but on appeal a divided Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit reversed the decision of the district court. The case was then appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Court's Decision 
The Supreme Court had recently recognized that commercial speech had some protection in Bigelow v. Virginia,. in which the Court struck down a Virginia statute prohibiting the advertisement of out-of-state abortion procedures, and in Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council,. which struck down a statute forbidding the advertisement of prescription drug prices.  Justice Marshall's decision noted that the Willingboro ordinance did not genuinely regulate the time or manner of the communication, but its content, since other signs were permitted.  Rather, Willingboro proscribed particular signs, those stating "for sale" or "sold," because the township feared that the signs will cause those residents reading them to act upon them.  As such, the township's ordinance was essentially the same as the situation in Virginia State Pharmacy Board, where a statute was intended to keep information from the public.  Although the purpose of the Willingboro law was to prevent irrational decisionmaking by white homeowners by keeping information on the status of real estate from them, the First Amendment does not permit the government to make such a statute.  The opinion says that when there is a choice between suppressing information and the danger of its misuse if it is freely available, then the remedy under the First Amendment is more speech and not enforced silence.  As there was no meaningful difference between the township's ordinance and the statute overturned in the Virginia State Pharmacy Board case, the Court concluded that the Willingboro violated the First Amendment.
Justice Rehnquist did not participate in the decision.  His had been the lone dissenting opinion in the Virginia State Pharmacy Board case, stating that the free speech protection of the First Amendment should be limited to social and political issues.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 431
 References 
External links
Category:Willingboro Township, New Jersey
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States commercial speech case law
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:History of real estate in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Lisenba v. California" ==> """
Lisenba v. California, 314 U.S. 219 (1941), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court upheld the criminal conviction and death sentence imposed upon a man who confessed to murder after being detained for more than 24 hours, slapped and deprived of sleep and food.. The petitioner argued that the confession was coerced, and that it violated his due process rights under the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
Facts
Murder of Mary Busch
Major Raymond Lisenba (a.k.a. "Robert S. James") worked as a barber in La Cañada Flintridge, California in the 1930s. His wife was a manicurist named Mary Busch. In 1935, Lisenba purchased a life insurance policy on his wife. A few months later, he purchased several rattlesnakes, which were used in an unsuccessful attempt to murder his wife. Hours later, Mary was found dead by drowning. Investigators from the insurance company discovered that Lisenba had been married several times previously and that one of his prior wives had died under similar circumstances.
Decision
The majority of the Supreme Court found that the police officers violated state law when they illegally detained Lisenba for two days, assaulted him, and denied him access to counsel. However, the court found that these illegal acts did not themselves constitute a due process violation, asserting that Lisenba had confessed of his own free will after being confronted with the testimony of an accomplice, not directly after the interrogation.
Justice Owen J. Roberts' opinion reads, in part:
Counsel had been afforded full opportunity to see [Lisenba] and had advised him. He exhibited a self-possession, a coolness, and an acumen throughout his questioning, and at his trial, which negatives the view that he had so lost his freedom of action that the statements made were not his but were the result of the deprivation of his free choice to admit, to deny, or to refuse to answer.
 Dissent 
Justice Hugo Black, joined by Justice William O. Douglas, used the facts of the case to decide in favor of the petitioner, noting the case's factual similarities to Chambers v. Florida, a landmark 1940 case (argued before the court by future Justice Thurgood Marshall on behalf of the petitioner) in which the court ruled that confessions compelled by police through duress are inadmissible at trial.
Black's dissenting opinion describes the circumstances of Lisenba's confession:Suspecting the defendant of murder they entered his home on Sunday, April 19, 1936, at 9 a.m. He was taken to a furnished house next door, in which the State's Attorney's office had installed a dictaphone. For the next forty-eight hours, or a little longer, the State's Attorney, his assistants, and investigators held James as their prisoner. He was so held not under indictment or warrant of arrest but by force. At about 4 a.m. Monday, one Southard, an investigator, 'slapped' the defendant, whose left ear became red and swollen. James was apparently kept at the State's Attorney's office during the daylight hours; the full extent to which he was questioned there is not clear. But on Monday and Tuesday nights, at the furnished house, with no one present but James and the officers, he was subjected to constant interrogation. The questioning officers divided themselves into squads, so that some could sleep while the others continued the questioning. The defendant got no sleep during the first forty-two hours after the officers seized him. And about 3:30 or 4 a.m. Tuesday morning, while sitting in the chair he occupied while being interrogated, at the very moment a question was being asked him, the defendant fell asleep. There he remained asleep until about 7 or 8 a.m. At about 11 a.m. the officers took him to jail and booked him on a charge of incest. During the entire forty- two hours defendant was held, he repeatedly denied any complicity in or knowledge of the murder of his wife.Lisenba, 314 U.S. at 241-42 (Black, J., dissenting).
 Aftermath 
On May 1, 1942, Lisenba was executed by hanging at San Quentin State Prison in California.James pays with life in wife killing. Former barber hanged at San Quentin for 'rattlesnake murder.' Los Angeles Times, May 2, 1942.
See also
Rattlesnake James
Death penalty
References
External links
Category:1941 in California
Category:1941 in United States case law
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Capital punishment in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:Life insurance
Category:La Cañada Flintridge, California
"""

From "Little Sisters of the Poor Saints Peter and Paul Home v. Pennsylvania" ==> """
Little Sisters of the Poor Saints Peter and Paul Home v. Pennsylvania, 591 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case involving ongoing conflicts between the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) and the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) over the ACA's contraceptive mandate. The ACA exempts nonprofit religious organizations from complying with the mandate, to which for-profit religious organizations objected.
The case is a result of prior court actions in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc., in 2014, and Zubik v. Burwell,. in 2016, which left the United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to promulgate new regulations on the mandate. President Donald Trump issued an Executive Order to the HHS to bypass the traditional regulatory process, leading HHS to devise new rules in late 2017 to give for-profit groups exemptions for religious or moral objections to the mandate. Several states sued the federal government, and multiple Circuit Courts placed injunctions on the new rules as arbitrary and capricious and required by neither the ACA or the RFRA, violating the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). This case was a consolidation of two appeals from the injunction placed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. The Supreme Court ruled on July 8, 2020, in a 7–2 decision that the new rules were valid, as the associated departments had the authority to promulgate the exemptions, and that the process to put the rules in place did not violate the APA.
Background
Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) passed in 2010 under President Barack Obama. The ACA did not displace the system then in effect whereby most of the U.S. population receives health insurance under plans that their employers arrange through the private market. Instead it sought to expand the number who are insured and improve and subsidize insurance coverage. Regulations within the ACA and its Women's Health Amendment imposed a range of requirements on group health plans, which included that they cover "essential health benefits", including "preventative and wellness services" from health care providers without imposing cost sharing on patients. The Obama administration, through the United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) as directed through the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), decided that to meet "compelling health and gender equity goals", the ACA's "preventative and wellness services" included contraceptives. This contraceptive mandate required employers with more than 50 employees to offer health plans that included some coverage of contraceptives. Churches were exempted from the mandate, but other nonprofit religious groups were initially required to comply. Numerous religious groups, both for- and nonprofit and particularly those of the Catholic faith, were critical of the mandate, arguing that the use of contraceptives is morally wrong and a sin. To accommodate these complaints, the Obama administration refined an exception for nonprofit religious groups to allow them to submit Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) Form 700 to the HHS to request an exception, starting on January 1, 2014. With an approved exception, the HHS was then to work with the groups' insurance carriers to cover the cost of contraceptives.
Even with the changes, there was still opposition to the mandate from for-profit religious groups, leading to the Supreme Court case Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc. to review the ruling from the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit. The Christian-based retail franchise Hobby Lobby argued that the mandate violated its free exercise of religion rights established by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution and affirmed in the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA). The Supreme Court affirmed this in its 5–4 ruling, holding that the administration's mandate created a substantial burden on for-profit religious organizations, and that because the administration was able to set a special exemption for nonprofit religious groups, there was a similar way to reduce that burden on for-profits. The Supreme Court's decision created a temporary exemption that followed the same process via Form 700 used by nonprofit religious groups. 
Zubik v. Burwell
The decision in Hobby Lobby remained controversial since it left the contraceptive mandate in place. Nonprofit religious organizations claimed that even with the exception, they would be complicit in offering contraceptives to employees. Several lawsuits were filed in the Circuit Courts. A circuit split was created, and the Supreme Court consolidated seven cases into Zubik v. Burwell in challenge to the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit's ruling, which upheld the nonprofit exception route. 
Before Zubik was heard in oral arguments, Justice Antonin Scalia died, and as he had joined the majority in Hobby Lobby, the possibility of a tie vote arose. The court did not come to a final opinion on Zubik but instead vacated all decisions on the cases and remanded them to their respective courts for further review. In a per curiam order in May 2016, the Supreme Court requested the parties and courts to work with the HHS to come up with regulations that respected the parties' concerns. The Supreme Court emphasized in its instructions that the petitioning parties, the religious organizations, had stated in their court documents that "their religious exercise is not infringed where they 'need to do nothing more than contract for a plan that does not include coverage for some or all forms of contraception'" and urged the parties to find a solution amenable to that position.
Post-Zubik events
Parties expected to move forward through a standard approach to introducing new executive regulations, in which HHS published a request for information in July 2016, after which it would have drafted new regulations, posted them within the Federal Register for public comment before making a final rulemaking decision. But with Donald Trump becoming president at the start of 2017, many of the executive branch agencies' agendas quickly altered. In May 2017, Trump enacted Executive Order 13798, "Promoting Free Speech and Religious Liberty", which directed HHS to consider alternate routes to address conscience-based objection and led HHS to issue new interim rules that allowed employers with religious or moral objections to be exempted from ACA's contraceptive mandate.
Multiple states challenged the new rules. Among the first was Pennsylvania; later, New Jersey challenged the Government in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, asserting that the process violated the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment of the Constitution. The Little Sisters of the Poor Saints Peter and Paul Home, one of the religious organizations that had been part of the earlier litigation, sought to intervene since it would be affected by a ruling favoring the state, which the District Court denied but was reversed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. The District Court subsequently granted a temporary injunction on the new HHS rulings, which the Third Circuit upheld, finding that the rules violated the APA and were unnecessary under both the ACA and the RFRA, making them arbitrary and capricious. It ordered a nationwide injunction on their use.
By the time the Pennsylvania case was certified at the Supreme Court, the rules had already received a second injunction from being enforced from the Ninth Circuit.
"Moral Cooperation with Evil" and Form 700
Despite the federal government's and the Supreme Court's efforts to resolve the issue, several Catholic groups, including the Little Sisters, denied that any accommodation had been made at all. 
Writing for Religion News Service, Thomas Reese reported that the Obama administration had hoped to resolve the issue through a workaround whereby religious nonprofits that objected to the mandate would send in a signed form saying that they objected to covering contraception in their insurance plans. Rejecting this, the Little Sisters held that "even signing the government-mandated form would be 'cooperating with evil.'" They called it a "permission slip" that could allow someone else to provide contraceptives. Reese was even consulted by the Obama administration and suggested that no form be required, but was told "that the complexity of the industry made my suggestion unworkable."
Citing the same moral theory, the Sisters' co-litigants Priests for Life held that filing out the government paperwork (Form 700) would not only register their objections and exempt them from participation in the plan but would also trigger a series of events that in the end would result in the delivery of contraception to persons in their employ who sought it. Their brief to the Court stated that this would cause "mortal sin and scandal" and that "This is true whether the immoral services are paid for directly, indirectly, or even not at all by Priests for Life. …the burden imposed upon Petitioners' religious exercise by the challenged mandate is precisely the same whether the government is forcing Petitioners to authorize and facilitate 'access to and utilization of' contraceptive services for Priests for Life's plan participants and beneficiaries via submitting a 'certification' or notice or via payment to Priests for Life's insurance carrier."
Covering the controversy for Roll Call, Melinda Henneberger wrote, "Religious nonprofits can be exempted if they sign a form notifying the government, which then sets up the coverage through the group's existing plan at no additional cost to the organization." She put the matter to the Witherspoon Institute’s Matthew J. Frank, who responded that for the Catholic groups in the case, "signing the form is the violation of the faith. At a minimum it is material cooperation with evil, because the signature on the form or letter is the 'but for' cause of the evil being done—that is, but for the Little Sisters signing the form the government demands, the transaction of their insurers providing the contraception the government demands would not occur."
In an Amicus brief to the court, 50 Catholic theologians and ethicists wrote in support of the Sisters' position. They wrote that abortion, sterilization, and contraception "are grave wrongs under the Catholic faith." The authors explained that in Catholic tradition a "material cooperation" with wrongdoing is when "the believer could reasonably foresee that his or her action will facilitate or assist the performance of the objectionable action by the third party, but does not share in the principal agent's intention to commit the action." The brief also put forward the position that if the Sisters complied with the mandate, it could qualify "as formal cooperation in wrongdoing…when the believer, in cooperating, shares in the intention that the forbidden action be committed by the other party." According to the brief, "Many theologians in the Catholic tradition have concluded that an agent who obeys a command to perform an action in furtherance of an immoral objective comes to share in the immoral intention of the commander, even if the objective is contrary to the agent’s personal preferences, and even if the action is performed under duress. On this view, such an agent engages in formal cooperation with wrongdoing, which is never permissible." Reflecting on Catholic tradition, the authors also wrote, "compliance with the Mandate in any form would cause 'scandal,' or encouraging others to engage in wrongdoing. ..create the appearance of complicity...[and] undermine their public witness against the use of abortifacients and contraceptives." They conclude that in line with Catholic tradition the Sisters "very reasonably conclude that compliance with the Mandate—whether by executing Form 700, by submitting the HHS Notice, or by maintaining a health plan or insurance relationship through which the objectionable coverage is provided—would involve either formal cooperation in wrongdoing, or impermissible material cooperation in serious wrongdoing, and would therefore be gravely wrongful." As use of Form 700 "is designed to facilitate providing contraceptive coverage" by giving the government information it can use "to assign to [a] third party the obligation for providing contraceptive coverage", they cannot comply, as this is "objectively immoral" and any actions that aid in bringing about that end share in its immorality.
Some Catholics, such as co-litigant Bishop David Zubik, objected to the mandate because it forced Catholic groups "to maintain an objectionable contractual relationship" with an insurer or TPA who provides or procures contraception, and demanded that any Catholic group not be "forced to maintain a contractual relationship with any company obligated, authorized, or incentivized to provide abortifacient and contraceptive coverage" because this "compels it to act in contravention to its beliefs."
RFRA
The Catholic groups opposing the mandate held that it violated the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), which "Prohibits any agency, department, or official of the United States or any State (the government) from substantially burdening a person's exercise of religion even if the burden results from a rule of general applicability, except that the government may burden a person's exercise of religion only if it demonstrates that application of the burden to the person: (1) furthers a compelling governmental interest; and (2) is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling governmental interest."
Those opposing the mandate held that what constituted a "substantial burden" under RFRA should be determined by the religious party involved, not the government. In its Amicus brief in support of the Sisters, First Liberty Institute (FLI) wrote, "government substantially burdens religious beliefs when it exerts substantial pressure on a religious adherent to modify his behavior and, thus, to violate his sincere beliefs". In its own brief supporting the Little Sisters, Liberty Counsel wrote that when the government holds that due to the accommodation process there is no substantial burden, the government is "asserting that they, not the religious adherents, are the arbiters of what is a substantial burden, and concomitantly, what is a valid religious belief. …[this] assertion of authority over the question of what is a substantial burden contradicts founding principles, the First Amendment, RFRA and this Court's precedents." It held that for the Court to agree with HHS would violate "the longstanding right of religious adherents to define the nature and extent of their religious beliefs, including whether a government regulation substantially burdens them."
The Third Circuit court had agreed with the government's position that thanks to the accommodation any sense of responsibility by the religious objectors should be settled: "The religious objectors who oppose the Accommodation mechanism disapprove of 'what follows from' filing the self-certification form[,] …[but] 'the actual provision of contraception coverage is by a third party,' so any possible burden from the notification procedure is not substantial. …No matter how sincerely held their beliefs may be, we cannot accept at face value that subscribing to the plan imposes a 'substantial burden.'" FLI and other supporters of the Sisters held that this violated Burwell v. Hobby Lobby. In that case, the government had argued that even if the company's owners held that the destruction of an embryo was morally wrong, the concern was "too attenuated" because "providing the coverage would not itself result in the destruction of an embryo; that would occur only if an employee chose to take advantage of the coverage and to use one of the four methods [of contraception that may operate after the fertilization of an egg] at issue." The Supreme Court held that the government had dodged "the question that RFRA presents (whether the HHS mandate imposes a substantial burden on the ability of the objecting parties to conduct business in accordance with their religious beliefs)" and had arrogated "the authority to provide a binding national answer to this religious and philosophical question...namely, the circumstances under which it is wrong for a person to perform an act that is innocent in itself but that has the effect of enabling or facilitating the commission of an immoral act by another." In Hobby Lobby, the Court rebuffed the government, declaring, "it is not for us to say that their religious beliefs are mistaken or insubstantial." The Court held that there was a substantial burden, saying, "Because the contraceptive mandate forces them to pay an enormous sum of money—as much as $475 million per year in the case of Hobby Lobby—if they insist on providing insurance coverage in accordance with their religious beliefs, the mandate clearly imposes a substantial burden on those beliefs." Liberty Counsel wrote, "the government cannot arrogate to itself the determination of the relative weight of the burden …What was true for the for-profit faith based organizations in Hobby Lobby is true for the non-profit faith-based organizations here. …As this Court did in Hobby Lobby, it should refuse to take that step and reject Respondents’ attempt to once again second guess the veracity of Petitioners' beliefs. FLI argued that as "the Accommodation also require the religious employers who object to it to violate their beliefs or incur a penalty for noncompliance", the Sisters would refuse to comply with the accommodation and face the same heavy monetary penalties for resisting regulations that violate their religious convictions as the owners of Hobby Lobby faced.
FLI also dismissed the Third Circuit's claim that the effect on non-religious parties for enforcing RFRA had to be weighed in any decision invoking it. The Court had worried that finding for the religious objectors "would impose an undue burden on nonbeneficiaries—the female employees who will lose coverage for contraceptive care." FLI held that such thinking "advanced the dangerous and legally incorrect idea that third party 'harm' supersedes RFRA's protections for religious objectors—virtually nullifying RFRA. …RFRA would have no meaning if it only applied where no other interest competed with the religious objector's interest." Again it cited Burwell V. Hobby Lobby, according to which "[I]t could not reasonably be maintained that any burden on religious exercise…is permissible under RFRA so long as the relevant legal obligation requires the religious adherent to confer a benefit on third parties." FLI wrote, "the notion that third party harm vetoes any interest in religious toleration is a prevalent deception RFRA opponents advance, but RFRA is by nature a burden-shifting standard. …in structuring and passing RFRA, Congress accepted the consequence that religious tolerance may sometimes affect third parties. …the lower court flipped RFRA on its head by mandating that the government find a means of applying RFRA that is least restrictive on third parties, not least restrictive on religious objectors."
Liberty Counsel also denied that there was any "compelling governmental interest" in the mandate that a person trying to apply RFRA would have to note. It cast the mandate's effects as "a newly minted 'right' of free employer-provided contraceptives, which in reality is nothing more than a convenience. …not necessary for public order or the common good".
FLI argued that the government had failed to use "the least restrictive means" as demanded by RFRA as it had already "exempted many entities from providing contraception without any Accommodation process" including houses of worship, religious orders, and self-run insurance plans that were owned and operated by religious groups (referred to as "Church Plans"). Therefore, when it came to religious nonprofits, the government had no justification to force them "to comply with either the Contraceptives Mandate or the Accommodation against their sincere religious beliefs." FLI held that the mandate "manifests an aggressive effort to compel the religious objector to assimilate with popular secular beliefs", and the lower jurisdictions' ruling in its favor "converts the federal courts into instruments of religious oppression, ready to intervene when the executive branch is no longer willing to oppress religious dissenters itself."
Political considerations
Writing for Religion News Service, Reese questioned whether both sides had goodwill throughout the process: "each side was suspicious of the other and any kind of deal became impossible." He held that the HHS lawyers while expert in health care law, were oblivious to case law around religious freedom. This had caused the original regulations to be open to withering criticism from religious nonprofits and Republicans, who vehemently opposed the ACA as a whole. Reese pointed out that shortly before the controversy began the HHS had denied the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops a government grant to assist people being trafficked on account of their refusal to refer clients for birth control or abortion services. Resulting in critics of the administration decrying events as "a planned assault on religion...[and] an organized conspiracy against religious believers." Reese noted that the Little Sisters were "advised by extremely conservative moralist and lawyers. In addition, some bishops and Republican Catholics saw a fight over religious freedom with the Obama administration as politically advantageous." He pointed out that Roman Catholic Cardinal Timothy M. Dolan of New York met with President Obama in hopes of resolving the issue, and afterward had said he was hopeful matters could be resolved but "was forced [to] back off by other bishops." Reese reported that there were also those around Obama who held that the conflict with the bishops would rally their own base as well, including supporters of Planned Parenthood (which opposed all exemptions).
Supreme Court
Both the government and Little Sisters petitioned the Supreme Court on the Third Circuit decision. The Supreme Court certified the cases in January 2020, consolidating both the Little Sisters and government petition. 
thumb|Congressmember Debbie Lesko showing her support for the Little Sisters of the Poor Saints Peter in 2020.
Oral arguments were heard on May 6, 2020, part of the set of cases heard via teleconference due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Court arguments were made trying to balance religious freedom versus women's health. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who had just undergone an emergency surgical procedure, called in from her hospital room while recovering to remind the court that "In this area of religious freedom the major trend is not to give everything to one side and nothing to the other side. We have had a history of accommodation, of tolerance."
The Supreme Court issued its ruling on July 8, 2020. The decision found that the rules put forth by the HHS and other departments were valid as they had the authority under the ACA to issue them, and that there were no procedural issues under the APA with how they were put into place. The ruling reversed the Third Circuit and remanded the case for review. The 7–2 majority opinion was written by Justice Clarence Thomas which was joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh. Thomas wrote that "We hold that the [administration] had the authority to provide exemptions from the regulatory contraceptive requirements for employers with religious and conscientious objections."
Justice Elena Kagan wrote a concurrence in judgement, joined by Justice Stephen Breyer. Kagan agreed with the majority in that the HHS and other departments did have authority to issue new rules, but was not sure if the proposed rules met the APA challenge and agreed with remanding the case to the lower courts for further review on this matter.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote the dissent, joined by Justice Sonia Sotomayor. Ginsburg wrote critically "Today, for the first time, the Court casts totally aside countervailing rights and interests in its zeal to secure religious rights to the nth degree." The dissent would be the last authored by Justice Ginsburg prior to her death in September 2020.
References
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:2020 in religion
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Affordable Care Act lawsuits
Category:History of religion in the United States
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States reproductive rights case law
"""

From "Little v. Barreme" ==> """
Little v. Barreme, 6 U.S. (2 Cranch) 170 (1804), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court found that the President of the United States does not have "inherent authority" or "inherent powers" that allow him to ignore a law passed by the US Congress.
Summary
A Presidential executive order was invalidated because the President was operating outside of his express Congressional authority.
Facts
The case derived from "an interesting and revealing incident" that occurred during the "Quasi War" with France at the end of the 18th century.Woods, Thomas (2005-07-07) Presidential War Powers, LewRockwell.com The frigate USS Boston commanded by captain George Little captured a Danish vessel, the Flying Fish, by order of the Secretary of the Navy on behalf of President John Adams "to intercept any suspected American ship sailing to or from a French port." The Congress, however, had passed a law authorizing the navy to seize "vessels or cargoes [that] are apparently, as well as really, American" and "bound or sailing to any [French] port" in an attempt to prevent American vessels transporting goods to France. The Flying Fish was sailing from and not to a French port. Captain Little was declared to be liable for executing a command that was illegal. Little appealed to the Supreme Court, where the decision was upheld.  Chief Justice John Marshall wrote "Is the officer who obeys [the President's order] liable for damages sustained by this misconstruction of the act, or will his orders excuse him? ... the instructions cannot change the nature of the transaction, or legalize an act which without those instructions would have been a plain trespass."
Procedural history
 District Court, found for Petitioner
 Circuit Court of Massachusetts, reversed, found for Respondent
 United States Supreme Court, affirmed, found for Respondent
Issues
 Whether an order of the President, which in effect attempts to make law, can override an act of Congress.
 Officers are responsible for execution of illegal commands, despite nature of military chain of command.
Holding
No, an order of the President which is in contradiction with an act of Congress is illegal.
Reasoning
The legislative branch makes laws and the executive branch enforces the laws. The Act of Congress provided only for the capture of vessels traveling to France. "The Flying Fish was on a voyage from, not to, a French port, and was, therefore, had she even been an American vessel, not liable to be captured on the high seas." The Act limited the president’s authority by only allowing the capture of certain vessels. The President acted contrary to these limitations.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 6
 United States v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corp.
References
Further reading
External links
LoveAllPeople.org: "Inherent Presidential Power Is Always Subject To The Inherent Congressional Powers To Make The Laws And Enforce Oversight Of The Executive Branch, Even In Time Of War"
Category:France–United States relations
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:1804 in United States case law
Category:United States federal sovereign immunity case law
Category:Quasi-War
Category:United States executive orders
Category:United States presidential history
Category:Denmark–United States relations
"""

From "Little v. Hall" ==> """
Little v. Hall, 59 U.S. (18 How.) 165 (1856), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held a contract with state officials to be the official publisher of court opinion documents does not transfer any copyright to that publisher, and they may not seek an injunction against someone else printing those documents..
 References 
External links
Category:1856 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
"""

From "Liu v. Securities and Exchange Commission" ==> """
Liu v. Securities and Exchange Commission, 591 U.S. ___ (2020), was a US Supreme Court case related to disgorgement awards sought by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for fraudulent activities. The Court ruled in an 8–1 decision that such disgorgement awards can be awarded by the courts as equitable relief under the Securities Act of 1933, , but they are limited to the wrongdoer's net profits.Liu v. Sec. & Exch. Comm'n, .
 Background 
Around 2014, Charles C. Liu and Xin Wang, a married couple and U.S. citizens in California, sought out investments from several Chinese companies that claimed that they were going to use the money to build a cancer treatment center through which they would later establish a means for investors to obtain an EB-5 visa. The EB-5 program allowed for such visas to be obtained if more than $500,000 was invested in certain types of development projects. By 2016, they had obtained investments from at least 50 different Chinese citizens, totaling more than $27 million. However, as determined by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the couple did not use the funds towards the project. While they had secured the land, there had been no development work on it during the 18 months after they had gotten the investments, and the SEC found that $11.8 million of the funds had been transferred back to Chinese companies owned by Liu and that another large portion had been used for personal expenses by the couple. The SEC had begun its investigation in February 2016 and filed official charges against the couple in June 2016 under the Securities Act of 1933, which that prohibits fraud, specifically misstatements as to use of investment funds under . The SEC filed its case in the United States District Court for the Central District of California.
The District Court ruled against the couple in April 2017. In addition to permanently enjoining the couple from ever engaging in the EB-5 program, the court issued a disgorgement award, requiring the couple to pay back the full amount that it had obtained from the investors and a civil penalty of $8.2 million.
Liu and Wang appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit and asserted they had not defrauded the investors since they were not seeking profits or securities but visas. Among their arguments, the appeal addressed the recent Supreme Court's decision in Kokesh v. SEC (581 U.S. ___ (2017)). Kokesh had determined that disgorgement awards were to be treated as penalties (in that case, they were subject to a statute of limitations) but left open the question "on whether courts possess authority to order disgorgement in SEC enforcement proceedings or on whether courts have properly applied disgorgement principles in this context."
The Ninth Circuit upheld the District Court's ruling in October 2018 and asserted that Kokesh had not yet prevented the courts from issuing disgorgement award and that in this case, the disgorgement award should not discount the legitimate business expenses, such as rent, which the couple had paid for during the 18 months.
Supreme Court
Liu and Wang petitioned to the Supreme Court on the question on whether the SEC can seek a disgorgement award as a form of equitable relief despite the Kokesh ruling that disgorgement award was determined to be a penalty. The Supreme Court accepted the petition in November 2019, which legal analysts believed was to resolve the open-ended question left by Kokesh. Oral arguments were heard on March 3, 2020 in which Liu and Wang's legal counsel continue to argued that Congress never gave the SEC authority to impose disgorgement as penalties, and observers saw the justices forced more on questions to reigning in the size of such disgorgement awards.
The Court issued its decision on June 22, 2020. In an 8–1 decision, the Court ruled that courts can award for disgorgement in security fraud cases and affirmed the implied stance from Kokesh but limited them to the net profits of the conduct from the fraudulent activity. Also, the decision required those funds to be paid back to the defrauded investors. Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote for the majority, which was joined by all but Justice Clarence Thomas. Sotomayor affirmed in her decision that "Congress prohibited the SEC from seeking an equitable remedy in excess of a defendant’s net profits from wrongdoing," under . She further wrote "To avoid transforming an equitable remedy into a punitive sanction, courts restricted the remedy to an individual wrongdoer's net profits to be awarded for victims."
Justice Thomas, in his dissent, stated that under , disgorgement is not "equitable relief" and so he disagreed with the conclusion of the majority. Thomas also wrote of concerns on the disgorgement being returned to investors: "The money ordered to be paid as disgorgement in no sense belongs to the government, and the majority cites no authority allowing a government agency to keep equitable relief for a wrong done to a third party."
The judgement vacated the Ninth Circuit's judgement and remanded the case to that court to re-evaluate the amount of the award based on this decision, including the deduction of legitimate business expenses.
 References 
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States securities case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Liverpool, New York & Philadelphia Steamship Co. v. Commissioners of Emigration" ==> """
Liverpool, New York & Philadelphia S. S. Co. v. Commissioners of Emigration, 113 U.S. 33 (1885), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court, in which the court held that the plaintiff was in error, being a corporation under the laws of Great Britain, and an alien, had brought this action in the circuit court of the United States for the Southern district of New York, the defendant being a corporation of that state.Liverpool, New York & Philadelphia S. S. Co. v. Commissioners of Emigration, . 
Background
The defendant, Liverpool, Philadelphia and New York Steamship Company, was indebted to the plaintiff for the sum of at least one million and ninety-three thousand dollars, regarding passengers in vessels arriving in the state of New York, and  for the regulation of marine hospitals.  the defendant was paid under the inducement of certain representations of the defendant, the plaintiff being an alien and not knowing the laws of the state of New York, and under protest.
Treating it as a complaint according to the procedure under the New York Code, the defendant filed an answer setting up several different defenses, which included the following: "That by an act of congress, entitled 'A bill to legalize the collection of head- moneys already paid,' approved June 19, 1878, the acts of every state and municipal officer or corporation in the several states of the United States in collection of head-moneys for every passenger brought to the United States prior to the first day of January 1877, under then existing laws of the several states, were declared valid, and the [113 U.S. 33, 35]." 
The case was cited in the per curiam decision Petite vs. United States..
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
113 33 Justia.com (full case)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
"""

From "Lloyd Corp. v. Tanner" ==> """
Lloyd Corp. v. Tanner, 407 U.S. 551 (1972), was a United States Supreme Court ruling that the passing out of anti-war leaflets at the Lloyd Center in Portland, Oregon, was an infringement on property rights. This differed from Marsh v. Alabama (1946) and Amalgamated Food Employees Union v. Logan Valley Plaza (1968) in that Marsh had the attributes of a municipality and Logan Valley related to picketing a particular store, while the current case, the distribution of leaflets, is unrelated to any activity in the property.    
 Background 
In 1960, the Lloyd Center, a large shopping mall near downtown Portland, Oregon, owned by the private Lloyd Corporation, had been in operation for eight years when this case commenced. Throughout this period the corporation had a general prohibition on the distribution of handbills, but it was generally open to public use. The Lloyd Corporation permitted the American Legion to sell poppies for disabled veterans, and every year before Christmas it permitted bell ringers for the Salvation Army and Volunteers of America to set up kettles and solicit contributions. However, it denied access to the March of Dimes and Hadassah, a national Zionist women's service organization. Both major parties' presidential candidates were allowed to speak in the mall's auditorium. The mall's rules were enforced by twelve commissioned special police officers of the city of Portland. These guards had full jurisdiction within the mall, carried guns, and wore uniforms just like the ones worn by the Portland police.
On November 14, 1968, five young people, including the respondents in this case, distributed within the mall handbill invitations to a meeting of the "Resistance Community" to protest against the draft for the Vietnam War. The distribution was quiet and orderly, and there was no littering. A customer complained, and security guards informed the respondents that they were trespassing and would be arrested unless they stopped their distribution. The respondents left the premises as requested to avoid arrest and continued passing out handbills on the streets and sidewalks that surrounded the mall. They later brought suit in the United States District Court for the District of Oregon seeking declaratory and injunctive relief under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and 28 U.S.C. § 2201. 
 Public or private property 
The Lloyd case resonated with the Supreme Court's 1946 Marsh v. Alabama decision, adjudicating on the public use of the private property. In that case, the court held that a company town could not exclude a Jehovah's Witness from distributing religious literature on a privately owned sidewalk. Balancing Marsh's First Amendment rights against the owner's property rights, the court, in that case, held that Marsh's rights occupied a "preferred position" and weighed heavier than the owner's rights.  
In other cases, the courts held that property rights were violated and people's First Amendment rights were not protected on private property. In a similar case in New Jersey, the Supreme court has upheld freedom of speech over private property rights.
 Decision 
The District Court found that the mall was open to the general public and equivalent to a public business district. Therefore, it held that the Lloyd Corporation's "rule prohibiting the distribution of handbills within the Mall violates ... First Amendment rights" and issued a permanent injunction restraining the corporation from interfering with these rights.  The Court of Appeals held that it was bound by the lower court's factual determination as to the character of the Center, and concluded that the Supreme Court precedents Marsh v. Alabama  and Amalgamated Food Employees Union v. Logan Valley Plaza  compelled affirmance. The Lloyd Corporation appealed the decision to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari on the question of whether the appeals court's decision violated property rights protected by the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. Justice Lewis F. Powell concluded that the respondents could have distributed their handbills on "any public street, on any public sidewalk, in any public park, or in any public building." Therefore, respondents were not entitled to exercise their free-speech rights on the privately owned shopping-center property.
 Significance 
Lloyd Corp v. Tanner led to the Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins (1980) case, where high school students petitioned against the U.N resolution "Zionism is Racism." The court sided with the First Amendment saying that it didn't violate the mall's rights under the U.S Constitution. However, the court reaffirmed its decision in the previous cases of Lloyd v. Tanner and National Labor Relations Board, leaving the decision up to the state's own constitution. With Richard Nixon's appointees to Supreme Court, it became more conservative than it had been in Amalgamated Food Employees Union Local 590 v. Logan Valley Plaza, where it upheld that shopping center sidewalks were equivalent to public sidewalks, allowing union works to strike and be protected under the First Amendment. The Berger court reversed many of the liberal decisions after Lloyd Corp v. Tanner. Justice Marshall said in his dissent after the case, "Only the wealthy may find effective communication possible unless we adhere to Marsh v. Alabama." Both Justice Marshall and New Jersey Supreme Court Justice Marie L. Garibaldi noticed that the underlying truth of the matter could be undermining freedom. The New Jersey Supreme Court reaffirmed its decision that the state's constitution protected those who protested the Persian Gulf War. Writing after the case, Chief Justice Robert Wilentz wrote, "[N]o use is more closely associated with the old downtown than leafleting."
 See also 
 Gunn v. University Committee to End the War in Viet Nam
 Mora v. McNamara
 References 
 External links 
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:History of Portland, Oregon
Category:Legal history of Oregon
Category:Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Lochner v. New York" ==> """
Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S. 45 (1905), was a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court holding that a New York State statute that prescribed maximum working hours for bakers violated the bakers' right to freedom of contract under the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution..  The decision has been effectively overturned.Bernstein, David. Only One Place of Redress: African Americans, Labor Regulations, and the Courts from Reconstruction to the New Deal, p. 100 (Duke University Press, 2001): "The Court also directly overturned Lochner by adding that it is no 'longer open to question that it is within the legislative power to fix maximum hours.'"Dorf, Michael and Morrison, Trevor. Constitutional Law, p. 18 (Oxford University Press, 2010).Patrick, John. The Supreme Court of the United States: A Student Companion, p. 362 (Oxford University Press, 2006).
The underlying case began in 1899 when Joseph Lochner, a German immigrant who owned a bakery in Utica, New York, was charged with violating New York's Bakeshop Act of 1895. The Bakeshop Act had made it a crime for New York bakeries to employ bakers for more than 10 hours per day or 60 hours per week. He was convicted and ultimately appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. A five-justice majority of the Supreme Court held that the law violated the Due Process Clause, stating that the law constituted an "unreasonable, unnecessary and arbitrary interference with the right and liberty of the individual to contract". Four dissenting justices rejected that view, and the dissent of Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., in particular, became one of the most famous opinions in U.S. history.
Lochner is one of the most controversial decisions in the Supreme Court's history and gave the name to what is known as the Lochner era. During that time, the Supreme Court issued several decisions invalidating federal and state statutes that sought to regulate working conditions during the Progressive Era and the Great Depression. The period ended with West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish (1937), in which the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of minimum wage legislation enacted by Washington State.
Background
Joseph Lochner was a German immigrant who owned a bakery in Utica, New York in the late 19th century. Unlike other bakeries, which used two separate shifts for evening and morning work, Lochner's bakery employed only a single crew of bakers. His bakers would arrive in the evening and prepare the bread dough, sleep for several hours in an on-site dormitory, then wake up in the early morning and bake the loaves of bread. Lochner counted his bakers' time spent sleeping in the dormitory as working hours and paid them accordingly. This practice violated New York's Bakeshop Act of 1895, which made it a crime for bakeries to employ workers for more than 10 hours per day or 60 hours per week.
In 1899, New York authorities indicted Lochner on a criminal charge of violating the Bakeshop Act by wrongfully and unlawfully permitting an employee to work more than 60 hours in one week. At his trial, Lochner's lawyer argued the right to contract freely to be one of the rights encompassed by substantive due process. Lochner's case was argued by Henry Weismann, who had been one of the foremost advocates of the Bakeshop Act when he was Secretary of the Journeymen Bakers' Union. In his brief, Weismann decried the idea that "the treasured freedom of the individual... should be swept away under the guise of the police power of the State." He denied New York's argument that the Bakeshop Act was a necessary health measure by claiming that the "average bakery of the present day is well ventilated, comfortable both summer and winter, and always sweet smelling." Weismann's brief contained an appendix providing statistics showing that bakers' mortality rates were comparable to that of white-collar professionals. 
But Weismann's arguments were unsuccessful. The trial court found Lochner guilty and fined him $50 (). Lochner appealed to the New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division, which affirmed his conviction, then appealed to the New York Court of Appeals, which also affirmed it. He then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Supreme Court decision
On April 17, 1905, the Supreme Court issued a 5–4 decision in favor of Lochner that struck down the New York Bakeshop Act's limits on bakers' working hours as unconstitutional.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|upright=0.875|Justice Rufus Peckham, the author of the majority opinion in Lochner 
Five justices formed the majority and joined an opinion written by Justice Rufus Peckham. 
The Court began with the question of whether the Fourteenth Amendment's protections applied to freedom of contract. Citing its 1897 decision Allgeyer v. Louisiana, in which it had struck down a Louisiana law that banned buying shipping insurance from companies in other states on grounds that it violated the freedom to make contracts to carry out a trade or profession, the Court held that freedom of contract was a basic right covered by the protections for "life, liberty, and property" in the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause.
The Court explained that by "circumstances which exclude the right", it meant when states passed laws under the "police power"the inherent authority of U.S. state governments to pass laws governing "health, safety, and morals". The Court said that because the Due Process Clause protected freedom of contract, state laws could only interfere with it if they were valid exercises of the police power.  To guarantee this freedom, the Court said that American courts had to scrutinize state laws regulating economic freedom, such as New York's bakery law, to ensure they served valid police-power purposes.
Applying these legal principles to the facts of the case, the Court first determined that bakers' jobs were not dangerous enough to need special government protection. The Court distinguished New York's law for bakers from a Utah law for miners the Court had upheld against a Due Process challenge in its 1898 decision Holden v. Hardy, saying that, unlike mining, baking was not an unusually dangerous activity. The Court also determined that the Bakeshop Act had no relation to public health. Reasoning that the New York Legislature could not rationally have enacted the law for health reasons, the Court concluded that the Act was really a "labor law" that could not be justified under the police power.
The Court concluded that New York had failed to prove that the Bakeshop Act's maximum-hours provision had any close connection to public health. It said that if it were to conclude otherwise, states would have unlimited power over citizens' lives.
Lastly, the Court said that state laws ostensibly enacted for police-power purposes were often really intended to redistribute wealth or help a certain group at the expense of others.
Having determined that Bakeshop Act had no relation to public health and that the baking profession was not unusually dangerous, the Court concluded that "the limit of the police power has been reached and passed in this case", and it struck down the act as a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause., quoting Lochner, 198 U.S. at 58.
Dissents
Harlan
thumb|right|upright=0.85|Justice John Marshall Harlan, who authored the first dissent in Lochner.
Justice John Marshall Harlan wrote a dissenting opinion that was joined by Justices Edward Douglass White and William R. Day.
Harlan contended that the liberty to contract is subject to regulation imposed by a state acting within the scope of its police powers. He offered the following rule for determining whether such statutes are unconstitutional:
Harlan asserted that the burden of proof should rest with the party seeking to have such a statute deemed unconstitutional.
Harlan argued that the Court gave insufficient weight to the state's argument that the law was a valid health measure addressing a legitimate state interest. He contended that it was "plain that this statute was enacted to protect the physical well-being of those who work in bakery and confectionery establishments." Responding to the majority's assertion that the profession of a baker was not an unhealthy one, he quoted at length from academic studies describing the respiratory ailments and other risks that bakers faced. He argued that the Supreme Court should have deferred to the New York Legislature's judgment that long working hours threatened the health of bakery employees: "If the end which the legislature seeks to accomplish be one to which its power extends, and if the means employed to that end, although not the wisest or best, are yet not plainly and palpably unauthorized by law, then the court cannot interfere."
Holmes
thumb|right|upright=0.85|Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., who wrote the second dissent in Lochner.
Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. also dissented from the Court's decision, and his three-paragraph dissent has become one of the most famous in U.S. Supreme Court history. Holmes began by accusing the majority of deciding Lochner's case by following laissez-faire economics rather than legal principles.
Holmes pointed out that there were many American laws restricting citizens' freedom of contract that had never been found unconstitutional. As "ancient examples", Holmes pointed to usury laws, which set maximum interest rates for loans of money, and Sunday laws, which outlawed certain economic activities on Sundays to promote Christian observance of the Sabbath. Holmes analogized the majority's interpretation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the writings of Herbert Spencer, the 19th-century British sociologist who coined the term "survival of the fittest" and whose ideas later became associated with social Darwinism.
Holmes wrote that, in his view, a duly enacted state law could only be unconstitutional under the Due Process Clause's guarantee of liberty if it could rationally be said to "infringe fundamental principles" in the American tradition, and he maintained that the Bakeshop Act clearly did not do so.
Significance and legacy
The Supreme Court's due process jurisprudence over the next three decades was inconsistent, but it took a narrow view of states' police powers in several major labor cases after Lochner. For example, in Coppage v. Kansas (1915), the Court struck down statutes forbidding "yellow-dog contracts." Similarly, in Adkins v. Children's Hospital (1923), the Supreme Court held that minimum wage laws violated the due process clause, but Chief Justice William Howard Taft strongly dissented and suggested that the Court instead should have overruled Lochner. The doctrine of substantive due process was coupled with a narrow interpretation of congressional power under the commerce clause. Justices James McReynolds, George Sutherland, Willis Van Devanter, and Pierce Butler emerged during the 1920s and the 1930s as the foremost defenders of traditional limitations on government power on the Supreme Court and so were collectively dubbed by supporters of the New Deal the "Four Horsemen of Reaction." All four of them believed in laissez-faire economics.
In 1934, the Supreme Court decided in Nebbia v. New York that there is no constitutional fundamental right to freedom of contract. In 1937, the Supreme Court decided West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish, which expressly overruled Adkins and implicitly signaled the end of the Lochner era by repudiating the idea that freedom of contract should be unrestricted.
Although the Supreme Court did not explicitly overrule Lochner, it agreed to give more deference to the decisions of state legislatures. The Supreme Court sounded the death knell for economic substantive due process several years later in Williamson v. Lee Optical of Oklahoma (1955) by unanimously declaring, "The day is gone when this Court uses the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to strike down state laws, regulatory of business and industrial conditions, because they may be unwise, improvident, or out of harmony with a particular school of thought."
Modern substantive due process
Since the end of the Lochner era, the Supreme Court has applied a lower standard of review to confront restrictions on economic liberty. A higher standard is used in reviewing legislation infringing on personal liberties. A line of cases dating back to the 1923 opinion by Justice McReynolds in Meyer v. Nebraska, which cited Lochner as establishing limits on the police power, has established a privacy right under substantive due process. More recently, in Roe v. Wade (1973), the Supreme Court held that women have a privacy right to determine whether or not to have an abortion. In Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992), the Supreme Court reaffirmed that right but no longer used the term "privacy" to describe it. The abortion right was later overruled in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization (2022).
Scholarly reaction
The Supreme Court's decision in Lochner v. New York has been criticized by legal scholars. The law professor Bernard Siegan described it as "one of the most condemned cases in United States history.", cited in  According to the Center for American Progress, a left-leaning thinktank, law professors often use Lochner, along with Plessy v. Ferguson and Korematsu v. United States, as examples of "how judges should not behave."Millhiser, Ian. Rand Paul praises horrendous Supreme Court decision, would let employers ruthlessly exploit workers. ThinkProgress, 2013-03-07.
Lochner is sometimes used as shorthand for extreme right-wing constitutional theory.Ian Millhiser described as "Worse Than Lochner" constitutional interpretation that would hold unconstitutional all affirmative action policies as well as Social Security, Medicare, and Pell Grants. However, it has come under harsh criticism from conservative and libertarian jurists as well because Lochner embraced substantive due process, a doctrine that was arguably at odds with the original understanding of the Constitution. For example, the conservative legal scholar Robert Bork called the decision an "abomination" and the "quintessence of judicial usurpation of power." Similarly, former Attorney General Edwin Meese said that the Supreme Court "ignored the limitations of the Constitution and blatantly usurped legislative authority." Siegan, a self-described libertarian, described it as "a symbol of judicial dereliction and abuse."
Scholars have noted that when the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted in 1868, 27 of the 37 state constitutions had adopted references to Locke's labor theory of property, which typically said: "All men are by nature free and independent, and have certain inalienable rights, among which are those of enjoying and defending life and liberty, acquiring and possessing and protecting property: and pursuing and obtaining safety and happiness." As such clauses were "deeply rooted in American history and tradition," they likely informed the original meaning of the scope and nature of the fundamental rights protected by the Fourteenth Amendment in the eyes of Lochner-era justices.
However, the decision also has attracted libertarian defenders: the Cato Institute and the scholars Richard Epstein and Randy Barnett, who argue that it correctly protected economic liberty.
Barnett has argued that the decision was basically correct in its presumption in favor of liberty of contract and that the decision was wrong only by perpetuating the misinterpretation of the Fourteenth Amendment that had been established in the Slaughter-House Cases. According to Barnett, the liberty of contract is properly found in the Privileges or Immunities Clause, not in the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. David Bernstein, in Rehabilitating Lochner: Defending Individual Rights Against Progressive Reform, has argued that Lochner was well grounded in Supreme Court precedent and that its emphasis on limits to the states' police powers informed the Supreme Court's early civil liberties and civil rights cases.
See also
 Anticanon
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 198
 Slaughterhouse Cases, 
 Munn v. Illinois, 
 Mugler v. Kansas, 
 Allgeyer v. Louisiana, 
 Adkins v. Children's Hospital, 261 U.S. 525 (1923) case about the minimum wage
References
Citations
Works cited
External links
 Summary of Lochner v. New York
 "Supreme Court Landmark Case Lochner v. New York" from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
Category:1905 in New York (state)
Category:1905 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Baking
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Working time
"""

From "Locke v. Davey" ==> """
Locke v. Davey, 540 U.S. 712 (2004), is a United States Supreme Court decision upholding the constitutionality of a Washington publicly funded scholarship program which excluded students pursuing a "degree in devotional theology." This case examined the "room ... between the two Religion Clauses", the Free Exercise Clause and the Establishment Clause.
Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote the opinion of the court, with Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas dissenting.
Background
Davey enrolled in Northwest College and received a Promise Scholarship. But when he declared a double major in pastoral ministries and business management/administration, his scholarship was revoked. Davey was given the opportunity to continue under the scholarship but without the pastoral ministries major, but he refused.
The scholarship
In 1999, the state of Washington legislature created a scholarship, the Promise Scholarship.  The scholarships were for $1,125 per year and were funded through the State's general fund. They were available for qualified students who enrolled for "at least half time in an eligible postsecondary institution in the state of Washington", but excluded study in theology.  This was because the Washington State Constitution specifically states that "No public money or property shall be appropriated for or applied to any religious worship, exercise or instruction."Article I, Section 11
The scholarship was available to any graduate of a Washington public or private high school. The student must be in the top 15%, receive a score of 1,200 or higher on the SAT, or score higher than a 27 on the American College Test. In addition, the student's family's income must be less than 135% of the median.
Holding
The statute was upheld.  The Court held that there was nothing "inherently constitutionally suspect" in the denial of funding for vocational religious instruction.  Even if there were, Washington had a "substantial state interest" in not funding "devotional degrees."
See also  	 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 540
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
Further reading
External links
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:2004 in religion
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Education in Washington (state)
Category:History of Renton, Washington
"""

From "Locke v. Karass" ==> """
Locke v. Karass, 555 U.S. 207 (2009), is a court case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Constitution permits the local chapter of a labor union to charge a "service fee" to non-members to cover non-local litigation expenses if (a) the expenses are "appropriately related to collective bargaining" and (b) there is a reciprocal relationship between the local chapter and the national union.. The case expanded on and clarified the earlier Lehnert v. Ferris Faculty Association,. which permitted such service fees for non-political activities but did not reach a consensus on whether "national" expenses were chargeable.Locke, 555 U.S. at 215-17.
Background
The Maine State Employees Association is the exclusive bargaining agent for certain employees of Maine's executive branch.Locke, 555 U.S. at 210-11. The Association is also Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union (SEIU). Per the terms of Maine's collective bargaining agreement with the association all non-member employees represented by the union must pay a "service fee"; effectively union dues but recalculated to include only the amount which would go to "ordinary representational activities, e.g., collective bargaining or contract administration."Locke, 555 U.S. at 211. The Supreme Court previously upheld such arrangements in Lehnert, but was unable to reach agreement on whether national litigation was "chargeable": that is, whether a union may include such costs as part of a service fee charged to non-union employees.
Non-member employees challenged the inclusion of national litigation costs by the parent SEIU in arbitration but the arbitrator deemed the inclusion lawful.Locke, 555 U.S. at 212. Concurrent with the arbitration the employees brought suit in federal court, alleging a First Amendment violation. The District Court found the fee lawful, and the Court of Appeals upheld the District Court on appeal. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve a split between the circuits.Locke, 555 U.S. at 212 (citing Otto v. Pennsylvania State Educ. Assn.-NEA, 330 F.3d 125 (3d Cir. 2003); Pilots Against Illegal Dues v. Air Line Pilots Assn., 938 F.2d 1123 (10th Cir. 1991)).
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court held that the local unit of a union may assess non-members a service fee to cover national litigation if that litigation involves collective bargaining or other issues which could conceivably involve the local unit and if the payment by the local unit is reciprocal. Justice Breyer wrote for a unanimous court; Justice Alito wrote a concurrence in which Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Scalia joined.
The central question was whether the national litigation fee caused a First Amendment problem. Prior rulings by the court permitted a so-called "service fee" provided that the fees did not include political and/or ideological activities, which would have the effect of forcing employees to underwrite political speech. Previous rulings, including Ellis and Lehnert, had not resolved this question. To address the issue Breyer's opinion introduced a two-factor test: a national litigation fee is chargeable "if (1) the subject matter of the national litigation bears an appropriate relation to collective bargaining and (2) the arrangement is reciprocal—that is, the local's payment to the national affiliate is for 'services that may ultimately inure to the benefit of the members of the local union by virtue of their membership in the parent organization.'"Locke, 555 U.S. at 218 (quoting Lehnert, 500 U.S. at 524).
Alito wrote a concurring opinion noting that the question of what "reciprocity" was had not been reached, given that all the courts had agreed, and the petitioners had not challenged, that reciprocity (whatever that was) existed between the local unit and the national union.Locke, 555 U.S. at 221-22 (Alito, J., concurring).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 555
List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
References
External links
 Maine State Employees Association Web site
Category:United States public employment trade union case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:Service Employees International Union litigation
Category:United States trade union case law
Category:2009 in Maine
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Lockett v. Ohio" ==> """
Lockett v. Ohio, 438 U.S. 586 (1978), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that sentencing authorities must have the discretion to consider at least some  mitigating factors, rather than being limited to a specific list of factors..
Background
An Ohio law required that the death penalty was mandatory for felons convicted of aggravated murder unless the victim had induced the offense, the offense was committed under duress or coercion, or the offense was a product of mental deficiencies. Sandra Lockett, the driver of the getaway car for a robbery that resulted in the murder of a pawnshop owner, was found guilty under the Ohio statute and sentenced to death.
Question before the Court
Does the Ohio statute requiring the death penalty for felons convicted of aggravated murder violate the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments by limiting the consideration of mitigating factors?
Opinion of the Court
With a 7-1 decision in favor of Lockett, Justice Burger wrote the opinion for the majority. The Court held that the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments required, in all but the rarest cases, that sentencers consider all mitigating factors surrounding the accused murderer before coming to the decision of applying the death penalty. These mitigating factors include, "a defendant's character or record and any circumstances of the offense proffered as a reason for a sentence less than death." Justice Burger, joined by Justice Stewart, Justice Powell and Justice Stevens concluded that "the limited range of mitigating circumstances that may be considered by the sentencer under the Ohio death penalty statute is incompatible with the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments."Lockett, 438 U.S. at 597-609. The Court cited  Gregg,. when the Court had previously approved of a statute that permitted the jury to "consider any aggravating or mitigating circumstances" to support their decision in LockettLockett, 438 U.S. at 606.
Justice Blackmun's concurrence
Justice Blackmun agreed with the majority of the opinion written by the Chief Justice, however, he "would do so for a reason more limited than that which the plurality espouses, and for an additional reason not relied upon by the plurality."Lockett, 438 U.S. at 613 (Blackmun, J., concurring).
Justice Marshall's concurrence
In a separate special concurrence from Justice Blackmun, Justice Marshall noted his opposition of the death penalty on its face, and deemed it a form of cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment of the Constitution.  Justice Marshall notes that "when a death sentence is imposed under the circumstances presented here, I fail to understand how any of my Brethren -- even those who believe that the death penalty is not wholly inconsistent with the Constitution -- can disagree that it must be vacated."Lockett, 438 U.S. at 620 (Marshall, J., concurring).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 438
References
External links
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:Capital punishment in Ohio
"""

From "Lockhart v. Fretwell" ==> """
Lockhart v. Fretwell, 506 U.S. 364 (1993), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court. which held that failure to make an objection under Collins v. Lockhart did not constitute undue prejudice required by Strickland v. Washington,. because the error did not cause a fundamentally unfair trial, as opposed to merely a different outcome of the case. 
Facts
An Arkansas Jury convicted Fretwell of Capital Murder, and sentenced him to the death penalty. In April 1985, Fretwell entered the home of the victim, stole the victim's money, and shot the victim in the head. Subsequently, the jury was asked in the penalty phase to determine two aggravating circumstances. The first of these was whether or not Fretwell committed the homicide for the purpose of avoiding or preventing arrest. The second was whether or not Fretwell committed the homicide for pecuniary gain. The jury subsequently found only the second aggravating factor, and found no mitigating factors. Fretwell's attorney failed to object to the submission of the second of these aggravating factors to the jury, despite the ruling of the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals in Collins v. Lockhart, which held that whether or not a defendant commits a homicide for pecuniary gain was unconstitutional under the Eighth and Fourteenth amendments to the Constitution of the United States in the setting of homicide committed in the context of a robbery.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment ineffective assistance of counsel case law
Category:1993 in United States case law
"""

From "Lockhart v. United States (2005)" ==> """
Lockhart v. United States, 546 U.S. 142 (2005), is a United States Supreme Court decision concerning whether the United States government can offset Social Security benefits to collect on student loan debt over 10 years old. In a unanimous decision, the Court affirmed the lower court's decision that allowed the offset by the government. 
Background
Legal history
The Debt Collection Act of 1982 allows the federal government to collect on debt by offsetting administrative payments. Social Security benefits are not exempt but have specific limitations as set forth in 42 USC §407, which states: [N]one of the moneys paid or payable or rights existing under this subchapter shall be subject to execution, levy, attachment, garnishment, or other legal process, or to the operation of any bankruptcy or insolvency law. No other provision of law, enacted before, on, or after April 20, 1983, may be construed to limit, supersede, or otherwise modify the provisions of this section except to the extent that it does so by express reference to this section.(a)–(b) However, debts older than 10 years old are generally protected from collection under the 1982 Debt Collection Act.(e)(1) This prohibition was revised under the Higher Education Technical Amendments, which specifically eliminated time restriction on the collection of a number of loan types, including student loans.(a)(2) This, however, did not apply to the offset of Social Security benefits as it did not specifically amend that act. The Debt Collection Act of 1996 made specific reference to 42 USC §407 in stating that "all payment due an individual under ... the Social Security Act ... shall be subject to offset under this section."(c)(3)(A)(i)
Facts of the case
James Lockhart received $874 per month in Social Security payments and $10 per month in food stamps.Brief for petitioner at 11, Lockhart v. United States,  At 67 years old, this was his only source of income, which he used for necessities such as food, housing, and medication. He had been unemployed since 1981 (save a few months of employment in 1987), and, to try to improve his chances of getting a job, Lockhart began attending various higher educational institutions from 1984 to 1990. Between 1984 and 1989, Lockhart incurred student loans which were reinsured by the federal government under the Guaranteed Student Loan Program. After failing to repay his loans, they were reassigned to the Department of Education and, through the Treasury Offset Program, were certified to the Department of the Treasury.Lockhart v. United States, 
In April 2002, the government notified Lockhart that a portion of his Social Security benefits would be withheld in order to collect on his delinquent debt. The initial offset was $93 but, after an increase in benefits, the offset was raised reaching a maximum of $143.10. Some of the loans being collected on were over 10 years delinquent. Lockhart brought suit which was dismissed and judged in favor of the United States. Lockhart appealed. The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held that the offset is not subject to the statute of limitations in 31 USC §3716(e)(1), and affirmed the lower court's judgement against Lockhart.Lockhart v. United States,  The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve a circuit split between the Eighth and Ninth Circuits.Lockhart v. United States, .
At oral arguments, Lockhart, represented by Brian Wolfman, advanced the argument that the government lacks the authority to offset benefits for loans over 10 years delinquent. They argued that when a law overrides the Social Security Act's ban on offsets by explicit reference to 42 USC §407, the authority extends only as far as that granted in the statute with the express reference. As such, they argue, "the Debt Collection Act [of 1996], the statute that contains that express reference, prohibits offsets to collect claims that have been outstanding for more than 10 years."Oral Arguments, Lockhart v. United States,  Justice Scalia raised the issue of whether the "magic words" required by §407 can nullify the intent of a later Congress if they had a clear intent to overrule the statute but did not use the required phrase. Respondents, represented by Lisa Blatt, argued that the text of Higher Education Technical Amendment in 1991 was unqualified and affected laws before and after its passage. They further argued that the 1996 Debt Collection Act had no impact on the limitations on debt collection saying that, All that happened was that Congress, in essence, put Social Security benefits on par, equal footing, with all other Federal payments .... the [Higher Education Technical Amendment] applies unless it's been repealed. And there's just nothing in the Debt Collection Act that comes close to repealing the [Higher Education Technical Amendment], because it doesn't address the subject of student loans.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|upright|right|alt=Justice Sandra Day O'Connor|Justice O'Connor delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.
In a unanimous decision delivered by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, the Court held that the government can offset Social Security benefits to collect on loans delinquent for more than 10 years. The Court did not rule on the issue of "express-reference provisions" like that in §407 as it was satisfied by the Debt Collection Act of 1996. However the Court did hold that the Higher Education Technical Amendment need not have a specific reference to §407 as §407(b) only requires a reference to authorize attachment in the first place, which the Debt Collection Act of 1996 did. While Lockhart argued that the Higher Education Technical Amendment only applied to previous statutes, the Court, citing Union Bank v. Wolas, rejected that argument "The fact that Congress may not have foreseen all of the consequences of a statutory enactment is not a sufficient reason for refusing to give effect to its plain meaning."
Scalia's concurrence
Justice Scalia filed a concurring opinion in which he argued that the express-reference provision of §407 is not binding. Scalia, citing a number of decisions, argued that "[o]ne legislature ... cannot abridge the powers of a succeeding legislature."Lockhart v. United States,  (Scalia, J., dissenting) citing  Following that premise, he contended that an act with an express-reference provision can be overruled by implicit reference without regard for the express-reference provision as long as the legislative intent is clear. Because of this, he argued that the Higher Education Technical Amendment and the Debt Collection Act of 1996 unambiguously contradict and thus repealed §407 and is effective even if the express-reference provision is not fulfilled.Lockhart v. United States,  (Scalia, J., dissenting)
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 546
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Lockhart v. United States (2016)" ==> """
Lockhart v. United States, 577 U.S. ___ (2016), is a United States Supreme Court decision concerning the interpretation of a federal statute. 18 U.S.C. § 2252(b)(2) states that a defendant convicted of possessing child pornography is subject to a mandatory 10 year minimum prison sentence if they have "a prior conviction...under the laws of any State relating to aggravated sexual abuse, sexual abuse, or abusive sexual conduct involving a minor or ward.". Avondale Lockhart, convicted of possession of child pornography, had a prior conviction for sexual abuse of his 53-year-old girlfriend under New York State law. He was sentenced to 10 years in prison under § 2252(b)(2). He appealed claiming that the qualifier "involving a minor or ward" applies to the whole series, making his prior conviction not trigger the sentence enhancement. In a 6-2 decision, the Supreme Court held that the phrase only modifies the final item in the series, upholding the 10 year minimum sentence imposed on Lockhart., 136 S. Ct. 958 (2016).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Lockheed Corp. v. Spink" ==> """
Lockheed Corp. v. Spink, 517 U.S. 882 (1996), is a US labor law case, concerning occupational pensions..
Facts
Mr Spink was denied full benefits from Lockheed Corporation after being rehired in 1988. He claimed that an amendment of the plan, to exclude people over 61, violated § 406(a)(1)(D) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA),. which prohibits a fiduciary from causing a plan to engage in a transaction that transfers plan assets to, or involves the use of plan assets for the benefit of, a party in interest. 
Judgment
Justice Thomas, writing for the majority, ruled that employers could amend plans. They were not bound by fiduciary duties while acting as sponsors. 
Justices Breyer and Souter dissented in part, preferring to withhold expression of any view on the proposition that "the payment of benefits pursuant to an amended plan, regardless of what the plan requires of the employee in return for those benefits, does not constitute a prohibited transaction."
See also
United States labor law
References
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
"""

From "Lockyer v. Andrade" ==> """
Lockyer v. Andrade, 538 U.S. 63 (2003),. decided the same day as Ewing v. California (a case with a similar subject matter),. held that there would be no relief by means of a petition for a writ of habeas corpus from a sentence imposed under California's three strikes law as a violation of the Eighth Amendment's prohibition of cruel and unusual punishments.  Relying on the reasoning of Ewing and Harmelin v. Michigan,. the Court ruled that because no "clearly established" law held that a three-strikes sentence was cruel and unusual punishment, the 50-years-to-life sentence imposed in this case was not cruel and unusual punishment.
Facts
On November 4, 1995, Leandro Andrade, a nine-year Army veteran and father of three, American Bar Association - Human Rights Magazine stole five children's videotapes from a K-Mart store in Ontario, California.  Two weeks later, he stole four children's videotapes from a different K-Mart store in Montclair, California. Andrade had been in and out of the state and federal prison systems since 1982.  By the time of these two crimes in 1995, he had been convicted of petty theft, residential burglary, transportation of marijuana, and escape from prison.   Under California's three strikes law, any felony can serve as the third "strike" and thereby expose the defendant to a mandatory sentence of 25 years to life in prison.
The trial court denied Andrade's request to classify the two petty theft charges as misdemeanors, and Andrade was ultimately convicted of the two felony theft charges.  As a result of his prior convictions, Andrade was sentenced to two consecutive terms of 25 years to life in prison.  (The State conceded at oral argument before the U.S. Supreme Court that the California Supreme Court had decided a case since Andrade's conviction that might allow him to petition the trial court to reduce his sentence to one 25-years-to-life term.)  The California Court of Appeal affirmed his conviction and sentence on direct appeal, and the California Supreme Court denied discretionary review.
Andrade next filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in the United States District Court for the Central District of California.  Andrade argued that his sentence violated the Eighth Amendment ban on cruel and unusual punishment, but the district court rejected this claim.  Andrade appealed, and the Ninth Circuit, after reviewing the relevant Supreme Court decisions, concluded that the district court was wrong.  The State of California asked the U.S. Supreme Court to review the Ninth Circuit's decision, and it agreed to do so.
Majority opinion
Although this case involved the same legal claim as Ewing v. California, its procedural posture was different.  Ewing was a case on direct review from the California state court system, meaning that the Supreme Court was deciding in the first instance whether a three-strikes sentence was cruel and unusual punishment.  If the defendant in Ewing had prevailed in the Supreme Court, he would have received a new sentencing hearing.  Andrade, by contrast, was an appeal from a federal habeas petition.  If the Court was to reach the same result in Andrade as it did in Ewing, it had to travel a different path to arrive there.
Because of the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act, the Court could not grant relief unless the decision of the state courts to uphold Andrade's sentence was "contrary to, or an unreasonable application of, clearly established Federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court of the United States."  This meant that the Court's first task was to identify what that "clearly established" law was.  The Court examined its prior holdings, and found three that were relevant—Rummel v. Estelle,. Solem v. Helm,. and Harmelin v. Michigan.  Although these precedents were not a "model of clarity," the Court concluded that a "gross disproportionality principle is applicable to sentences for terms of years," but that the "precise contours" of this principle were unclear and applied only in the "exceedingly rare and extreme case."  In Solem, the sentence did not allow for parole, and the Court had held it was cruel and unusual; in Rummel, the sentence did allow for parole, and the Court had held it was not cruel and unusual.  In this case, like in Rummel, Andrade retained the opportunity for parole, even if that possibility was remote.  Because the gross disproportionality principle applied in only an extreme case, the Court concluded that the California courts did not unreasonably apply it to Andrade's sentence.
Dissenting opinion
Justice David Souter protested that Andrade's criminal history and triggering offenses were less severe than those of the defendant in Ewing, yet Andrade received a harsher sentence.  He argued that the sentence in this case was indistinguishable from that in Solem, and thus required the Court to grant relief.  "Andrade, like the defendant in Solem, was a repeat offender who committed theft of trifling value, some $150, and their criminal records are comparable, including burglary (though Andrade's were residential), with no violent crimes or crimes against the person."  Because Andrade was 37 at the time of the offenses in this case, the 50-years-to-life sentence was effectively life without parole.  The only way Souter could distinguish the sentence in this case and the sentence in Solem was "to reject the practical equivalence of a life sentence without parole and one with parole eligibility at 87."  
Moreover, the fact that California's three-strikes law embodied one penological theory — the theory of incapacitation — facilitated judicial review of sentences imposed under it with reference to the requirements of the Eighth Amendment.  The incapacitation theory could not, Souter argued, justify sentencing a person to 25 more years in prison for an identical, trifling crime committed two weeks after the first.  "Since the defendant's condition has not changed between the two closely related thefts, the incapacitation penalty is not open to the simple arithmetic of multiplying the punishment by two, without resulting in gross disproportion even under the State's chosen benchmark."  For Souter, the sentence in this case presented one of those rare cases that the Eighth Amendment allowed the Court to set it aside.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 538
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
  Brief of the ACLU in support of respondent Andrade
  Amicus brief of Criminal Justice Legal Foundation
 [  Transcript of the oral argument]
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause case law
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Legal history of California
Category:Kmart
"""

From "United States v. Loew's Inc." ==> """
United States v. Loew's Inc., 371 U.S. 38 (1962), was an antitrust case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that block booking of movies—the offer of only a combined assortment of movies to an exhibitor—violates the Sherman Antitrust Act.
Besides its legal consequences, the court's decision affected economic theory, explaining product bundling as a form of price discrimination.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 371
 International Salt Co. v. United States (1947)
 United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc. (1948)
References
External links
Category:1962 in United States case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Business ethics cases
Category:Loews Cineplex Entertainment
"""

From "Loewe v. Lawlor" ==> """
Loewe v. Lawlor, 208 U.S. 274 (1908), also referred to as the Danbury Hatters' Case, is a United States Supreme Court case in United States labor law concerning the application of antitrust laws to labor unions..  The Court's decision effectively outlawed the secondary boycott as a violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act, despite union arguments that their actions affected only intrastate commerce.Carter, Saalim A. Labor Unions and Antitrust Legislation: Judicial Activism vs. Judicial Restraint from 1890-1941. Penn State University, 2006. p. 28. It was also decided that individual unionists could be held personally liable for damages incurred by the activities of their union.Carter, p. 30.
Facts
In 1901, D. E. Loewe & Company, a fur hat manufacturer, declared itself an open shop.Federal Writers' Project (1938). Connecticut: A Guide to Its Roads, Lore and People. Reprint: US History Publishers. . pp. 132-133. It was the third open shop ever established in Danbury, Connecticut, the center of the pelt industry since 1780 (see North American fur trade). Loewe's declaration sparked a strike and a boycott by the United Hatters of North America (UHU), which had organized 70 out of 82 firms in the hat manufacturing industry. The nationwide boycott was assisted by the American Federation of Labor (AFL) and was successful in persuading retailers, wholesalers and customers not to buy from or do business with Loewe. The goal of the operation was for UHU to gain union recognition as the bargaining agent for employees at Loewe & Co.
Loewe & Co. sued the union for violating the Sherman Antitrust Act, alleging that UHU's boycott interfered with Loewe's ability to engage in the interstate commerce of selling hats. The act had been adopted in 1890, with the primary purpose to control business monopolies.Holley, p. 106. The appellee in the case was Martin Lawlor, the business agent for the UHU, but the list of defendants included 240 union members.Danbury Museum & Historical Society, Danbury. Arcadia Publishing, 2001. p. 79.
The case was handled in the first instance by the United States Circuit Court for the District of Connecticut, which dismissed the suit on the grounds that the alleged actions fell outside the scope of the Sherman Act. Loewe & Co. appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which certified the case to the Supreme Court.
Judgment
In a unanimous decision written by Chief Justice Melville Fuller, the UHU was found to have been acting in restraint of interstate commerce and to have violated the Sherman Antitrust Act. Fuller began the opinion by recounting the relevant provisions of the Sherman Act. The first, second, and seventh section of the act can be concisely described as follows:
1. Every contract, combination in the form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations, is illegal.
2. Every person who monopolizes, or attempts to monopolize, or combine or conspire with any other person or persons, to monopolize any part of the trade or commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations, is in violation of the statute.
3. Any person who is injured in his business or property by any other person or corporation by reason of anything forbidden or declared illegal by the act may sue in federal court in the district of the defendant and recover three fold damages.
Fuller concluded that the actions of the union did constitute unlawful combination of the type described in the act: "In our opinion, the combination described in the declaration is a combination 'in restraint of trade or commerce among the several States,' in the sense in which those words are used in the act, and the action can be maintained accordingly."
The union had raised a number of objections to the application of the act to its activities, all of which were found to be untenable by the Court. While the union had not interfered with the transportation of hats originating with Loewe & Co., a national boycott conceived on the initiative of the union that comprised vendees in other states was a violation of interstate commerce as proscribed by the statute:
If the purposes of the combination were, as alleged, to prevent any interstate transportation at all, the fact that the means operated at one end before physical transportation commenced, and at the other end after the physical transportation ended, was immaterial. And that conclusion rests on many judgments of this court, to the effect that the act prohibits any combination whatever to secure action which essentially obstructs the free flow of commerce between the States, or restricts, in that regard, the liberty of a trader to engage in business.
The fact that the union was not itself engaged in interstate commerce was irrelevant since the act did not distinguish between the types of associations involved but simply forbade every contract, combination, or conspiracy in restraint of trade. Fuller underscored that no exemption had been made for organizations of laborers or farmers, despite lobbying to include such language in the statute:
The records of Congress show that several efforts were made to exempt, by legislation, organizations of farmers and laborers from the operation of the act, and that all these efforts failed, so that the act remained as we have it before us.
Consequently, while the boycott and strike action had originated in a single state, the combination efforts had to be viewed in aggregation:
(...) [T]he acts must be considered as a whole, and the plan is open to condemnation notwithstanding a negligible amount of intrastate business might be affected in carrying it out.
The judgment of dismissal was reversed, and the case was remanded for further proceedings.
Significance
thumb|Verdict for the plaintiffs in the Loewe v. Lawlor case
In 1909, a new trial was held in the District Court to determine the outcome of the case. The presiding judge directed the jury to find for Loewe & Co., in accordance with the Supreme Court decision. The jury returned with a verdict of $74,000 in damages, which was tripled, under the Sherman Act, to $222,000.Ernst, Daniel R. Lawyers against labor: from individual rights to corporate liberalism. University of Illinois Press, 1995. p. 151. The union won on appeal but then lost on retrial in 1912.Tomlins, Christopher. The United States Supreme Court: The Pursuit of Justice. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2005. p. 162. The case reached the Supreme Court in 1914, and in Lawlor v. Loewe (1915), the Court again held the union liable for damages. In 1917, the case was settled for slightly over $234,000 (approximately $3.9 million in 2009 currency) of which the AFL was able to obtain $216,000 in voluntary contributions from union members.Gould, William B. A Primer on American Labor Law. MIT Press, 2004. p. 14.
The ruling deprived labor unions of an important and effective union tactic, and the decision to hold individual union members personally liable for damages had an adverse impact on union organizing efforts.William H. Holley and Kenneth M. Jennings. The Labor Relations Process. South-Western, Division of Thomson Learning, 2008. p. 78. That led the AFL to initiate an aggressive campaign to convince Congress to address labor concerns about the Sherman Act in the reform of antitrust laws. The push culminated with the passage of the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, which provided that "the labor of a human being is not a commodity or an article of commerce." Section 20 of the act further stated that no injunctions should be granted by federal courts in labor disputes "unless necessary to prevent irreparable injury to property, or to a property right." The provisions, however, were narrowly interpreted by the Supreme Court, which ruled, in Duplex Printing Press Company v. Deering (1921), that the exemptions in the Clayton Act did not protect secondary boycotts from judicial control.
Prosecution of labor under antitrust laws would continue until the enactment of the Norris–La Guardia Act in 1932, which included express exemptions of organized labor from antitrust injunctions. The exemptions were upheld by the Supreme Court in United States v. Hutcheson (1941), which stated that the act should be read broadly to provide a total antitrust exemption for labor unions, "so long as [the] union acts in its self-interest and does not combine with non-labor groups." The majority opinion in Hutcheson was written by Felix Frankfurter, who, before becoming a Supreme Court Justice, had served as one of the drafters of the Norris-La Guardia Act.Dubofsky, Melvyn. The State and Labor in Modern America. University of North Carolina Press, 1994. p. 165.
See also
United States labor law
 Labor history of the United States
Albany International BV v Stichting Bedrijfspensioenfonds Textielindustrie [1999] ECR I-5751 (C-67/96)
Mogul Steamship Co Ltd v McGregor, Gow & Co [1892] AC 25
Notes
References
 External links 
Category:Labor disputes in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:1908 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Connecticut
Category:UNITE HERE
Category:Hatmaking
Category:Danbury, Connecticut
"""

From "Logan v. United States" ==> """
Logan v. United States, 552 U.S. 23 (2007), was a case before the United States Supreme Court.
Background
Defendant pleaded that his sentence (for being a felon in possession of a firearm) was improperly enhanced under the Armed Career Criminal Act of 1984, 18 U.S.C.S. § 921(a)(20), because it was based on prior convictions which did not result in the loss of civil rights.  Since that law did not include prior convictions for sentencing purposes if civil rights were restored, defendant argued that it also operated to preclude his prior state battery convictions from consideration at sentencing because the offenses occasioned no loss of civil rights.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit affirmed his sentence.
Question before the court
Is a conviction that does not result in a loss of civil rights excluded from the "three convictions rule" that are required to activate the Armed Career Criminal Act's sentence enhancement?
Opinion of the court
The Court unanimously held that the "civil rights restored" exemption of convictions for sentence-enhancement purposes did not extend to a defendant who retained his civil rights at all times, and whose postconviction legal status remained in all respects unaltered by any state dispensation. Justice Ruth Ginsburg wrote the opinion of the Supreme Court. Restoration of rights means that the rights were previously taken away, and rights retained were not functionally equivalent to rights revoked but later restored. Further, the other statutory basis for disregarding convictions involved convictions which were expunged or set aside, or for which the offender was pardoned, all of which were postconviction events which relieved consequences of the convictions, and there was no showing of any congressional intent to broaden the "civil rights restored" exemption to cover convictions attended by no loss of civil rights.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 552
Justia: Logan v. United States
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States Federal Sentencing Guidelines case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Armed Career Criminal Act case law
"""

From "Logan v. Zimmerman Brush Co." ==> """
Logan v. Zimmerman Brush Co., 455 U.S. 422, is a unanimous 1982 decision of the U.S. Supreme Court concerning the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The Court held that the petitioner was entitled to have his discrimination complaint adjudged by Illinois's Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC), which had dismissed it for its own failure to meet a deadline. The decision reversed the Illinois Supreme Court's holding to the contrary two years prior.
Logan, one of whose legs was shorter than the other, had been hired by Zimmerman in 1979 as a machine operator; when that proved beyond his capabilities, he was made a shipping clerk. A month later the company fired him for poor performance; within a week Logan brought a claim with FEPC, alleging he had been discriminated against due to his disability. FEPC was required to hold a factfinding conference with both parties within four months; it accidentally scheduled the one in Logan's case a week after that period ended. The company moved to dismiss the claim on those grounds; after FEPC's denial it petitioned the state Supreme Court for a writ of prohibition which was granted on the grounds that the statutory time limit was mandatory.
The U.S. Supreme Court granted Logan certiorari to argue on appeal that his constitutional rights to equal protection and due process of law had been violated. Justice Harry Blackmun, writing for the Court, followed some of its other recent cases in holding that when the state created a process for Logan to seek redress, it had also created a property interest in any claims filed through that process which could not itself be deprived without due process. Unusually, Blackmun also wrote a separate concurrence to the majority opinion, joined by three other justices, arguing that the Illinois Supreme Court had also violated Logan's right to equal protection of the laws by arbitrarily creating two classes of complainants but only granting full rights to one purely on the basis of its own deadline. Justice Lewis Powell also concurred, but would have decided the case on narrower grounds specific to Logan's circumstances, rejecting Blackmun's "broad pronouncements".
The Court has not revisited Logan in any later case, but it has often been cited as establishing a test for when due process has been denied. Lower courts have sometimes had to choose between Logan and the Parratt v. Taylor decision two years earlier (later overruled in part) as guiding precedent based on the record before them. Legal scholars have, in considering how it held Logan's claim a property interest, found it to straddle the line between procedural and substantive due process. It has also been described as the first time a majority of justices agreed that a challenged regulation failed the rational basis test under the Fourteenth Amendment. In the wake of the decision Illinois reformed the statute and replaced the FEPC with the Illinois Human Rights Commission, part of the newly created Illinois Department of Human Rights.
Background
In 1961 the Illinois legislature passed the state's Fair Employment Practices Act (FEPA). It created the Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC), an administrative body empowered to hear and resolve complaints of employment discrimination in all categories protected by law. Early in its existence it incurred the wrath of large businesses; in 1964 Motorola offered to pay the legal bills of any small businesses in the state facing proceedings before the FEPC after it spent $200,000 fighting a decision to award $1,000 to an unsuccessful applicant. In 1975 the legislature added disability to the law's protected classes, but made FEPC the exclusive venue for resolving those complaints.
The FEPA set a deadline of 180 days from the alleged offense for complaints to be brought, and required only that FEPC notify any employer of a complaint against them within 120 days. After the state's Supreme Court held in its 1978 case Springfield-Sangamon County Regional Plan Commission v. Fair Employment Practices Commission that the deadlines were mandatory, not merely directory, the statute was amended to require that FEPC convene a fact-finding conference with the parties within the 120-day deadline, to promote speedier resolution of complaints and encourage negotiated settlements., hereafter FEPC In 1979, in a suit against FEPC brought by Chicago State University and another employer after the commission had waited two years to inform the latter of a pending complaint against it, the state Supreme Court not only reaffirmed its earlier ruling but clarified that if FEPC failed to notify the employer within 180 days of receiving the complaint, it lost jurisdiction permanently.
Underlying dispute
In early October 1979 Laverne L. Logan was hired by the Zimmerman Brush Co., a Chicago manufacturer.FEPC, at 101 According to the company's lawyer, at that time it was fully aware that Logan's left leg was several inches shorter than his right. Zimmerman tried to accommodate him by assigning him first to the shipping room, and then to work on a machine where he could sit.
After a month, while he was still in his probationary period and thus not yet covered by the union contract, the company let Logan go since he was unable to perform his duties satisfactorily. Five days later, on November 14, Logan, on his own, filed a complaint with Illinois's Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC), alleging that he had been fired because of his physical disability in violation of state law.
In late January 1980 FEPC mailed to both Logan and Zimmerman notice that it had scheduled that conference for March 18. The company was also asked to complete and return a two-page questionnaire about its personnel practices and the circumstances of Logan's termination by March 10, which it did. At the conference, Zimmerman moved to dismiss Logan's complaint on the grounds that, since FEPC had mistakenly scheduled the conference for five days after the 120-day deadline had expired, it was no longer valid. FEPC denied the motion, so the company petitioned the Supreme Court of Illinois for a writ of prohibition barring FEPC from taking any further action; it granted a stay pending resolution of the case. Logan retained counsel and, since the six-month period for him to file a complaint had not yet lapsed, refiled.
In response, the legislature again amended FEPA to allow for the conference to take place after the 120-day deadline if both parties agreed. It took effect in July of that year.FEPC, 108–09
Supreme Court of Illinois
The court unanimously held for Zimmerman in a late September decision. It conceded that the use of "shall" in the statute did not, by itself, make its provisions mandatory. "One must consider the word within the context of the entire statute, looking particularly to the purpose of the legislation", wrote Justice Daniel P. Ward for his colleagues. Since that language had in earlier cases been held to mandate an action, it was presumed that the legislature knew this and intended that construction.FEPC, 104–07
The commission attempted to distinguish Springfield-Sangamon by noting that its delay in bringing that case had been found to have had the potential to cost the employer considerable sums of money in back pay and fines, which would not have been the case here. The court responded that FEPC was reading that decision too narrowly and ignored the purpose of the conference, as clarified by the 1978 amendment, to provide an opportunity for speedy resolution of the complaint (perhaps through a negotiated settlement), save all parties time and money, and protect employers from frivolous complaints. "Without a required fact-finding conference the Commission would in most instances have to proceed solely on the basis of the employee's charge", Ward wrote. "Unless the Commission would be able to obtain information regarding the charge from some independent investigation its decision of whether or not to file a complaint would hardly be an informed one."
The court also found unpersuasive arguments by the commission and Logan that, by submitting the completed questionnaire and attending the conference, Zimmerman had waived any standing to move to have the charge dismissed on grounds of failure to proceed in a timely fashion. By doing so, Ward noted, it had merely been complying with the commission's request and thus the law; to not do so would have made it equally responsible for the delay of the conference. The record also did not reflect any awareness on the company's part that it was aware at that time that the conference had been scheduled too late.FEPC, 107–09
Logan raised three additional arguments; the court rejected all of them. His equal protection and due process rights could not have been violated since the legislature had created reasonable procedures for the resolution of employment discrimination complaints, which had been followed. The amendment to FEPA that would have allowed the parties to waive the deadline was not explicitly worded to be retroactive. And since FEPC had otherwise processed his first complaint in compliance with the law, he could not be allowed to file a second one. Under the circumstances, "[n]ot only would an employer's rights be prejudiced if an employee were allowed to file a second and successive charge, but also the public interest in promoting an expeditious resolution of charges would be circumvented", Ward wrote.
U.S. Supreme Court
Logan petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court for certiorari on the question of whether his due process and equal protection rights were violated by the state following its own procedures. Early in 1981 the petition was granted.450 U.S. 909 (1981) Illinois Attorney General Tyrone C. Fahner filed a brief on FEPC's behalf. The Congress of Organizations of the Physically Handicapped filed an amicus curiae brief urging reversal.
Oral argument
Oral argument was held in October 1981. Gary Palm, arguing for Logan, went first. The Court was primarily focused on getting him to clarify the nature of Logan's injury and both constitutional claims. Asked whether a post-deprivation remedy would suffice, as the Court had held earlier that year in Parratt v. Taylor, where a state tort remedy was held constitutionally preferable to an inmate's federal Section 1983 lawsuit over some hobby materials he had ordered that were lost by prison officials before they could be delivered to him, Palm demurred. "This is a case involving ... adjudicatory procedures, which just should not be put into the same category as the negligent handling of a hobby kit or the negligent handling of an automobile." Palm noted that his client was not ultimately seeking redress from the state, but his employer. All he had wanted from the former was the opportunity to make his case that he had been illegally fired by the latter, an opportunity he had followed every rule of the state's to exercise.
Afterwards, Jay Canel argued for Zimmerman. Justice Thurgood Marshall questioned why the company had taken the case this far, since it might otherwise have long since settled with Logan. Canel agreed, telling Justice William Rehnquist that his client felt the same way at that point but had earlier followed the advice of previous counsel that had advised him to assert his rights under the law. Justice John Paul Stevens saw "a real equal protection concern" with the 120-day deadline, since it might both allow claimants with spurious claims to get the full process while those with legitimate ones would not. Questioning Canel closely about what sort of post-deprivation remedies might still be available to Logan should the Court rule in Zimmerman's favor, since only the commission could order him reinstated, he asked Canel if he was arguing that there could never be a due process violation in litigation between private parties. Specifically Stevens brought up Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co., where the statutory notice provisions related to the suit were held deficient enough to be a due process violation. Canel said that while he did not think that, he believed Logan could still get economic restitution from the state through either the Illinois Court of Claims or a Section 1983 suit.
Decision
The Court issued its opinion in late March 1982. Unanimously, it had agreed with Logan that his rights had been violated by the process. In what way, and to what extent, it offered three different opinions. Justice Harry Blackmun wrote for the Court that Logan's due process rights had been violated.Logan, 424–38 In an unusual separate concurrence joined by three other justices, he argued that the statute failed the rational basis test and thus denied Logan equal protection of the laws.Logan, 438–42 Justice Lewis Powell agreed with the latter point, but would have limited the holding to the facts specific to the case.Logan, 443–44
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|Justice Harry Blackmun, who wrote both the Court's opinion and a separate concurrence 
"At the outset," Blackmun wrote after summarizing the facts of the case, "we are faced with what has become a familiar two-part inquiry: we must determine whether Logan was deprived of a protected interest, and, if so, what process was his due." Mullane, where a requirement that publication in a newspaper was held a constitutionally inadequate level of notice to the beneficiaries of a common trust fund who stood to be deprived of their rights to hold the trustees and fiduciaries accountable for mismanagement through the settlement process, was the precedent that "affirmatively settled" the first question. Zimmerman had attempted to distinguish the cases, but, Blackmun wrote, the Court was unconvinced.Logan, at 428
And precedents even older than Mullane supported the protection of litigants' claims by the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment. In 1971's Boddie v. Connecticut, filing fees for indigent defendants which prevented them from beginning divorce actions were held to violate the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause. "The hallmark of property, the Court has emphasized, is an individual entitlement grounded in state law, which cannot be removed except 'for cause,'" Blackmun explained. "Once that characteristic is found, the types of interests protected as 'property' are varied and, as often as not, intangible, relating 'to the whole domain of social and economic fact.'"Logan, 430–32
"A claimant has more than an abstract desire or interest in redressing his grievance: his right to redress is guaranteed by the State, with the adequacy of his claim assessed under what is, in essence, a 'for cause' standard, based upon the substantiality of the evidence", Blackmun continued. Among the many things the Court had found to be protected property interests under the Due Process Clause were a horse trainer's license, he noted, referring to Barry v. Barchi, a 1979 case where the Court had held that New York had unconstitutionally suspended one after the horse had tested positive for banned substances after a race without guaranteeing the trainer a prompt adversarial hearing to offer a defense. It would take a "remarkable reading" of the Court's precedent, Blackmun wrote, "to conclude that a horse trainer's license is a protected property interest under the Fourteenth Amendment, while a state-created right to redress discrimination is not."
The Illinois Supreme Court's deference to the legislature, in holding that Logan only had such a right once the process of adjudicating the claim had actually begun, as it would have after the conference, misunderstood the nature of the Constitution's due process guarantee, said Blackmun. In a case decided around the same time as the Illinois Supreme Court's decision in the instant case, Vitek v. Jones, the Court had held in favor of a Nebraska prison inmate challenging his involuntary transfer to a mental hospital. Justice Byron White had held there that constitutional due process guarantees are federal and "not diminished by the fact that the State may have specified its own procedures that it may deem adequate for determining the preconditions to adverse official action". "Indeed", Blackmun added, "any other conclusion would allow the State to destroy at will virtually any state-created property interest."
Having established that Logan had been deprived of a property interest, Blackmun turned to the question of what process he was due before that happened. "[I]t has become a truism," he observed, "that some form of hearing' is required before the owner is finally deprived of a protected property interest." But Court precedent also recognized that the nature of the process would vary based on "the importance of the private interest and the length or finality of the deprivation ... the likelihood of governmental error ... and the magnitude of the governmental interests involved." Taking all these factors into consideration, Logan was entitled to the full process he would have gotten if the hearing date had been timely set:Logan, 432–35
Lastly, Blackmun addressed Zimmerman's arguments that the case not be distinguished from Parratt, that Logan still had post-deprivation remedies in state court. "This argument misses Parratts point", Blackmun responded. That case had involved an unforeseeable accident, whereas Logan had been deprived of his property interest through the prescribed operation of state law. "Parratt was not designed to reach such a situation." He further pointed out that a tort against the state in its Court of Claims would be likelier to be more expensive and protracted for Logan than his FEPC case had been, and as Canel had conceded during oral argument, could not result in him getting his job back, something only the FEPC could order.Logan, 435–37
In conclusion, Blackmun reiterated that the Court's decision did not entitle every aggrieved litigant to their day in court or its equivalent. "The State may erect reasonable procedural requirements for triggering the right to an adjudication, be they statutes of limitations ... or, in an appropriate case, filing fees." But, quoting previous cases, he said that the Fourteenth Amendment required "'an opportunity . . . granted at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner' ... 'for [a] hearing appropriate to the nature of the case'".Mullane, at 313 That, Logan had been denied.
Blackmun concurrence
Blackmun took the unusual step of writing a concurring opinion to his own opinion for the Court. He was joined by three other justices: William Brennan, Marshall, and Sandra Day O'Connor (whom a headnote indicated joined only that concurrence and not Blackmun's majority opinion). "Although the Court considered that it was unnecessary to discuss and dispose of the equal protection claim when the due process issue was being decided in Logan's favor, I regard the equal protection issue as sufficiently important to require comment on my part," he wrote, "particularly inasmuch as a majority of the Members of the Court are favorably inclined toward the claim, although, to be sure, that majority is not the one that constitutes the Court for the controlling opinion."Logan, at 438
The equal protection claim in the case was "unconventional", Blackmun conceded, since the state did not explicitly create any classifications among litigants in the FEPA. That changed with the Illinois Supreme Court's strict reading. According to Blackmun, by refusing to allow FEPC the flexibility to correct or ignore its own mistake, claimants for before it were now divided between those whose complaints the commission processed in a timely fashion and those who it failed to do so for, no matter how timely those complaints were otherwise.Logan, 438–39
Since there was thus a classification, the next step was to decide whether it was rational. After briefly reviewing precedent in the area that held that test was "not toothless" despite its requirements very often being met when considered by courts, Blackmun said that in this case there was no room for doubt: "I see no need to explore the outer bounds of this test, for I find that the Illinois statute runs afoul of the lowest level of permissible equal protection scrutiny."Logan, 439–42
Taking under consideration the FEPA's two stated purposes—eliminating employment discrimination while providing employers with a process that protected them from baseless claims—Blackmun wrote that "[i]t is evident at a glance that neither of these objectives is served by [FEPA]'s deadline provision. Terminating potentially meritorious claims in a random manner obviously cannot serve to redress instances of discrimination. And it cannot protect employers from unfounded charges, for the frivolousness of a claim is entirely unrelated to the length of time the Commission takes to process that claim."
Blackmun likened FEPA as interpreted by the Illinois Supreme Court to an Oregon statute the Court had struck down on equal protection grounds in Lindsey v. Normet a decade prior. The state had required that tenants challenging their evictions were required to put up a bond equal to twice their monthly rent in advance of beginning proceedings. The Court had rejected all challenges to that law save the equal protection grounds, for the merits of a tenant's case against their landlord had no relation to their ability to afford the potentially exorbitant bond. "While it may well be true that '[n]o bright line divides the merely foolish from the arbitrary law,'" Blackmun wrote, quoting from Schweiker v. Wilson, another equal-protection case the Court had decided the year before, "I have no doubt that [this law] is patently irrational in the light of its stated purposes."
The Illinois Supreme Court had also, Blackmun agreed, found two other public purposes for the 120-day deadline—that it expedited dispute resolution, and keeping the commission's case load manageable. He dismissed the first: "Insofar as the court meant to suggest that a factfinding conference may help settle controversies and frame issues for a more efficient future resolution, it was undoubtedly correct. But I cannot agree that terminating a claim that the State itself has misscheduled is a rational way of expediting the resolution of disputes." Blackmun also found this rationale dubious since once the conference had been held, the law set no deadline for the resolution of the dispute.
Blackmun conceded that claims where the deadline had been missed, such as Logan's, were indeed resolved expeditiously. But that was less analysis than the Fourteenth Amendment required, he wrote.
So, too, was the state's possible interest in administrative efficiency. If that was indeed the goal, Blackmun wrote, "[it] suffers from the defect outlined above: it draws an arbitrary line between otherwise identical claims." It was also "speculative and attenuated" in relation to that goal as to arbitrary on its face. "The State's rationale must be something more than the exercise of a strained imagination; while the connection between means and ends need not be precise, it, at the least, must have some objective basis", he concluded. "That is not so here."
Powell concurrence
Justice Powell, joined by William Rehnquist, characterized the case as being of "little importance except to the litigants" since the statute had long since been amended, arising from "an isolated example of bureaucratic oversight". He expressed surprise that the more likely solution, tolling the deadline until the hearing could be held, was rejected in favor of a strict reading of the statute.
"The issue presented, at least for me, is too simple and straightforward to justify broad pronouncements on the law of procedural due process or of equal protection", Powell wrote. Rejecting the expansive reading he believed was suggested by Blackmun's opinions, "should be decided narrowly on its unusual facts". Those facts supported Blackmun's reasoning that the state denied Logan equal protection of the laws by creating two arbitrarily different classes of claimants:
Powell agreed that Lindsey and Schweiker compelled the result. " Although I do not join Justice Blackmun's separate opinion, I agree that the challenged statute, as construed and applied in this case, failed to comport with this minimal standard", he concluded. "I am concerned by the broad sweep of the Court's opinion, but I do join its judgment."
Aftermath
While the case was pending before the U.S. Supreme Court, the Illinois Supreme Court ruled on another challenge to the FEPA's deadlines provision. The 1978 amendment to the law following the Springfield-Sangamon decision had allowed claimants who had filed with the FEPC prior to that amendment's effective date but not had their claims acted on to refile those claims in state court. An employer facing a revived lawsuit argued the amended statute allowing it was a violation of the state constitution's guarantees of equal protection and due process, as well as its prohibition of laws benefiting a special interest without a rational justification. Again, in Wilson v. All-Steel, Inc., a unanimous opinion by Justice Ward, the Illinois Supreme Court agreed that by reviving extinguished claims for a class of plaintiffs distinguished purely by an arbitrary date of filing, it violated the equal protection rights of the other plaintiffs and the due process rights of the employers.
Wilson was interpreted as effectively barring the revival of any claim FEPC had administratively closed prior to 1981—until Logan. A federal class action suit brought by 3,000 plaintiffs who met its conditions went back and forth between the district court and the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals for the rest of the decade until Judge Brian Barnett Duff held in 1989 that the retroactive application of Logan the plaintiffs sought, while otherwise justifiable, would have led to an inequitable result for employers who, possibly lacking access to the evidence necessary to defend claims that were at that point well over a decade old, would effectively be forced to settle to their own financial detriment. The plaintiffs appealed that as well, arguing that Chevron Oil Co. v. Huson allowed an exception, but the Seventh Circuit again held for the state.
Subsequent jurisprudence
Two years later, in Hudson v. Palmer, another prisoner argued a guard's deliberate destruction of his property during a search of his cell constituted a due process violation per Logan. The Court declined to make the distinction. "In Logan, we decided a question about which our decision in Parratt left little doubt, that is, whether a postdeprivation state remedy satisfies due process where the property deprivation is effected pursuant to an established state procedure", wrote Chief Justice Warren Burger. "We held that it does not. Logan plainly has no relevance here."
The following year, in the landmark Cleveland Board of Education v. Loudermill decision on the due process rights of public employees facing termination from their jobs, Justice Byron White's majority opinion characterized Logan as "reiterat[ing]" its earlier holding in Vitek v. Jones,Vitek, at 491 that while states are free to create, modify or even abolish whatever procedures they wish for the remedy of constitutional wrongs, those procedures still must comply with federal law. The Court has not had the occasion to revisit Logan since then; but many lower courts have.
Federal courts
Holman v. Hilton
Blackmun had rebuked Zimmerman for "miss[ing] the point" of Parratt with its attempts to distinguish the two cases, noting that what distinction there was—between the negligence of a government and its prescribed acts following its own procedures—actually weighed in Logan's favor. Two years later, in Holman v. Hilton, the Third Circuit discussed the relationship between the two cases at greater length in resolving a claim with elements of both., hereafter Holman II
Like Parratt, the case had been brought by a prison inmate, Charles Holman, serving a life sentence at what was then known as Rahway State Prison in New Jersey. While he had been at Trenton State Prison in 1976, some of his personal items had been impounded following a search after an abortive escape attempt. They included 65 record albums, a quartz Timex watch and a set of diamond engagement rings. After collecting mail room receipts to prove the items had been shipped to him, he filed a replevin action in Mercer County Court to recover either the items or their cash value, which he put at over $600. The complaint was dismissed per New Jersey law which forbade prisoners from suing the government or its employees until they had completed their sentences and been released.,, hereafter Holman IHolman II, 855–56
After his transfer to Rahway, he filed several more claims within the prison system for items (books, clothing and food) he had been told were destroyed in a fire at Trenton. In March 1979 those claims were denied on the grounds that despite knowing of the impending transfer he had refused to assist in packing his personal items. Five months later Holman filed a pro se federal lawsuit under Section 1983, alleging that the law barring his suit violated the Fourteenth Amendment by denying him due process after a deprivation of property. The District of New Jersey agreed, granting Holman summary judgement,
Judge Dickinson R. Debevoise held for Holman. The state had defended the statute as rational since it believed it limited the potential for conflict between prisoners and correctional officers; also it insisted that it reduced the likelihood of prisoners filing frivolous lawsuits in order to get taken to court appearances. "At the very least, the rationality of [this law] is open to serious question", Debevoise wrote. It seemed more sensible to him that having recourse to the courts would make the feared conflicts less likely. For two reasons he also doubted that the bar on lawsuits against the state and its employees by those still incarcerated would serve to deter frivolous lawsuits: Parratt would divert inmate suits to federal court, and the law did not distinguish between frivolous and meritorious suits.Holman I, 920–21
It was not enough that the law fail the rational-basis test; it also had to serve to deny Holman his rights. Debevoise looked to Parratt and Logan for guidance. The former case was enough, he felt, but it was "confusing, however, and raises a number of difficult questions" that were answered by Logan. That case allowed him to see the challenged law as procedural and thus analogous to the FEPC's 120-day deadline in Logan. Since Holman's interests in the resolution of his dispute outweighed the state's, and he ran the risk of either dying in prison before he could bring suit or having to collect aged or unavailable evidence after release some time in the distant future, "[h]ere, as in the Logan case, the state has created an 'established procedure' which 'destroys [plaintiff's] entitlement without according him proper procedural safeguards.'"Holman I, 922–26
The state appealed to the Third Circuit. Judge James Hunter III wrote for a unanimous panel that Parratt and Logan governed the case. After briefly reviewing the facts, similar to the former, he noted the difference: New Jersey, unlike Nebraska, barred prisoners from suing under state tort law for the duration of their sentence.Holman II, 856–60
Hunter first asked if the state law was constitutional by itself, without consideration of the presence of alternative procedures the state cited in defending the statute. He agreed with Debevoise that, following Logan, the law deprived Holman of his property interest, one "quite substantial ... as its arbitrary denial could leave him with an uncompensated loss of what little personal property is allowed him in prison." He was equally doubtful of the state's logic behind the law, and also found Holman's interests greater than the state's.
New Jersey also argued that its administrative processes were an adequate substitute for litigation, but Hunter found them constitutionally deficient since they did not guarantee a hearing, and the state had the sole discretion to act on them. He specified that it was not necessary to have a hearing in every prison administrative process, just "some kind of meaningful opportunity to have [a] claim properly evaluated at some point." It "need not be formal nor need it be conducted pursuant to the requirements of the Federal Rules of Evidence or the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure."Holman II, 862–63
Diggs v. United States
The following year, the Third Circuit held against a prisoner whose pro se petition to have his sentence reduced under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 35(b) was sent by him before the 120-day deadline it set expired but not acted upon by the court for another year and a half. The government challenged the ensuing reduction to time served for lack of notice. The sentence reduction was vacated, and Diggs then filed a habeas petition challenging the vacatur order. After the district court dismissed it, he appealed.
Logan had been decided during the pendency of the case, which Judge Edward R. Becker admitted had a "provoking" effect on the case. But it was not sufficient for him to hold for Diggs. He was doubtful that a single rule could give rise to the property interest that Logan had found derived from an entire procedure, and that even if it could be said to there was less risk of erroneous deprivation than under the FEPA's 120-day limit because federal judges have almost unlimited discretion in considering sentence reductions.Diggs, at 248–50
Becker further distinguished Logan from the instant case by noting that while the extinction of Logan's claim by the lapsed deadline in his FEPC claim frustrated the state's interest in fighting employment discrimination, Diggs could still address the issues that might make early release better for him and the government through parole applications. Lastly the federal government's bases for limiting the time 35(b) petitions could be filed was a finding that the Parole Commission was generally better suited to considering when prisoners could be released, which Becker found rational.
Dissenting Judge John Joseph Gibbons argued that the delay in processing Diggs' original petition was not "unreasonable" since it was entirely the district court's fault. As a result it was unnecessary for the court to reach the due process claim that had been based on Logan, and he would have remanded the case to the district court to reconsider with the stipulation that no events subsequent to the original sentence reduction be considered in evaluating the petition.Diggs, 250–51
Yates v. Jamison
In 1986 the Fourth Circuit split over whether Logan or Parratt controlled a case brought by a Fayetteville, North Carolina, couple who sought compensation from the city of Charlotte after it demolished a house they owned there without notifying them beforehand. The city's building inspector's office had, the Yateses said, failed to exercise proper diligence in trying to locate them after it found the vacant house uninhabitable. After the district court denied the city's motion to dismiss, the city filed an interlocutory appeal.
Writing for the majority, Judge Robert F. Chapman held for himself and district judge Terrence Boyle, sitting by designation, that the sole question on appeal was whether Parratt reached the Yates' complaint. They had argued it came under Logan as having happened as a result of the city's "policy or custom" of inadequate searches of public records when trying to locate absentee property owners. Chapman noted that they themselves had attributed the demolition to "willful or reckless negligence" on the city's part. Finding the state's inverse condemnation procedures adequate enough remedy, he and Boyle reversed the district court and ordered the Yates' claim dismissed.Yates, at 1184–85
Judge Samuel James Ervin III dissented. He agreed that it was necessary to consider the applicability of Parratt and Hudson to the case to decide it, however after a lengthy review of those cases and other relevant precedent he found Logan more to the point since the other two cases concerned unauthorized takings of property. "[I]t is clear that, if the allegations in the complaint are true," Ervin wrote, "notice and the opportunity for a hearing were required prior to the destruction of the Yates' house."Yates, 1186–91
Ervin analogized the inverse condemnation process to the tort claim the Illinois Supreme Court had held an acceptable remedy for Logan—it would have been time-consuming, expensive and in the end could not have undone the original injury. "A predeprivation hearing after appropriate notice is the only possible way in which the owner of a building alleged to be unfit for human habitation can adequately protect his interest. Under the ordinance he may elect to contest the unfit characterization of the structure, or he can, by making repairs, save his property from destruction", Ervin wrote. "Hence, a postdeprivation hearing cannot possibly meet the owner's needs."
Other federal cases
Haygood v. Younger: In 1985, the Ninth Circuit affirmed a Section 1983 jury verdict in favor of a former prisoner who alleged California had miscalculated his sentence, resulting in him serving five years more than he should have, could proceed with a Section 1983 action against the state for excessive custody. In such a case, wrote Judge Alfred Goodwin for an en banc court, "[a] court's first task is to determine whether Parratt (random act) or Logan (official practice and procedure) controls." The court agreed that Haygood's extra time was the result of the latter.
Bretz v. Kelman: The same year, the Ninth Circuit found Logan applicable when remanding a Section 1983 malicious prosecution suit by a Montana man back to the district court which had dismissed it. "As in Logan, Bretz is challenging the direct abuse of the state process itself. It is meaningless to speak of the state's ability to provide postdeprivation remedial process where the state process itself has been abused", Goodwin wrote. "Consequently, also as in Logan, the state cannot satisfy the due process clause here by providing Bretz with a postdeprivation remedy in state court in the form of a tort action for malicious prosecution."
Burch v. Appalachee Community Mental Health Services: Judge Thomas Alonzo Clark relied on Logan when concurring in this 1988 Eleventh Circuit decision that held a Florida man had been deprived of his rights when, after being involuntarily committed to a local mental hospital, he was held there for five months without a legally required hearing before being discharged. Despite the greater factual similarities to Hudson and Parratt, Clark found Logan the controlling case, as the plaintiff had been taken into custody under established state procedure, and his lengthy commitment had been the result of the state's failure to follow that procedure, just as Logan's complaint had been closed due to the state's mistake.
Matthias v. Bingley: In 1990, the Fifth Circuit upheld a jury verdict for several plaintiffs whose seized property was ultimately sold due to a series of paperwork mistakes by members of the Houston Police Department. The defendants had likened the case to Parratt, as an unforeseeable and random action for which no predeprivation remedy could be possible. Judge Irving Loeb Goldberg was not convinced, seeing the case as more like Logan: "In fact, this case involves a systemic problem far more constitutionally problematic than that in Logan. In Logan, had the system worked correctly and no error occurred, the Commission's actions would not violate the Due Process Clause", he wrote. "But here, even if every City employee strictly complies with the City's system for processing seized property ... the system itself still blatantly violates the Due Process Clause."   
Long v. Morris: In this 1991 case, the Sixth Circuit relied on Logan to deny qualified immunity to Tennessee correctional officers who suspended, or threatened to, inmates' visitation privileges in retaliation for their refusal to comply with a strip search. Since state prison regulations said those privileges could only be abridged for good cause, they were a protected interest and came under the protection of Logan as settled law.
Shvartsman v. Apfel: In 1998, the Seventh Circuit rejected this challenge to the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act of 1996 by permanent resident aliens whose food stamps were terminated in August 1997, per the act, unless they could prove they had gained U.S. citizenship by that point. They had likened their case to Logan, but Judge Joel Flaum was unpersuaded, distinguishing the cases by noting that Logan had recognized a property right in the claim itself, not the procedures to assert it: "[Their reliance on Logan gets them no closer to their goal of establishing a property interest in the Food Stamp recertification procedures. This result is unsurprising, for defining access to procedures as a protectable property interest would eliminate the distinction between property and the procedures that are constitutionally required to protect it", he wrote. The Supreme Court has repeatedly emphasized the importance of this distinction, and the Court has not looked favorably upon claims of a property entitlement to a set of procedures."
Youakim v. McDonald: In 2000 the Northern District of Illinois sided with foster parents who challenged a reform in the system that denied them retroactive benefits past a certain date if the state's Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS) had not yet acted upon their applications, even if they were later found by DCFS to have been in continual compliance with new licensure requirements up to a certain date. Judge John Albert Nordberg found this provision "analogous to the 120-day deadline in Logan. Neither Plaintiffs here nor the plaintiff in Logan had any ability to expedite the process, their property interest was entirely in the hands of the State and the State is proceeding arbitrarily." And unlike Logan, there was no postdeprivation remedy available.
Hettinga v. United States, in 2012, considered a different aspect of Logan: the degree of deference involved in rational basis review. The D.C. Circuit affirmed a district court decision upholding the provision of the Milk Regulation Equity Act of 2005 (MREA) that eliminated a classification exempting large producer-handlers of milk from federal milk marketing orders, adversely affecting the interests of the plaintiff Arizona dairy processor. Among other issues, Hettinga claimed that the district court had been too deferential in applying the rational basis review to the MREA, noting that Logan had said the process is "not toothless". "Regardless of how Justice Blackmun characterized rational basis review, the Supreme Court's subsequent decision in Beach makes clear that 'not toothless' does not mean 'growling,'" the court's per curiam opinion responded. In the instant case, regardless of the impact on the plaintiffs, the government had satisfactorily explained the basis for the law, which was found to be rationally related to that purpose.
State courts
Board of County Commissioners of Calvert County v. Pritchard
In 1988 the Maryland Court of Appeals, that state's highest court, reversed the state's Court of Special Appeals, holding Logan inapplicabe, in a case where landowners challenged a rezoning of their property. The respondents in Board of County Commissioners of Calvert County v. Pritchard owned a  lot at an intersection on Maryland Route 4 north of Dunkirk that had been zoned "rural commercial" until May 1984 when the county adopted a new rezoning plan that reclassified it as "rural". The new zoning gave owners who wished to develop their property per the previous zoning a two-year window to do so, provided they had an approved site plan; after that they had an additional two years to get their construction completed.
The year after the rezoning, the Pritchards provisionally sold the lot to a developer who drew up plans for a shopping center at the site, and submitted them to the county planning commission, which gave the project preliminary approval but sought some changes. Near the end of the year that approval was rescinded after an updated plan was not submitted. In May 1986, the day before the original two-year grace period expired, the Pritchards submitted a nearly identical site plan, which the commission again rejected. This time it cited the zoning change.
The Pritchards sued, but lost at trial in circuit court. The Court of Special Appeals reversed in an unpublished opinion, finding that the two-year grace period established a property interest for the Pritchards which, per Logan, the state could not terminate without due process. The county was granted certiorari by the state Court of Appeals.
"There is no procedural due process violation", wrote Judge Lawrence Rodowsky for a unanimous court. The Pritchards had not been denied a hearing; they had had one when they submitted their plan right before the deadline and had been given adequate notice two years prior of what they needed to have done in order to retain the rural commercial zoning. Contrary to what the lower court had held, mere submission of a plan did not toll the deadline. "Logan is not on point", Rodowsky said. "Here ... the Pritchards' property was not downzoned as a result of any determination of adjudicative facts by the Commission. The downzoning was legislative action ... delayed for the two-year grace period."Pritchard, at 531–535
The Pritchards had also argued a denial of equal protection, based on Blackmun's concurrence in Logan. Again the court was unconvinced.Pritchard, 535–37
Joshua v. City of Gainesville
The Florida Supreme Court heard a case with similarities to Logan in 2000. The petitioner in Joshua v. City of Gainesville had five years earlier made formal complaints seven months apart to the state's Commission on Human Relations alleging the city had denied her a promotion on racial grounds and then retaliated against her following that complaint. The statute governing the commission said that it had 180 days to make a determination of whether reasonable cause exists to believe there is merit to the complaint; after that complainants have a year to file suit if they wish to pursue that remedy. In Joshua's case the commission never made any determination during that time, so she filed suit in 1998.
The city moved for dismissal on the grounds that the case was time-barred, citing recent lower-court precedent to that effect. Joshua could have filed her suit no later than January 1997, it said. She responded that that deadline did not apply because she had never received any determination from the commission, and thus the state's usual four-year statute of limitations for statutory causes of action applied, under which her suit had been timely. The trial court ruled for the city and dismissed, which Joshua appealed. The First District Court of Appeal affirmed, but certified the question to the state Supreme Court.
Writing for a unanimous court, Justice Peggy Quince looked to the text of the statute to determine the legislature's intent. It was clear, she said, that the legislature expressed a preference for complainants to first seek administrative dispute resolution before going to court. To do so it established the one-year limitation for those who received a favorable reasonable-cause finding, and required the commission to dismiss any complaint where it found in the negative. But, "[w]hat is not clear, however, is what happens when the Commission fails to make any determination within the allotted 180 days." The city and Joshua argued that in pari materia readings of the statute supported their positions,Joshua, at 435–36 with the latter relying on a precedent where an age-discrimination suit had been allowed to proceed under the four-year deadline.
Quince held that the rigid application of the deadline in Joshua's case, without any statutory support, denied her due process. She found Logan to be helpful in understanding this. "As in Logan, this case involves administrative inaction and error", Quince wrote. "A claimant should not be penalized for attempting to allow a government agency to do its job." To that end she reminded the commission that it owed every complainant notice within the 180 days.Joshua, 438–39
District of Columbia v. Beretta USA
In 2008 the District of Columbia Court of Appeals relied in part on Logan when dismissing the district's suit against the gunmaker for its role in contributing to gun violence in the district by retroactively applying the federal Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act (PLCAA), which strictly limits suits against firearms manufacturers, passed during the pendency of the suit. The district argued that the ongoing action was a claim with a property interest, like Logans, that could not just be arbitrarily extinguished by an act of Congress. "But Logan, in our judgment, imposes no such complete restriction on legislative authority", wrote Judge Michael W. Farrell for a unanimous court.
Farrell pointed to the language in Logan saying that the state "remains free to create substantive defenses or immunities for use in adjudication—or to eliminate its statutorily created causes of action altogether".Logan, 432 That last was exactly what had happened here, he wrote. The district had been deprived of its claim not by the executive or judicial branches, but by a legislative act, which was per Logan, all the process that was due."
The district had argued that this still said nothing about Congress's powers to retroactively bar causes of action that it had previously permitted while suits under those causes were pending. Farrell looked to other cases, particularly Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm, Inc., a 1995 case where the Supreme Court had held unconstitutional an amendment to the Securities Act of 1934 that required federal courts to reopen some closed cases. While the district's suit was a protected property interest per Logan, Farrell conceded, that alone could not exempt it from the FLCAA.
Shepherd of the Valley Lutheran Retirement Services v. Cesta
In 2019 Ohio's Eleventh District Court of Appeals heard the case of Shepherd of the Valley Lutheran Retirement Services, a nursing home operator which had sought to recover nearly $25,000 in unpaid pills from the family of a former Warren nursing home resident after her 2016 death. Its lawyer had thus applied to be appointed special administrator for her estate, one day before the six-month deadline to make a claim against the estate ended. The lawyer was appointed a week later, and the claim presented to him, but in mid-2017 Cesta's husband was appointed her executor per her will. He rejected the nursing home's claim as untimely, and the organization challenged that in Trumbull County Court of Common Pleas within the two months required by state law.
Shepherd argued that, like Logan, they had been deprived without recourse of a property claim because of a process—the untimely appointment of an administrator for the Cesta estate—over which they had no control. The trial court rejected that argument, holding that Shepherd had been aware of the deadline since Cesta's death, of which it was also aware, and had waited too long to seek the appointment of a special administrator. "Such application is not an unduly burdensome or time consuming pursuit", it said, granting summary judgement to Cesta.
On appeal, the decision was affirmed. Judge Diane Grendell wrote for a unanimous panel that Logan was inapposite both legally and factually. First, the statute establishing the deadline was self-executing, involving no process, and thus beyond the reach of Logan. Second, Shepherd, unlike Logan, had waited almost until the last moment to request the appointment of a special administrator. "There is no evidence that Shepherd of the Valley sought an expedited ruling or otherwise advised the probate court of the urgency of the appointment", Grendell wrote. "[I]t cannot be said that [it] acted with due diligence to comply with [the statute]'s reasonable procedural requirements. The claim in Logan, by contrast, was compromised by the state's inaction and dilatory conduct."
Analysis and commentary
Theory of property
The year after Logan was decided, Emory law professor Timothy Terrell added a lengthy critique of Blackmun's reasoning behind holding Logan's complaint a protected property interest, which he characterized as "harmful[ly] superficial", to an essay he had begun writing on what he argued was the Court's vague and intellectually unsound understanding of property. By not elucidating more on Justice Jackson's equally shallow analysis in Mullane, "much important analytic detail is assumed and obscured." While a contractual cause of action had long been recognized as property under the common law concept of a chose in action, it was harder to recognize torts as property due to their lack of transferability.
Terrell focused on Blackmun's likening of Logan's right to have his complaint heard on the merits to the indigent petitioners' right to divorce in Boddie. "While his conclusion may seem reasonable, his reasoning is strained and unnecessary", Terrell wrote. Divorce did not have to be viewed as property to be a protectable interest. "Instead, it and any other right relating to use of the court system could and should be labeled as 'liberty' interests."Terrell, at 513
Terrell connected this to a theory he had been developing that due process rights are strongest where the government provides the only forum for redress. He defended Justice Rehnquist's widely criticized plurality opinion in Arnett v. Kennedy, which suggested rights like life, liberty and property were rights only in the sense that procedures had been put in place to protect citizens from arbitrarily being deprived of them, as at least acknowledging the issue Blackmun's Logan opinion avoided. While the "for cause" standard he had invoked to hold Logan's claim a property interest worked within the opinion, "[it] does not give us any basis to disagree with the Illinois Supreme Court's conclusion that this entitlement had some serious 'holes' in it", Terrell commented.Terrell, 517–520 Blackmun further erred in treating Logan's property rights as purely procedural without reaching the substantive rights that underlay them.Terrell, 524–527
"The basic criticism that can be made of Justice Blackmun's reasoning throughout his opinion in [Logan] is not that it is illogical or productive of indefensible results," Terrell concluded, "but that it is incomplete. By failing to identify and rely upon the normative foundations of the Due Process Clause, his opinion lacks the kind of structured and rigorous legal analysis it could and should possess."Terrell, 533
Three years later Villanova professor Karen Flax considered the issue at more length. She argued that while the Court did not formally reject the "bitter with the sweet" theory until Loudermill, it effectively did so in Logan. There, by joining Blackmun's majority opinion, Burger, who had been part of the plurality in Arnett, formally left Rehnquist by himself in asserting it.
Thomas W. Merrill, Charles Evans Hughes Professor at Columbia Law School, looked back in 2000 and observed that, perhaps because Loudermill had explicitly rejected Arnetts "bitter with the sweet" formulation, the "analytically coherent solution to the positivist trap" that Logan had offered in conjunction with another minimally cited case from that era, Memphis Light, Power & Gas Division v. Craft had been overlooked.Merrill, at 929 As a result, four of the Court's recent cases that had turned in part on the definition of property were still problematic.Merrill, 889–90
Merrill found one of those four cases, College Savings Bank v. Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Education Expense Board, to be in particular conflict with Logan.Merrill, 912–913 There, the private-party petitioner had sued the respondent state agency over advertising that they claimed misrepresented their competing product, alleging among other claims trademark infringement. The bank had argued it had a property interest in its potential future business, an interest it claimed the state's actions had damaged. Justice Antonin Scalia's majority opinion rejected that argument, characterizing the bank's interest as "future business activity", which could not be considered property, unlike its intellectual-property claims, since it could not include the right to exclude.College Savings Bank, at 673
Scalia described this as "the hallmark of property", which to Merrill brought to mind the same phrase used by Blackmun in Logan—but with a different predicate: "an individual entitlement grounded in state law, which cannot be removed except 'for cause'". In addition to this conflict, Merrill pointed that Logan, which the bank had mentioned only once in its briefs and Scalia had not cited at all, had reaffirmed Mullane (likewise unmentioned by Scalia) in explicitly recognizing a cause of action as property, under which the Court could have held for the bank. "The failure to attend to Logan and the procedural due process case law points to what will surely be the most vexing problem created by College Savings Bank", Merrill wrote.
Procedural and substantive due process
In a later paper, Michigan professor Christina Whitman similarly describes Logan as "stand[ing] on the border between procedure and substance." She groups it with Parratt as representing a direction she believes the Court abandoned too quickly due to the complexities it presented, "properly sensitive to the design of state systems in handling of citizen concerns, and to the possibility that structural designs may create constitutional questions through either omissions or inadvertence." Logan, she explains, blurs the distinction between procedural and substantive due process in that it asks not "whether the decision to deprive Logan of his claim ... was made with fair procedures, but whether that
decision could be reached at all."
In the wake of the 1989 DeShaney v. Winnebago County decision, in which the Court held that an abused child's due process rights were not violated by county social workers' failure to protect him despite their awareness of the abuse before he suffered permanent brain damage, Boston University (BU) professor, Jack Beermann, saw Logan as a counterexample to the Court's analysis in the case, since in both cases the petitioner had looked to the government to protect them from, or remedy, private harm. He argued that Logan had to be read as a substantive due process case since there was, unlike most procedural due process cases, no doubt that the claim existed to begin with. "I would read Logan more broadly and argue that when government promises any sort of benefit in a situation like DeShaney, it should be required to keep its promise," he wrote. "[T]he Court's decision can be supported on the ground that people are entitled to rely on the state's promise to fight discrimination, and the state cannot avoid that promise surreptitiously, with surprising procedural or substantive bars."
Blackmun's concurrence
Smolla also found Blackmun's concurrence, finding Logan had been denied his equal-protection rights as well through the arbitrary operation of the FEPA, "more elegantly simple" than his opinion for the Court. He found it a further qualification of Parratt: "... although the hallmark of property is an entitlement that cannot be removed except 'for cause,' the attempt by a state to permit certain administrative action to be taken with or without cause may sometimes be so devoid of rational justification that it violates equal protection, notwithstanding the existence of state tort remedies."
Flax, too, found Blackmun's concurrence the most "surprising" aspect of the decision, for the way it allowed circumvention of the entitlement doctrine, under which litigants have a claim against the state only if the law creating the right or privilege can be read as making it an entitlement, limiting judicial review of the state's action. "In effect", she wrote, "his argument maintains that, with or without a state-created entitlement, a state denies equal protection when it allows administrators to act in a totally arbitrary fashion." Flax pointed to City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., where the Court struck down an administrative act without reaching the ordinance authorizing it, as showing how "Logan "undermines the doctrine because it by itself is an entitlement case."
Stanford professor William Cohen wrote more about Powell's shorter concurrence. "Obviously, if a majority of the justices had followed [his] lead, Logan would not be among the cases meeting head-on the puzzle [of] whether the state must provide fair procedures for substantive entitlements it did not have to give in the first place", he wrote. But viewing it as a due process case would have made it difficult to justify the result. "Equal protection would provide a narrower precedent simply because it would obscure the reasons for that conclusion."
Another BU professor, Kenneth Simons, was more skeptical of Blackmun's equal-protection analysis. He suggested that, assuming the hypothesized goal of reducing the FEPC's caseload was the actual reason for the deadline, if perhaps it was understaffed and could not otherwise stay within its budget, "[t]his is an unfortunate state of affairs, but does it deny equal protection?" Flax also wondered whether a lottery would be seen as unconstitutional if that were the case.
Simons also considered Blackmun's analysis legally deficient. "I do not understand why Justice Blackmun feels compelled to accept the state court's characterization of this inadvertent result as a 'classification'", he wrote. Federal law should have been determinative of that question. Simons also believed that it might only have been a constitutional issue if the misscheduling had occurred more than once, and the agency could have been ordered to develop and adopt remedies. "If this were an isolated, random error of an individual employee, however, I doubt that the problem should be analyzed as an equal protection 'classification'".Simons, at 526n272
Stringency of rational basis review
Other commentators have followed the D.C. Circuit's Heeringa example by taking note of not just what Blackmun's concurrence says about the stringency of rational basis review but putting it into practice. In 1984 DePaul professor Jeffrey Shaman cited Logan as one of three recent cases where the Court was less deferential to governments in considering the rationality of the statute under review than it had typically been. "[I]n all three of these decisions the Court restricted the indulgence that normally prevails under minimal scrutiny for overinclusive and underinclusive legislation, and thereby sharpened the level of review", Shaman wrote. St. Mary's professor David Dittfurth sees Logan as demonstrating that "[a]lthough it is often said that the lowest tier of equal protection analysis applies to general economic or social welfare regulation, the more accurate view is that judicial scrutiny will be applied only when the Supreme Court finds reason to be especially suspicious of a particular type of classification."
Other issues
The year after the decision, Illinois law professor Rodney Smolla devoted an extended analysis to Logan and its relationship with Parratt, in the context of what he saw as the Court's increasing emphasis on state tort remedies over Section 1983 actions as appropriate responses to alleged due process violations. Taking note of Blackmun's rebuke of Zimmerman for suggesting there was no distinction between the two cases, he saw the Court as holding Parratt applied to cases where the plaintiff alleged random, unforeseeable government action, while Logan applied if the due process violation arose from the operation of law.
In another paper, Smolla called Logans use of the rational basis test "a starting point for the development of a sound rational compromise" between the rights-privilege analysis of due process, which the court had abandoned in the 1960s with Keyishian v. Board of Regents, and the entitlement doctrine that had emerged as a possible replacement a few years later in Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth.
The authors of a 1984 Georgia Law Review article primarily critical of Parratt for doing little to clarify the distinction between common-law and constitutional torts also believed Logan could have done more to resolve that issue. "The precedential authority of the Logan Court's treatment of Parratt is open to question since the Court never should have reached Parratts 'adequacy' issue at all," they wrote in a footnote. Since Logan, unlike Parratts Taylor, was not suing the state, "the straightforward answer to the defendant's argument, then, is that the threshold requirement for the invocation of Parratt is a constitutional tort action that can be avoided by an adequate state tort remedy and that this threshold is not met on the facts of Logan."
David Azrin of Michigan counsels against deriving a rule that arbitrary state court action should be corrected by federal courts from Logan and two other cases He notes that the Court's majority opinion in the case moves, without explanation, from locating Logan's property right in his claim to the procedures that he had to follow, and that the Court does not explain why it rejected the Illinois Supreme Court's interpretation—the Court may, he speculates, have felt an anti-discrimination claim entitled to special consideration, and "by silently changing the nature of the property interest while remaining within the traditional due process analysis, the Court was able to protect Logan's right to be free from discrimination without announcing a new constitutional doctrine concerning discrimination."
Azrin also wrote about Logans "feeble" attempt to distinguish itself from Parratt. "The practical difficulties in applying the distinction between acts 'operative of state law' and those that are merely 'unauthorized' are compounded by the emptiness of the concept itself", he explained, observing that federal courts trying to apply the case had reached different conclusions when considering similar state actions under the two cases. "A number of courts have explicitly refused to interpret Logan broadly to support a rule against arbitrary state decisions", particularly in the First Circuit, Azrin observed. They cited both the intrusion on state lawmaking and judicial processes, and that "the added layer of federal review does not ensure a more correct result." He concluded that "Logan should not be read broadly to support a rule against arbitrary state decisions. [It] should instead be limited to its facts."Azrin, at 2046–49
Richard Lempert and Joseph Sanders, authors of An Invitation to Law and Social Science, find the "otherwise ordinary" case of Logan an excellent illustration of the difference between the older forms of action, which focused on strict adherence to procedure, preferred in English common law courts and the modern substantial causes of action, under which a plaintiff must only state the facts of the case, which displaced them in the mid-19th century. The Illinois Supreme Court took a more form-based approach when it issued the writ of prohibition since the FEPC had not complied with the statutory requirement to hold the conference within the 120-day period. "This argument would have done a common lawyer proud," they write. "It elevates form over substance in much the same way demurrers do to technically deficient pleas." The Supreme Court's reversal came from taking a more substantive approach to the case.
A 1990 comment in the University of Pennsylvania Law Review on the issue of using fees to control access to the courts and thus reduce caseloads expressed the belief that, in the wake of Logan, indigent or financially challenged plaintiffs seeking to have any fees reduced or waived will have to rely exclusively on due process arguments. Prior to it, Boddie and two other cases, all of which rested on other issues, had controlled. "But the restriction of the access argument to due process in Logan, coupled with the Court's refusal to enunciate a doctrine tying any of the aforementioned strands into a coherent whole, will surely keep the civil litigant's status in limbo for the foreseeable future."
See also
List of United States administrative law cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
Notes
References
Further reading
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States disability case law
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:1982 in United States case law
"""

From "Londoner v. City and County of Denver" ==> """
Londoner v. City and County of Denver, 210 U.S. 373 (1908), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that due process rights under the U.S. Constitution attach to administrative agency hearings that involve adjudication, but not to those that involve legislation.
Legal principles
Due process protections attach to government agency activities that are adjudicative in nature, but not to activities that are legislative in nature.
Facts and procedural posture
The provisions of the Denver (Defendant) city charter confer upon the city the power to make local improvements and to assess the cost upon property specially benefited. Londoner (Plaintiff) was provided with notice of the assessment, but there was no opportunity for a hearing, the notice only fixed a deadline for the filing of complaints and objection. Londoner brought suit against the city challenging the assessment of a tax for the cost of paving the street abutting his property on the grounds that he was denied due process of law.
Issue
Where a tax is to be assessed upon property owners, do those affected by the tax have the right to argue their side and support their allegations by proof?
Analysis
The due process protections of the 14th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution require a hearing and opportunity to be heard whenever the government wishes to violate a citizen's life, liberty, or property.  Due process rights attach to governmental activities that are adjudicative in nature, but not to activities that are legislative in nature.  In the context of taxation, a legislative body has the power to tax without affording citizens due process protections.  However, when the decision to tax particular individuals is made by a non-legislative body based on the individual facts and circumstances of a particular case, the decision becomes adjudicative in nature, and due process protections attach.  These due process protections do not require a full trial, but the mere opportunity to file a written statement is insufficient.  Due process in this context requires at least an opportunity to be heard in person and present evidence.  No such opportunity was given.  Therefore, the action violated due process, and the liens were void.
This case is one of the earliest to establish when an agency rulemaking process must submit to adjudication. While administrative agencies have wide discretion within the rulemaking context, there are many instances in which adjudication is required. Where complaints are particularized and specific facts are at issue, adjudication is preferable since it is within a judge's expertise to resolve matters involving personal rights.  Whereas, when there is a general grievance bearing on future policies, rulemaking is preferable because the expertise and familiarity of an agency within its field helps to inform them on such decisions.
Here, the law of Colorado denied landowners post-deprivation hearings, the right to be heard after an assessment of taxes had been made.  Thus, the right to a pre-deprivation hearing, allowing landowners to be heard prior to the assessment of taxes, was the only way in which the landowners could challenge the Government's actions depriving them of property.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 210
External links
Category:1908 in United States case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:History of Denver
Category:Legal history of Colorado
"""

From "Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock" ==> """
Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock, 187 U.S. 553 (1903), was a United States Supreme Court case brought against the US government by the Kiowa chief Lone Wolf, who charged that Native American tribes under the Medicine Lodge Treaty had been defrauded of land by Congressional actions in violation of the treaty.
The Court declared that the "plenary power" of the United States Congress gave it authority to abrogate treaty obligations between the United States and Native American tribes unilaterally. The decision marked a departure from the holdings of Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, , and Worcester v. Georgia, , which had shown greater respect for the autonomy of Native American tribes.
Background
Tribes
The Kiowa tribe is a Native American tribe that has historically inhabited the southern Great Plains what is now Oklahoma, Texas, Kansas, and New Mexico.,  132-34 (2009). Originally from the northern great plains along the Platte River, and under pressure from other tribes,Angela R. Riley, The Apex of Congress' no power over Indian Affairs: The Story of Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock, in  193 (Carole Goldberg, Kevin K. Washburn, & Philip P. Frickey eds., 2011); ,  153 (Kessinger Publishing 2006) (1901). they eventually moved and settled south of the Arkansas River primarily in present-day Oklahoma. The Kiowa had a long history of close association and alliance with the Kiowa-Apache or Plains Apache., at 156; , at 433. Around 1790, the Kiowa also formed an alliance with the Comanche and formed a barrier to European-American incursions into their territories.,  147 (2003); , at 133; John R. Wunder, Why Native Americans Can No Longer Count on Treaties with the U.S. Government in 2  700, 701 (John W. Johnson ed. 2001). The alliance made travel on the Santa Fe Trail hazardous, with attacks on wagon trains beginning in 1828 and continuing thereafter., at 194; , at 75.
Treaties
In 1837 at Fort Gibson, leaders of the Kiowa tribe signed their first treatyTreaty with the Kiowa, etc. of 1837, May 26, 1837, ; , at 169-71; Wunder, at 701. with the United States. By 1854, the need for another treaty became apparent, and the United States entered into a treatyTreaty with the Comanche, Kiowa, and Apache of 1853, July 27, 1853, . with the Kiowa, Comanche, and Kiowa-Apache (KCA) at Fort Ackinson, Indian Territory.Kappler, at 600. The treaty did not specifically designate a reservation but was, for the most part, an extension of the 1837 treaty. There was an attempt to place some of the tribes on a reservation on the Brazos River in Texas near Fort Belknap, under Indian Agent Robert S. Neighbors., at 197; , at 76. By 1858, Neighbors resolved to move the reservation into Indian Territory. By August 1859, Neighbors had moved the Indians from the Brazos Reservation to Indian Territory, south of the Washita River near Fort Cobb., at 76. In 1865, near present-day Wichita, Kansas, the three tribes signed another treatyTreaty with the Comanche and Kiowa of 1865, Oct. 18, 1865, . that provided for the reservation in present-day Oklahoma and Texas., at 179-80. Finally, in 1867, the tribes agreed to the Medicine Lodge Treaty.Treaty with the Kiowa and Comanche of 1867, ; Riley, at 194; Kappler, at 977; , at 181-86; Wunder, at 701. The treaty provided for a much smaller reservation and stipulated that whites were not allowed to encroach on the reservation. Also, to reduce the reserve's land further would require the approval of three fourths of the tribal members., at 185; Wunder, at 701; Riley, at 194-96.
Assimilation period
thumb|left|250px|alt=Photo of a Kiowa Indian (Lone Wolk the elder)|Lone Wolf (the elder) in 1872
Within one year, the United States breached the treaty when General William T. Sherman ordered all the tribes to Fort Cobb, withheld the treaty payments to them, and requested an order declaring that all hunting rights be forfeited. At the same time, Indian agents were trying to undermine tribal authority as the buffalo herds were being eliminated by white hunting.Riley, at 197. Two new leaders emerged meanwhile: Quanah Parker and Lone Wolf (the younger) Following his defeat at the Battle of Palo Duro Canyon, Parker settled down and began to adopt white ways., at 76-77. Lone Wolf and his followers continued to resist assimilation policies., at 133; Riley, at 199-202. Many of the old tribal leaders had been arrested and imprisoned when they left the reservation to hunt, and war leaders such as Lone Wolf (the elder) started to pass away from old age and disease.
During this same period, as the tribes had been unsuccessful at farming it, the KCA found a way to make the land pay by leasing it to cattlemen for grazing., at 217. By 1885, about  were being used to graze about 75,000 cattle, with an annual payment to the tribes of $55,000. At the same time, whites living just outside the reservation boundary were coming onto it to take timber and other goods, resulting in the tribes forming a police force to protect their property from theft by white settlers., at 217; ,  91-95 (2007).
The Jerome Commission
thumb|right|250px|alt=Photo of a Kiowa Indian (Lone Wolk the younger)|Lone Wolf (the younger) in 1902, plaintiff
In 1892, the United States sent the Jerome Commission, consisting of David H. Jerome, Alfred M. Wilson, and Warren G. Sayre, to meet with the Kiowa to convince them to turn over most of their reserve for white settlement in return for $2 million.Riley, at 202-05.Raymond Cross, Sovereign Bargains, Indian Takings, and the Preservation of Indian Country in the Twenty-First Century: Lift Your Weapons. Here is the One that Resists Intentions, 40  425, 462 (1998); Riley, at 202-05. Lone Wolf spoke out in opposition to the allotment, saying:
After over a week of negotiations, terms were set so that each member would receive 160 acres. The tribes would receive $2 million of which $250,000 would be paid to members, with the remaining money to be held in trust for the tribes at 5% interest.; Cross, at 463; , at 219-20; Wunder, at 701; Riley, at 202-05. The commission immediately began to collect signatures and, just as quickly, allegations of fraud arose. Joshua Givens, an interpreter, was widely suspected of being dishonest. He was accused of forcing some members to sign and tricking others into thinking they were signing a document opposing the agreement.Wunder, at 701; Riley, at 202-05. By now, the tribes were almost unanimous in their opposition to the agreement, asked to see the document, and requested that their signatures be removed. Lone Wolf later stated that was refused and that they were threatened with violence.Riley, at 202-05. Jerome left the reservation with what the government claimed was the approval of three quarters of the tribe.Lone Wolf, 187 U.S. at 554; , at 220; Wunder, at 701; Riley, at 202-05.
thumb|left|250px|alt=Photo of a white man in a suit (Ethan Hitchcock)|Ethan Hitchcock, Secretary of the Interior, defendant
Congress
With the validity of the agreement in question, the tribes, joined by the Indian Rights Association (IRA) and local ranchers, lobbied against its ratification by Congress., at 220; , at 108-09; Wunder, at 701-02; Riley, at 205-07. The IRA wrote letters to Senators, stating that the agreement was: "utterly destructive of that honor and good faith which should characterize our dealings with any people, and especially with one too weak to enforce their rights as against us by any other mean as than an appeal to our sense of justice."Riley, at 205 (internal citations omitted). The Secretary of the Interior informed Congress that the allotment would be devastating to the tribes, as the land was not suited to farming, and the amount of land allotted would not allow them sufficient land to graze cattle. A bill was introduced in 1892 to ratify the agreement, but failed to receive the necessary votes. It was reintroduced every year until it passed in 1900, eight years later.Cross, at 464; , at 108-09; Wunder, at 701-02; Riley, at 205-07. The agreement finally passed when the Rock Island Railroad agree to set aside an additional 480,000 acres of pastureland for the tribes to hold in common.Lone Wolf, 187 U.S. at 559-60; , at 116; Riley, at 205-07.
Lower courts
At the ratification of the agreement, a delegation of tribal leaders traveled to Washington, D.C. and requested a meeting with President William McKinley.Wunder, at 701-02; Riley, at 207-08. McKinley's position was that the tribes must conform to the decision of Congress.Riley, at 207-08. Parker and the other principal chiefs accepted that the fight against allotment was over, but Lone Wolf continued to argue against accepting allotment.Wunder, at 701-02; Riley, at 207. In 1901, Lone Wolf and others hired William M. Springer, a former federal judge and US representative., at 117-18; Wunder, at 701-02; Riley, at 208.
Supreme Court of the District of Columbia
On June 6, 1901, Springer filed suit in the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia, which is a different court than the United States Supreme Court., at 118. The plaintiffs asked for an injunction to stop the opening of KCA lands to settlement and the allotment of the land.Cross, at 443, 464. Springer argued that the Jerome agreement deprived the tribes of their lands without due process and in violation of the Constitution by breaking the treaty with the tribes.Riley, at 208-09. Springer alleged that the KCA were duped into signing the agreement and that it was not signed by three quarters of the members, as required by the treaty, that the KCA had protested the agreement from the beginning, and that the version which Congress ratified was different from the version signed by the KCA.Riley, at 209. While the suit was being heard, on August 6, 1901, the government began to sell off the tribes' surplus land., at 220; , at 118. Judge A.C. Bradley ruled against Lone Wolf, holding that Congress had the authority to allot the land, citing United States v. Kagama..Lone Wolf, 187 U.S. at 563; Wunder, at 702.
Circuit Court of Appeals
Springer then appealed to the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals.Wunder, at 702; Reilly, at 216-17. By the time that court heard the appeal, the reservation land had been allotted and excess land sold. The D.C. Circuit ruled that the question was not justiciable, rather it was a political question which had to be decided by Congress. The Court held that an act of Congress must prevail over any specific article in a treaty with an Indian tribe.Reilly, at 216-17. The court further held that, in any event, the land did not belong to the tribe. It was controlled by the United States, with Indians as mere occupants. The Circuit Court affirmed the decision of the lower court.Lone Wolf, 187 U.S. at 564.
Supreme Court
thumb|right|250px|alt=Photo of a white man in a suit (Justice Edward White)|Justice Edward White, author of the majority opinion
Arguments
At this point, the IRA hired another attorney, Hampton L. Carson, to take the lead from Springer.Wunder, at 703. The arguments remained the same as they had in the lower courts: that the tribes were being deprived of their land without due process. The attorneys noted that the United States had never deprived a tribe of its land without some form of consent by the tribe.Reilly, at 217-19. Carson and Springer highlighted Worcester v. Georgia    . and the Indian canon of construction in their arguments.
Willis Van Devanter argued the case for the United States, taking the position that Congress had the power to abrogate the treaty at will. Devanter cited Kagama as authority for Congress having plenary power over Indian matters.
Opinion of the court
Justice Edward White delivered the opinion of the unanimous court. The Court held that Congress had the authority to void treaty obligations with Native American tribes because it had an inherent plenary power,Cross, at 464-65. noting:
The decision was based, among other things, on a paternalistic view of the United States' relationship with the tribes:
The decision presented American Indians as inferior in race, culture, and religion: 
White held that requiring tribal consent would actually hurt the tribes and that the tribes should presume that Congress would act in good faith to protect tribal needs.Cross, at 464-65.
Justice John Marshall Harlan concurred in the judgment but did not author a separate opinion.
Subsequent developments
Reports show that ninety percent of the land allotted to tribal members was lost by them to settlers.Judith V. Royster, The Legacy of Allotment, 27  1, 11-12 (1995). By the 1920s, the KCA tribes were impoverished, with an unemployment rate of sixty percent.Natsu Taylor Saito, The Plenary Power Doctrine: Subverting Human Rights in the Name of Sovereignty, 51  1115, 1133-34 (2002); Reilly, at 224.
By 1934, approximately , or two thirds of Indian lands, had been transferred to settlers.Royster, at 13; Saito, at 1133; Cross, at 446 n.108. Until the Meriam Report was published, showing the destructive effects of the policy, the allotment process continued unchecked.Royster, at 16. By the time Congress ended allotment, the KCA land went from  to about .Reilly, at 224. Also, the Court's ruling meant that the only recourse left for Indian tribes to use to resolve land disputes was Congress.Shelby D. Green, Specific Relief for Ancient Deprivations of Property, 36  245, 272-73 (2003). Indians were not eligible to bring a case in the United States Court of Claims under the Tucker Act,Green, at 273-74. and were limited to actions in often hostile state courts.
Legally, scholars have compared Lone Wolf to the infamous Dred Scott case,.Angela R. Riley, The Apex of Congress' no power over Indian Affairs: The Story of Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock, in  193, 226 (Carole Goldberg, Kevin K. Washburn, & Philip P. Frickey eds., 2011) and universally condemned the decision.Reilly, at 226.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 187
Footnotes
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1903 in United States case law
Category:United States Native American treaty case law
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Indigenous peoples of the Great Plains
Category:Kiowa
Category:Indian Territory
"""

From "Long Island Care at Home, Ltd. v. Coke" ==> """
Long Island Care at Home, Ltd. v. Coke, 551 U.S. 158 (2007), is a US labor law case, concerning the minimum wage.
Facts
Long Island Care at Home Ltd claimed that it did not need to pay its staff the minimum wage, despite the apparent meaning of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 and its rules as clarified by the Department of Labor. It argued that this was true under the Fair Labor Standards Act 1938, 29 USC §213(a)(15) which exempted persons 'employed in domestic service employment to provide companionship services for individuals ... unable to care for themselves.' The Department of Labor's General Regulations §552.3 further stated this had to be the 'private home ... of the person by whom he or she is employed.'
Judgment
Justice Breyer wrote for a unanimous court that the care employees were included in the minimum wage.
See also
United States labor law
References
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2007 in United States case law
"""

From "Longshoremen v. Allied Int'l, Inc." ==> """
International Longshoremen's Association, AFL-CIO v. Allied International, Inc., 456 U.S. 212 (1982), was a United States Supreme Court case which held that a trade union that refused to unload cargo from the Soviet Union in protest against the invasion of Afghanistan had engaged in a secondary boycott, an unfair labor practice under the National Labor Relations Act..
 Background 
Allied International was an importer of wood products from the Soviet Union and had contracts with a shipping firm to bring the products to the United States. The shipping company in turn contracted a stevedoring company to unload the cargo, whose workers were members of the International Longshoremen's Association (ILA).  In 1980, following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the ILA had resolved not to load or unload Soviet cargo destined for US ports. As a result of this boycott, Allied's shipping was disrupted and the company had to renegotiate its contracts. Allied International sued the union.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Powell rejected the ILA's defense, noting; ''as understandable and even commendable as the ILA's ultimate objectives may be, the certain effect of its action is to impose a heavy burden on neutral employers. It is just such a burden, as well as widening of industrial strife, that the secondary boycott provisions were designed to prevent.''  The Court argued that while ILA claimed to be boycotting the Soviet Union, it was in effect boycotting a third party (the employer).  The Court viewed the boycott as a political act, rather than economic.  It dismissed claims that of First Amendment protection, as the petition clause relates to expression towards domestic government, not foreign.
 Subsequent developments 
John Rubin, writing on the significance of the case, noted:
Julius Getman, writing at the time as Professor of Law at Yale University, noted the incongruity in the Court's reasoning between this case and NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware Co., which upheld the right to engage in boycotts:
 References 
External links
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States case law
Category:International Longshoremen's Association
Category:United States labor case law
Category:Soviet Union–United States relations
"""

From "Looney v. District of Columbia" ==> """
Looney v. District of Columbia, 113 U.S. 258 (1885), was a U.S. Supreme Court case testing whether a government contractor could sue for outstanding payment when those debts had already been sold off to other parties.  The court ruled a street contractor could not both sell the debts at a discount as a security and also sue District of Columbia for the difference in what they were owed.
Background
The case involves a written contract made on September 11, 1872, between Dennis Looney and the Board of Public Works of the District of Columbia wherein Looney agreed to provide  materials and labor and to grade and gravel Fourteenth Street East between B Street South and Boundary, in the City of Washington; agreeing to punctually pay in cash the workmen employed by him with the Board of Public Works paying him the amount found to be due to him periodically according to the contract. Looney held to his part of the contract terms. After evaluating the work and the account statements during the progress and completion of the work, it was calculated Looney was due $27,364.75; but due to a mistake in the calculations of which neither party was aware, this amount was $500.00 too much, Looney received standard certificates by the Auditor of the Board of Public Works in different sums, some of which Looney assigned to others as payment to them..
According to the case syllabus:
Decision
Justice Gray delivered the opinion of the court, which stated:
The judgment was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States securities case law
Category:Government bonds issued by the United States
Category:Government of the District of Columbia
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "Lopez v. Davis" ==> """
Lopez v. Davis, 531 U.S. 230 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned the validity of a Bureau of Prisons regulation which lowered prisoners' sentences for completion of a substance abuse program. The statute however restricted this credit to those who did not engage in a felony aided by a firearm. The Court upheld the regulation over the dissent of three Justices.
Background
In 1995, the Bureau of Prisons published a rule to implement "early release incentives". Only prisoners who did not commit a "crime of violence" would be eligible for the program. The Bureau defined this to include a drug trafficking conviction which received a sentence increase due to the use of a weapon during the commission of that crime. After split decisions by circuit Courts of Appeal over the vagueness of the regulation, the Bureau published a revised one in 1997. This gave broader discretion to the Director of the Bureau to grant these term reductions. 
Christopher A. Lopez applied for the program but was rejected. Lopez had been convicted of possession with intent to distribute while possessing a firearm at the time of his offense. The Bureau of Prisons defined this a "crime of violence".
The United States District Court for the District of South Dakota reversed a decision by the Bureau of Prisons that Lopez would not be subject to term reductions. Finding that underlying convictions that were "nonviolent" should be reconsidered for the program by the Bureau of Prisons, the District Court reasoned Lopez was a candidate for term reductions. The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reversed, and Lopez appealed.
Opinion of the Court
Majority opinion
Justice  Ruth Bader Ginsburg delivered the opinion of the Court, affirming the Eighth Circuit and finding Lopez ineligible for the program. Justice Ginsburg framed the question as whether the Bureau has "discretion to delineate...those whose current offense is a felony involving a firearm".
Ginsburg argued that the statutory language provided the Director of the Bureau of Prisons the authority to make these sentence distinctions as the text used the word "may" consider rather than "shall". Further, the argument advanced by Lopez would restrict the new 1997 regulation, which was intended to provide broader authority to the Director. 
Having held the Bureau's interpretation of the statute as proper, the Court concluded by finding that Lopez was not eligible for the program.
Stevens' dissent
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justice Anthony Kennedy. Stevens argued that the phrasing of "may be reduced" was a command by Congress for the Director of Prisons to consider cases where the underlying conviction was not violent. He concluded that the Bureau was free to make these distinctions, so long as it held to Congress's intent which he saw as aiding Lopez's arguments.
See also
 Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution
 Appeal
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Federal Bureau of Prisons
Category:Parole in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States sentencing case law
"""

From "Lopez v. Gonzales" ==> """
Lopez v. Gonzales, 549 U.S. 47 (2006), held that an "aggravated felony" includes only conduct punishable as a felony under the federal Controlled Substances Act, regardless of whether state law classifies such conduct as a felony or a misdemeanor.  Under federal law, there are two main consequences of having a prior conviction for an "aggravated felony."  One is that, if the convicted person is an alien, he will be deported.  The other is that, with respect to certain federal crimes, a prior conviction for an aggravated felony provides a sentencing enhancement.  In this case, Lopez had been convicted of conduct that was a felony under South Dakota law but was a misdemeanor under federal law.  Accordingly, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that this conviction could not serve as a basis for deporting him.
 Background 
Lopez entered the United States illegally from Mexico in 1986, but became a lawful permanent resident in 1990.  In 1997, he pleaded guilty to aiding and abetting the possession of cocaine in a South Dakota court, and served 15 months in prison.  When he was released, the INS sought to deport him because, it claimed, he had been convicted of a controlled substances violation and an "aggravated felony."  An Immigration Judge ordered him deported, and the Board of Immigration Appeals ultimately affirmed that decision.  Lopez petitioned for review in the Eighth Circuit, which the court denied.  Because there was a conflict in the federal courts of appeals on how to classify crimes such as Lopez's, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Souter wrote for the majority.  As is frequently the case with regard to immigration cases, the Court had to examine the interplay of federal and state laws that are complex in their phrasing.  Under the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), an aggravated felony includes "illicit trafficking in a controlled substance... including a drug trafficking crime (as defined in section 924(c) of Title 18)."  (a)(43)(B).  A "drug trafficking crime," in turn, refers to "any felony punishable under the Controlled Substances Act [the CSA] ( et seq.)."  The term "aggravated felony" "applies to an offense whether in violation of Federal of State law and applies to such an offense in violation of the law of a foreign country for which the term of imprisonment was completed within the previous 15 years."
Under South Dakota law, aiding and abetting the possession of cocaine is equivalent to possessing cocaine, and that crime is a felony.  Mere possession is not a felony under the CSA unless the amount of the drug possessed is greater than that normally kept for personal use.  Where federal law treats certain conduct as a misdemeanor, and state law treats that same conduct as a felony, does that conduct constitute an "aggravated felony" or not?  To answer this question, the Court had to parse the phrase "any felony punishable under the Controlled Substances Act."
The Government argued that Lopez's South Dakota conviction qualified as an aggravated felony because it was (1) a felony, because South Dakota law made it a felony; that (2) was punishable under the CSA, because it is a crime under the CSA to possess a controlled substance, albeit a misdemeanor.  This interpretation ignored the fact that to qualify as an "aggravated felony," the crime in question had to relate to trafficking in a controlled substance.  Possession is not trafficking, the Court reasoned, because possession lacks a connection to commerce.  "Reading § 924(c) the Government's way, then, would turn simple possession into trafficking, just what the English language tells us not to expect, and that result makes us very wary of the Government's position."
As the INA provides, all "felonies punishable under the Controlled Substances Act" are drug trafficking crimes; thus, the place to go to determine what crimes are "felonies punishable under the Controlled Substances Act" is the Act itself.  The term "aggravated felony" is one of federal law, and the Supreme Court is the ultimate arbiter of the meaning of federal law, including the meaning of words Congress uses when it crafts statutes.  Congress could have expressly relied on state law to classify crimes as aggravated felonies.  Since it did not, the Court reasoned, the class of crimes that constitute aggravated felonies must be defined in federal law.  Hence, "unless a state offense is punishable as a federal felony it does not count" as an "aggravated felony."  
In the Court's opinion, Government's gloss on the statutory phrase was not consistent with ordinary English usage.  Because the words "punishable under the Controlled Substances Act" followed directly after the word "punishable," the Court reasoned that the most sensible meaning of the phrase was "a felony punishable as such by the Controlled Substances Act."  
The Government pointed out that the term "aggravated felony" applies to any offense "whether in violation of Federal or State law."  This qualification, it argued, showed that Congress intended for state law to determine whether conduct qualified as an aggravated felony.  The Court read this language in the opposite way the Government did.  But this gloss would "wrench[] the expectations raised by normal English usage."  This qualifying language "confirms that a state offense whose elements include the elements of a felony punishable under the CSA is an aggravated felony."  Furthermore, the fact that the Government had never prosecuted anyone under § 924(c) where the underlying "drug trafficking crime" was a state felony but a federal misdemeanor belied the Government's interpretation.  Moreover, the Government's interpretation would make federal immigration law dependent on the vagaries of state criminal law, at least with respect to alien removal and eligibility for asylum.  If Congress had meant the term "aggravated felony" to bear some generic meaning, and thus to depend to some extent on state law, it would not have expressly referenced another federal statute, such as § 924(c), in defining this category of aggravated felony.  Put another way, it was not clear that Congress intended that a state conviction for felony possession of up to 30 grams of marijuana—a crime treated as a misdemeanor under federal law—should count as an aggravated felony while a state conviction for misdemeanor possession of 5 grams of cocaine—a crime treated as a felony under federal law—should not.
 Dissenting opinion 
Justice Thomas accepted the Government's interpretation of the phrase "felony punishable under the Controlled Substances Act."  Because Lopez's crime was a felony under South Dakota law, and the CSA provided for punishment for his crime, he had committed an aggravated felony.  "The classification [of a crime as a felony or a misdemeanor] depends only on the authorized term of imprisonment."
 See also 
 Burgess v. United States: state misdemeanor conviction that would be a federal felony
External links
  Brief of Petitioner Lopez
  Brief of the Solicitor General on behalf of the Government
  Amicus brief of the ACLU
  Amicus brief of the American Bar Association
  Information about applying Lopez from the American Immigration Law Foundation
  Information about applying Lopez from the New York State Defenders Association Immigrant Defense Project
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Cocaine in the United States
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:Legal history of South Dakota
Category:Mexico–United States relations
"""

From "Lorain Journal Co. v. United States" ==> """
Lorain Journal Co. v. United States, 342 U.S. 143 (1951), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court. often cited as an example of a monopolization violation being based on unilateral denial of access to an essential facility, although it in fact involved concerted action.See. e.g., Robert Pitofsky, Donna Patterson, and Jonathan Hooks, The Essential Facilities Doctrine Under United States Antitrust Law, 70  L.J. 443, 446–47 (2002) (characterizing it as "a unilateral refusal to deal" case). Actually, Lorain Journal involved agreements with reluctantly acquiescent customers that they would not deal with a competitive radio station, as explained in the Background section. When the Lorain Journal'''s monopoly over advertising in the Lorain, Ohio area was threatened by the establishment of a competing radio station, the Journal's publisher refused to accept advertising from those who advertised over the radio station and required them to advertise only in the Journal. The purpose of the publisher was to eliminate the competition of the radio station.  The Supreme Court held that the publisher had attempted to monopolize trade and commerce, in violation of § 2 of the Sherman Antitrust Act, and was properly enjoined from continuing the conduct.
Background
The defendant The Lorain Journal Company published a newspaper here called the Journal. For some years, the Journal maintained "a commanding and an overpowering" position in the area. It reached 99% of the families in the city. It was the only daily newspaper. It carried a substantial amount of local and national advertising.342 U.S. at 146.
Until 1948, the Journal enjoyed a monopoly "of the mass dissemination of news and advertising, both of a local and national character." In 1948, however, the FCC licensed the Elyria-Lorain Broadcasting Co. to operate a radio station, WEOL, in the Elyria, Oberlin, and Lorain, Ohio area. Many of the local advertisers in the Journal wanted to use WEOL as well. The Journal developed a plan to eliminate the competition from WEOL. The Journal refused to accept local advertisements in the Journal from any Lorain County advertiser who advertised or who appeared to be about to advertise over WEOL.342 U.S. at 147–48.
The Journal monitored WEOL programs to determine the identity of the station's local Lorain advertisers. Those using the station had their contracts with the Journal terminated, and were able to renew them only after ceasing to advertise through WEOL. As a result, many Lorain County merchants either ceased advertising or abandoned their plans to advertise over WEOL. The district court found that "the very existence of WEOL is imperiled by this attack upon one of its principal sources of business and income."342 U.S. at 149.
The district court therefore found a violation of § 2 of the Sherman Act and enjoined the Journal from continuing its program of refusing to deal with advertisers who advertised in WEOL and of requiring advertisers to advertise only in the Journal. The publisher appealed to the Supreme Court.
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|175px|Justice Harold Burton delivered the opinion of the Court
Justice Harold H. Burton delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court that the Journal's publisher attempted to monopolize in violation of § 2 of the Sherman Act and was properly enjoined from continuing to do so.
The Court found the most important among the facts supporting the district court's judgment to be that the Journal enjoyed a nearly complete monopoly in Lorain from 1933 to 1948, together with a 99% coverage of all Lorain families. "Those factors made the Journal an indispensable medium of advertising for many Lorain concerns." Accordingly, the Journal's:
 refusals to print Lorain advertising for those using WEOL for like advertising often amounted to an effective prohibition of the use of WEOL for that purpose. Numerous Lorain advertisers wished to supplement their local newspaper advertising with local radio advertising, but could not afford to discontinue their newspaper advertising in order to use the radio.342 U.S. at 152–53.
The Court said it was clear that "if all the newspapers in a city, in order to monopolize the dissemination of news and advertising by eliminating a competing radio station, conspired to accept no advertisements from anyone who advertised over that station," their boycott conspiracy would violate §§ 1 and 2 of the Sherman Act, since that was held in such cases as Fashion Originators' Guild v. FTC. The Court continued, "It is consistent with that result to hold here that a single newspaper, already enjoying a substantial monopoly in its area, violates the 'attempt to monopolize' clause of § 2 when it uses its monopoly to destroy threatened competition."342 U.S. at 154.
The Journal sought to excuse its conduct on the ground that it has a "right as a private business concern to select its customers and to refuse to accept advertisement from whomever it pleases." The Court said that such a right is not unqualified:
The right claimed by the publisher is neither absolute nor exempt from regulation. Its exercise a purposeful means of monopolizing interstate commerce is prohibited by the Sherman Act. The operator of the radio station, equally with the publisher of the newspaper, is entitled to the protection of that Act.342 U.S. at 155.
Commentary
● A Note in the Virginia Law Review focused on the fact that the Court found an attempted monopolization of interstate commerce even though the Journal attempted to monopolize the advertising of local merchants only and did not refuse or try to monopolize the business of national advertisers because of their dealings with the radio station:
In this sense the monopoly was confined to the limits of a single city. This was nevertheless a forbidden monopoly, as the successful destruction of competition in local business by forcing the station to close would also have destroyed competition in interstate business, i.e., the national advertising carried by both the newspaper and the radio station. Thus the case is useful to point out again that the suppression of local competition is not free from the threat of prosecution under the Sherman Act simply because an intrastate and not an interstate monopoly is contemplated.Note. 38  404, 406 (1952).
● Charles Barber points to a contradiction or disconnect in the case law regarding specific intent in cases of this type. In Lorain Journal, especially as interpreted in Times-Picayune Publishing Co. v. United States,. the specific intent behind the refusal to deal—a purpose to eliminate a competitor—or a purpose to create or maintain a monopoly—was a major theme in finding a § 2 Sherman Act violation.See Charles F. Barber,  Refusals To Deal Under the Federal Antitrust Laws, 103 U.  847, 862, 866 (1955). In Lorain Journal, the district court had found that the purpose and intent of the Journal's refusals to sell "was to destroy the broadcasting company." In Times-Picayune, the Court held that monopolization did not occur because there was no showing of specific intent to destroy competition or build monopoly, and the newspaper's challenged practice was legal; because it was predominantly motivated "by legitimate business aims."345 U.S. at 622. The Court distinguished the Lorain Journal case on the ground that there the newspaper's refusal to sell space to advertisers who advertised on the local radio station manifested "bold, relentless, and predatory commercial behavior,"See 342 U.S. at 149. which was absent in the Times-Picayune case. Barber maintains that the Court's "emphasis on specific intent suggests that it regarded this as controlling" on the monopolization issue.Barber, at 866. Yet, Barber insists, United States v. Griffith,. which is  quoted in both Lorain Journal and Times-Picayune, "held that specific intent is no longer an element of the offense of monopolization under Section 2."Barber, at 870.
Barber therefore concludes:
The cases reviewed above indicate that the courts are groping for an appropriate rationale of the monopoly provisions of the Sherman Act which, while limiting the freedom of a trader unduly to exploit trade advantages stemming from his market position, will assure the preservation of his essential freedom to develop his business, including his supplier and customer relationships, in accordance with his personal business judgment.Barber, at 872.
● Donald Turner observed in the Harvard Law Review that the Supreme Court was "unquestionably correct" in holding the Journal's conduct an unlawful attempt to monopolize under section 2 of the Sherman Ac. Nonetheless, if the Court had been asked to do so, it could properly "also have held that each seller [merchant contracting for advertisements] who complied with Lorain Journal's demands became party to an agreement with Lorain Journal to boycott the radio station." The only problem with holding that would be "the seeming unfairness of subjecting the coerced sellers to criminal penalties." It would be a mistake, however, Turner argued, to hold (as in Interstate Circuit, Inc. v. United States. or United States v. Parke, Davis & Co..)     
"that the sellers, each being aware that others would also cease patronizing the radio station, have agreed with each other to carry on a collective boycott [emphasis added]." The reason is that:
[T]he decision of each seller was apparently wholly independent of the decisions of the others; each decision simply reflected an economic choice, forced by the newspaper's policy, as to which advertising medium could be dispensed with at least cost, a choice wholly unaffected by what other sellers might choose to do.Donald F. Turner, The Definition of Agreement under the Sherman Act: Conscious Parallelism and Refusals to Deal, 75  655, 700 (Feb. 1962).
In Interstate Circuit, for example, "there was ample evidence . . . to support a finding of horizontal agreement of the most obvious sort, including the significant evidence that the consequence of imposing limitations on the movie chains' subsequent-run competitors had been to increase not only the profits of the chains but also the profits of each distributor."Id. In the Lorain Journal case, each acquiescent merchant "ended up worse off than before." Such an agreement "would be an odd sort of agreement." In such a case it would be more sensible to proceed against the instigating party [who] has coerced those with whom he dealt" under a theory of attempted monopolization, as the Court did in the Lorain Journal'' case.Id. at 701.
Finally, Turner emphasizes:
In Lorain Journal, for example, the principal culprit was clearly the newspaper which instigated the boycott of the radio station. The advertisers who dealt with the paper, and who acquiesced in its demands, were unwilling participants. Moreover, the situation can be remedied, as indeed it was in Lorain Journal, by [the government's] proceeding against the instigator alone; freed of the unlawful pressures, the other parties would presumably revert to the nonrestrictive decisions they made before. These considerations might well and properly be taken into account by an enforcement agency in deciding whom to charge and whom not to charge with a violation of the act.Id. at 702.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
"""

From "Lorenzo v. SEC" ==> """
Lorenzo v. Securities and Exchange Commission, 587 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case from the October 2018 term.
The Supreme Court held that someone who disseminates false statements to potential investors with the intent to defraud those investors can be held liable under subsection b of Rule 10b-5 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, even if they personally were not the ones who drafted the false statements., 139 S. Ct. 1094 (2019).
This decision clarifies the applicability of the 2011 holding in Janus Capital Group, Inc. v. First Derivative Traders to individuals who disseminate false statements made by others. That decision had held that subsection (b) of Rule 10b-5 (which prohibits "mak[ing] any untrue statement of a material fact") applies only to the individual who personally drafted the false statements; this decision clarifies that other individuals who participate in the fraud scheme can be held liable under other subsections of Rule 10b-5. 
It also marked one of the rare recent occasions in which the Securities and Exchange Commission prevailed in front of the Supreme Court, after defeats in prior cases including Gabelli v. SEC (2013), Kokesh v. SEC (2016), and Lucia v. SEC (2018).
 Background 
Francis Vincent Lorenzo (Frank Lorenzo) was the former director of investment banking at Charles Vista LLC, a pennystock broker-dealer in Staten Island, New York. Lorenzo's only client at the time was a pennystock company called Waste2Energy Holdings Inc., a firm which claimed to be developing technology to transform solid waste into clean energy. In early 2009, Lorenzo was tasked with attempting to sell $15 million worth of convertible debentures (debt securities) issued by Waste2Energy. By October 2009, however, Waste2Energy had disclosed to the public and to Lorenzo that its intellectual property was worthless and that it had written off all of its intangible assets. Its remaining assets were worth approximately $370,000, far less than the value of its proposed debenture offering. 
Despite this, Lorenzo continued attempting to sell the debentures on the market, sending emails to prospective investors which stated that the company had $10 million in 'confirmed assets', which would protect investors against losses. According to Lorenzo, his boss at Charles Vista LLC had supplied the content of the emails and approved their dissemination to investors. Throughout 2009 and 2010, investors purchased the debentures. 
When Waste2Energy Holdings eventually collapsed and filed for bankruptcy in 2013, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filed an administrative case against Charles Vista, Lorenzo, and his former boss for violating section 17(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, Section 10(b), and Rule 10b-5. Charles Vista was also charged with violating the Exchange Act's Section 15(c) and rule 10b-5 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. All three entities were charged with being 'primary violators' of Rule 10b-5. Lorenzo's boss and Charles Vista agreed to settle the case, but Lorenzo himself went to trial before an administrative law judge (ALJ) at the SEC. In the hearing, Lorenzo insisted that he simply cut-and-pasted language given to him by his boss and that, under existing Supreme Court precedent, he should not be held liable for merely passing on someone else's false statements.
The SEC administrative law judge who heard the case accepted Lorenzo's claim that he had sent the fraudulent emails without really reading them or thinking about the contents. However, the administrative law judge still found that Lorenzo had willfully violated securities laws by making fraudulent misstatements and by participating in a scheme to defraud potential investors. Lorenzo was barred from the securities industry for life and fined $15,000. The full SEC affirmed the ALJ's decision but formally rejected his claim that he had sent the emails without reading them. 
Lorenzo appealed the SEC's decision to federal court. As allowed by the Securities Exchange Act, Lorenzo was permitted to appeal the Commission's ruling before either the DC Circuit Court of Appeals or the Circuit Court of Appeals in which he principally did business.
 In lower courts 
 Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit 
Lorenzo's appeal was first heard by a three-judge panel United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, which comprised circuit judges Sri Srinivasan, Brett Kavanaugh, and Thomas Griffith. Lorenzo's argument before the DC Circuit was that he could not be held liable for passing on false statements made by another person. By applying the decision from Janus Capital Group, Inc. v. First Derivative Traders, the DC Circuit ruled that Lorenzo did not violate subsection b of Rule 10b-5, holding the primary liability under that subsection can only be applied to the person who held 'ultimate authority' over the statement, including its content and whether and how it should be communicated. They affirmed Lorenzo's contention that his boss was the true 'maker' of the false statements since he was the one who asked Lorenzo to send the emails and was the one who supplied the content. 
However, by a 2-to-1 vote (with Judge Kavanaugh dissenting), the DC Circuit held that Lorenzo was liable under subsections a and c of Rule 10b-5, which cover liability for participating in a fraud scheme (also known as "scheme" liability). Because the court ruled against the SEC on the Rule 10b-5 subsection b ruling, it vacated the penalties levied against Lorenzo by the SEC and sent the case back to the Commission to reconsider Lorenzo's punishment in light of the ruling.
In his dissent, Judge Kavanaugh claimed that the majority opinion endorsed the SEC's efforts to "end-run the Supreme Court" by expanding primary liability for securities fraud. He stated the conduct described in Lorenzo's case may have been considered 'aiding and abetting' but that Lorenzo should not be considered a primary violator for passing along misstatements from his boss. He emphasized the distinction between primary liability and aiding and abetting, noting that prior Supreme Court cases (2008's Stoneridge Investment Partners v. Scientific-Atlanta, Inc. and 1994's Central Bank of Denver, N.A. v. First Interstate Bank of Denver, N.A.) had limited the ability of private plaintiffs to file suit against secondary actors (accused aiders and abettors) in a fraud case. Kavanaugh argued that the Court of Appeals's opinion here would have the effect of converting these secondary actors into primary violators through "scheme" liability, exposing them to additional liability (contradicting the Supreme Court's past rulings).
The DC Circuit's decision exacerbated a circuit split regarding this issue. Since 2005, the Second, Eighth, and Ninth Circuit Courts of Appeal had each held that fraudulent misstatements could not by themselves create "scheme" liability while the Eleventh Circuit had been more open to the idea.
 Appeal to the Supreme Court 
Lorenzo appealed the decision to the Supreme Court in January 2018. In June 2018, the Supreme Court granted his writ of certiorari agreeing to hear the case. The case was argued on December 3, 2018. Robert Heim, an attorney with the firm of Meyers & Heim LLP, argued the case on behalf of Lorenzo. Assistant Solicitor General Christopher Michel argued the case on behalf of the United States government. Because he was on the DC Circuit panel which heard the original case, Justice Brett Kavanaugh recused himself from participating in this case.
 Supreme Court opinion 
The Supreme Court affirmed the DC Circuit's decision to impose "scheme" liability on Lorenzo. Writing for a 6-2 majority, Justice Stephen Breyer found that the language in subsections a and c of Rule 10b-5 were sufficiently broad to encompass Lorenzo's dissemination of false information with the intent to defraud. The majority opinion held that merely disseminating false statements was not enough to create "scheme" liability; it argued that the fraudulent course of conduct (planning the debenture sales, development of the fraud scheme, etc.) was part of the pattern of conduct needed to impose primary liability.
In dissent, Justice Clarence Thomas (joined by Justice Neil Gorsuch) argued that the majority opinion would render the Supreme Court's precedent in Janus a "dead letter".
This decision is noteworthy because it expanded the scope of primary liability for securities fraud, which is controversial in the securities industry. One potential repercussion of the ruling is that private plaintiffs may use the Lorenzo precedent to argue for expanded liability for deep-pocketed peripheral players in fraud schemes, such as accountants and attorneys, who otherwise would have been protected under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act.
 References 
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States securities case law
Category:U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission litigation
"""

From "Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp." ==> """
Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp., 458 U.S. 419 (1982), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that when the character of the governmental action is a permanent physical occupation of property, the government actions effects regulatory taking to the extent of the occupation, without regard to whether the action achieves an important public benefit or has only minimal economic impact on the owner.. In doing so, it established the permanent physical presence test for regulatory takings.
Background
Section 828 of the Executive Law of New York required certain property owners to permit installation and maintenance of certain cable television wires on their property. Jean Loretto owned a five-story apartment building located at 303 West 105th Street, New York City. Prior to Loretto's acquisition of the property, Manhattan Teleprompter installed cable television wires on Loretto's property pursuant to § 828 of the Executive Law.
Procedural history
Loretto, on behalf of all property owners so situated, sued Manhattan Teleprompter for trespass and—insofar as Teleprompter relied on § 828—a taking without just compensation, and requested damages and injunctive relief; the City of New York intervened in the case. The New York Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the statute and rendered summary judgment for Manhattan Teleprompter, finding that non-crossover installations constituted a taking for which just compensation is due, but here the law served a legitimate public purpose there is no significant economic impact on expectations of investors, rejecting the theory that physical presence is per se a taking. The judgment was affirmed by the New York Court of Appeals. Loretto petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari, which was granted by the U.S. Supreme Court.
Arguments
The Court addressed the issue of whether Manhattan Teleprompter's minor but permanent physical occupation of Loretto's property constitutes a physical taking of property for which just compensation is due under the Fifth Amendment, as incorporated against the states by the Fourteenth Amendment.
Loretto's argument
Loretto argued that Manhattan Teleprompter's minor but permanent physical occupation of Loretto's property was a trespass. Since a statute made the trespass permissible, it constituted a "taking" of property for which just compensation was due.
Manhattan Teleprompter's argument
Manhattan Teleprompter claimed that their minor but permanent physical occupation of Plaintiff's property did not constitute a "taking" of property. Section 828 of the Executive Law applied only to rental property, and was simply a regulation on the permissible use of such rental property. New York had also effectively granted tenants the right to enjoy cable television, which is not in itself a taking. Additionally, they claimed that application of a per se rule would have dire consequences for regulation of landlord/tenant relationships.
Holding
The Court held that regardless of whether the action achieves an important public benefit or has only minimal economic impact on the owner, Manhattan Teleprompter's minor but permanent physical occupation of Loretto's property constituted a regulatory taking of property for which just compensation is due under the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments of the Constitution, reversing the judgment of the lower New York state courts.
Writing for the majority, Justice Marshall argued that Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City (1978) held that there is no set formula for finding a taking. He noted that the Court in Pumpelly v. Green Bay Company (1871) held that a physical presence with the effect of impairing property's usefulness is a taking. Recent cases focused on the importance of physical invasion as a taking. Justice Marshall noted that the right to exclude is one of the most essential "sticks in the bundle of rights" that are commonly characterized as property. Insofar as invasion exists, it destroys each of these rights (to possess, to use, and to dispose). The Court found that owners have an expectation of privacy, without invasion. In contrast to the dissent, Justice Marshall noted that a bright-line "invasion rule" avoids ambiguity as to both law and fact. He noted that contrary to the assertions of the Manhattan Teleprompter and co-defendants, a physical occupation of only rental property does not make this less of a taking, that the statute in question does not purport to give the tenant any additional rights, and that a ruling against Manhattan Teleprompter will not reverse the broad discretion the Court affords to states in regulating landlord/tenant relationships.
Dissent
Justice Blackmun, joined by Justice Brennan and Justice White, wrote a dissent arguing against an automatic rule to determine whether there is a taking, and objected to drawing an artificial distinction between temporary and permanent physical presence. Instead, there should be a multi-factor balancing test that considers: (1) whether the State has interfered in some minimal way with the use of space on her building and (2) the extent of the State's interference, and whether it is so severe as to constitute a compensable taking.
Aftermath
On remand, the New York Court of Appeals upheld the validity of the statutory provisions empowering the Commission on Cable Television to set compensation for the taking at $1. The Commission concluded that the property value would increase as a result of cable television access, and as such $1 would be sufficient compensation for the permanent intrusion.446 N.E.2d 428 (N.Y. 1983)
Legacy
This case established, for the first time a bright-line rule  that permanent physical presence constitutes a taking per se. It would seem the Court's aim was to distinguish a category of pre se takings to reduce doctrinal ambiguity following the standard introduced by Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City, 438 U.S. 104 (1978).
However, said rule is considered to affirm a pre-existing rule: "the traditional physical occupation test," "the traditional rule," and "We affirm the traditional rule that a permanent physical occupation of property is a taking" as mentioned several times throughout the opinion.Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp., 458 U.S. 419, 421, 436, 441 (1982)
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 458
 Teleprompter Corp. v. Columbia Broadcasting
References
External links
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States land use case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Cable television in the United States
Category:1982 in New York City
Category:TelePrompTer Corporation
"""

From "Lorillard Tobacco Co. v. Reilly" ==> """
Lorillard v. Reilly, 533 U.S. 525 (2001), was a 2001 case brought by Lorillard Tobacco Company when Massachusetts instituted a ban on tobacco ads and sales of tobacco within 1,000 feet (300 m) of schools and playgrounds.  Lorillard argued that this was an infringement on its First Amendment rights and that the regulation was more extensive than necessary.  Applying the Central Hudson Test, the U.S. Supreme Court held that  Massachusetts' ban on advertising and tobacco sales was overbroad.  The Supreme Court also held that the Massachusetts regulation was preempted by federal law.
See also
Commercial speech
Bigelow v. Commonwealth of Virginia, 421 U.S. 809 (1974)
Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, 433 U.S. 350 (1977)
Linmark Associates, Inc., v. Township of Willingboro, 431 U.S. 85 (1977)
Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission, 447 U.S. 557 (1980)
Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico, 478 U.S. 328 (1986)
List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 533
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States commercial speech case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States tobacco case law
Category:Lorillard Tobacco Company
Category:Smoking in the United States
"""

From "Los Angeles County Flood Control District v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc." ==> """
Los Angeles County Flood Control District v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 568 U.S. 78 (2013), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Natural Resources Defense Council and Santa Monica Baykeeper challenged the Los Angeles County Flood Control District (District) for violating the terms of its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit as shown in water quality measurements from monitoring stations within the Los Angeles and San Gabriel Rivers.. The Supreme Court, by a unanimous 9-0 vote, reversed and remanded the Ninth Circuit's ruling on the grounds that the flow of water from an improved portion of a navigable waterway into an unimproved portion of the same waterway does not qualify as a "discharge of a pollutant" under the Clean Water Act.
Parties
Los Angeles County Flood Control District
The Los Angeles County Flood Control District is the petitioner in this particular case. The district was established upon adoption of the Los Angeles County Flood Control Act in 1915, after a disastrous regional flood occurred. The district's primary purpose is to provide flood protection, water conservation, recreation, and aesthetic enhancement within its boundaries. As of 1985, the responsibilities and authority of the district were transferred to the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works. The Flood Control District encompasses more than 3,000 square miles and 85 cities in Southern California. It includes approximately 500 miles of open channel, 2,800 miles of underground storm drainage pipelines, and an estimated 120,000 catch basins.
Natural Resources Defense Council
The Natural Resources Defense Council and Santa Monica Baykeeper are the respondent. The Natural Resources Defense Council is a nationwide environmental action group consisting of over 1.3 million members and over 350 lawyers, scientists and other professionals.  Santa Monica Baykeeper is a non-profit organization that aims to protect and restore the Santa Monica Bay, San Pedro Bay and adjacent waters through enforcement, field work, and community action.
 Background 
The district operates a "municipal separate storm sewer system" (MS4), which is a conveyance or a system of conveyances that collects and transports stormwater runoff into waters of the U.S. The district's MS4 transports stormwater through rivers and channels flowing to the Pacific Ocean. Because stormwater is often heavily polluted from various non-point sources, the Clean Water Act and its implementing regulations require certain MS4s to obtain a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit before discharging stormwater into navigable waters. Between 2002 and 2008, monitoring stations in the Los Angeles River, San Gabriel River, Santa Clara River, and Malibu Creek continually detected water pollution levels that exceeded its MS4 permit in its stormwater channel system.  Some of the pollution levels exceeded included high levels of aluminum, copper, cyanide, fecal coliform bacteria, and zinc.
Prior cases
District court opinion
In 2008, the Natural Resources Defense Council and Santa Monica Baykeeper (collectively NRDC) filed a citizen-enforcement action against the district and county in the Central District of California, and alleged that the district violated the NPDES permit and the Clean Water Act. NRDC sought to impose liability on the district for its permit violations in four rivers: the Los Angeles River, San Gabriel River, Santa Clara River, and Malibu Creek.  The district argued that this issue was resolved by the court's earlier decision in the South Florida Water Management Dist. v. Miccosukee Tribe (541 U.S. 95) case, which determined that transferring water within a single water body does not constitute a "discharge." The district court initially denied summary judgment because the evidence did not clearly show whether the standards-exceeding pollutant had been discharged through the district's MS4. Thus, the district court concluded that NRDC failed to show whether there had been a "discharge" from a "point source" within the statutory meanings of those terms. The district court granted summary judgment to the district on these claims and concluded that the record was insufficient to warrant a finding that the MS4 had discharged stormwater containing the pollutants detected at the downstream monitoring stations.
South Florida Water Management District v. Miccosukee Tribe of Indians
right|thumb|200px|Southern third of the Florida Peninsula, showing the area managed by the South Florida Water Management District
In this 2004 U.S. Supreme Court case, the Miccosukee Tribe challenged the South Florida Water Management District on an issue related to the operation of a new pump station that transferred water from a concrete canal to a large undeveloped wetland area as part of the Central and South Florida Flood Control Project. During rain events, stormwater collected in the canal contained contaminants such as phosphorus and fertilizers from agricultural and urban land uses. The district impounded water in the wetland area, a remnant of the original South Florida Everglades, to conserve fresh water that might otherwise flow directly to the ocean and to preserve wetland habitat. When water levels in the canal rose above a set level, the pump would transfer water out of the canal and empty the water in the canal. In doing so, the phosphorus-containing the water altered the wetland's ecosystem, which was naturally low in phosphorus, and stimulated the growth of algae and plants that were uncommon in the Everglades ecosystem.
The Miccosukee Tribe filed suit under the Clean Water Act, which prohibits "the discharge of any pollutant by any person" unless done in compliance with the Act. The Tribe claimed that the pump station required an NPDES permit, because it moved phosphorus-laden water from the canal into the wetland area, but the district contended that the pump's operation did not constitute the "discharge of a pollutant" under the Act. The district court granted the Tribe summary judgment, and the Eleventh Circuit affirmed. For the purposes of NPDES permitting requirements, the Government (as an impartial adviser to the district) contended that all water bodies that fall within the Act's definition of "navigable water" (which are defined as "the waters of the U.S.") should be viewed collectively. Since the Act requires NPDES permits only when there is an addition of a pollutant to "navigable waters," this approach implied that such permits are not required when water is transferred from one navigable water, unaltered, into another navigable water body. However, because neither the district nor the Government raised the "unitary waters" approach before the Eleventh Circuit or in their briefs respecting certiori and because some factual issues remained unresolved, the U.S. Supreme Court declined to resolve the unitary waters argument and the case was remanded to the lower court.
Appeals Court opinion
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed in part, finding that the NRDC was entitled to summary judgment on its claims regarding the Los Angeles River and San Gabriel River because the monitoring stations are located within the MS4 owned and operated by the district. The U.S. Court of Appeals held that the district was liable for the discharge of pollutants that occurred when the polluted stormwater detected at the monitoring stations flowed out of the concrete-lined portions of the rivers, where the monitoring stations are located, into lower, unlined portions of the same rivers. However, with regard to the Santa Clara River and Malibu Creek, NRDC failed to provide adequate evidence for the district court to determine if stormwater discharged from the MS4 caused or contributed to exceedances of permitted water quality levels. As such, the NRDC was entitled to summary judgment on the district's liability for discharges into the Los Angeles and San Gabriel Rivers but not the Santa Clara River or Malibu Creek.
 thumb|300px|Map of the Los Angeles River Watershed thumb|300px|Map of the San Gabriel River Watershed
Supreme Court decision
 Issues 
The Clean Water Act regulates discharges of pollutants, including discharges of pollutants from municipal stormwater systems. The petition of a writ of certiorari (filed October 11, 2011) posed two questions to the Supreme Court:
1. Do "navigable waters of the United States" include only "naturally occurring" bodies of water so that construction of engineered channels or other man-made improvements to a river as part of municipal flood and storm control renders the improved portion no longer a "navigable water" under the Clean Water Act?
2. When water flows from one portion of a river that is a navigable water of the United States, through a concrete channel or other engineered improvement in the river constructed for flood and stormwater control as part of a municipal separate storm sewer system, into a lower portion of the same river, can there be a "discharge" from an "outfall" under the Clean Water Act, notwithstanding this Court's holding in South Florida Water Management District v. Miccosukee Tribe of Indians, 541 U.S. 95, 105 (2004), that transfer of water within a single body of water cannot constitute a "discharge" for purposes of the Act?
Granting of certiorari
The petition for a writ of certiorari sought to expand the definition of "navigable waters of the United States" to potentially include human engineered improvements, and to also reverse the verdict of the Ninth Circuit based on the Supreme Court's prior ruling in South Florida Water Management District v. Miccosukee Tribe of Indians.
On June 25, 2012 the Supreme Court granted certiorari and limited to Question 2 set forth in the initial petition for a writ of certiorari.
The Supreme Court granted the certiorari in order to address the Ninth Circuit's verdict which reversed a previous decision and held that the Los Angeles County Flood Control District was liable due to the discharge of pollutants that occurred when polluted water was detected at the monitoring stations as it flowed out through the concrete channel to unimproved portions of the river. The Supreme Court decided to limit its scope to the latter of the two questions, leaving the first to the lower courts.
 Arguments 
left|thumb|300px|alt=Los Angeles River Bridge B&W|Los Angeles River Bridge
The case was argued on December 4, 2012 by NRDC senior attorney Aaron Colangelo for respondents and GMSR partner Timothy T. Coates for the petitioner L.A. County. Essentially conceding that the premise upon which the Ninth Circuit's decision was based was incorrect, the NRDC and Baykeeper sought to argue that the exceedances detected at monitoring stations themselves sufficed in establishing the liability of the district under the Clean Water Act for its upstream discharges. NRDC felt that the Court of Appeals came to the correct decision, albeit for the wrong reasons, in their evaluation of the discharge of pollutants from an improved portion to an unimproved portion of the same waters. The NRDC and Baykeeper contended that the exceedances detected at the instream monitoring stations were sufficient to establish the district's liability under the Clean Water Act for upstream discharges. In addition, the NRDC argued that under the terms of the permit, the district had agreed to be severally liable with its co-permittees for any excess pollution in the river picked up by the monitoring stations.
The district sought to argue that under the EPA's 2008 water transfer rule (40 C.F.R. § 122.3(i)) it was not liable for violating its permit. The NRDC, however, pointed out that the water transfer rules did not apply in the cases of MS4s stating that "[m]unicipal separate storm sewer systems...are clearly subject to regulation under the Act. CWA section 402(p)."
The district argued that the issue granted certiorari by the Supreme Court had to be resolved in favor of the district on the basis of previous standing. Again, this point was not in contention on the part of the NRDC. As the first issue upon which the petition for certiorari was not going to be addressed in court, the district sought to argue the alternative monitoring argument that the NRDC was attempting to bring forth. The district argued that the monitoring theory itself was contrary to the Clean Water Act, which imposes liability only where it is shown that a permitee has discharged in violation of permit terms. The Supreme Court ruled that their grant of certiorari was only to evaluate the Court of Appeals ruling as it related to the prior standing and "did not address or indicate any opinion on the issue the NRDC and Baykeeper seek to substitute."
 Opinion of the court 
The case was argued on December 4, 2012 with a decision being issued on January 8, 2013.
Justice Ginsburg delivered the opinion of the court which held that the flow from an improved portion of a navigable waterway into an unimproved portion of the same waterway does not constitute a "discharge of a pollutant" under the Clean Water Act. This was based on the standing of the South Florida Water Management Dist. v. Miccosukee Tribe. Based on this, the court found that the Ninth Circuit's decision was not in accordance with this hold and reversed and remanded the decision.
Significance of the case
Some environmental groups expressed concern that the U.S. Supreme Court decision inappropriately relied on the Court's past decision on the South Florida Water Management District v. Miccosukee Tribe of Indians case. While the Court was asked to determine whether the transfer of water that arguably contained pollutants from one part of a water body into another part of that same water body needed a permit to discharge pollutants in the Miccosukee case, there is no doubt that municipal storm sewers need permits to discharge into rivers in the Los Angeles Flood Control District v. NRDC case. Outside parties asserted that the two situations have nothing in common.
In general, several parties believe that the U.S. Supreme Court's decision is narrow in its scope, and questioned why the Supreme Court had decided to hear the case rather than just reverse the Ninth Circuit's decision. However, the reversal of the Ninth Circuit's judgment against the Los Angeles County Flood Control District in the case implies that local water quality advocates will continue to pressure the local regulator, the Regional Water Quality Control Board, to ensure that the new municipal stormwater permit effectively implements its water quality improvement measures.
Additionally, while the Supreme Court decided against addressing the first question raised in the certiorari, if it had been addressed, it would have further defined "navigable waters" under the Clean Water Act.
Some observers of the case contend that there are additional lessons that can be taken from the Supreme Court case. By not defending the decision made by the Ninth Circuit, the NRDC was able to steer the Court's attention to more plausible grounds in an effort to keep the case alive for a remand.
 References 
External links
Category:2013 in California
Category:2013 in Los Angeles
Category:2013 in the environment
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Natural Resources Defense Council
Category:Los Angeles County Department of Public Works
"""

From "Los Angeles County v. Humphries" ==> """
Los Angeles County v. Humphries, 562 U.S. 29 (2010), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that clarified one of the requirements for imposing liability on a municipality for violations of a federal right, in lawsuits brought under Section 1983 of the Civil Rights Act of 1871 (codified at 42 U.S.C. § 1983)..
The Court had previously ruled in Monell v. Department of Social Services of the City of New York, , that municipalities could only be liable under Section 1983 if the injury was a result of that municipality's "policy or custom.".  In Los Angeles County v. Humphries, the Court ruled that this "policy or custom" requirement applied regardless of whether the relief the plaintiff sought was monetary or prospective..
 Background of the case
Section 1983 of the 1871 Civil Rights Act
Section 1983 provides in part:
Every person who, under color of any [state] statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage . . . subjects, or causes to be subjected, any ... other person ... to the deprivation of any rights ... secured by the Constitution and laws [of the United States], shall be liable to the party injured in an action at law, suit in equity, or other proper proceeding for redress.
In Monroe v. Pape, the Supreme Court had held that municipal entities were not "person[s]" under § 1983, based on its reading of the history of the Civil Rights Act of 1871..  However, the Court overruled Monroe in Monell v. Department of Social Services of the City of New York, holding that municipalities were "persons" under § 1983, but that a municipality could be held liable under § 1983 only for its own violations of federal law. The violation must be caused by the "execution of [the municipality's] policy or custom", not simply when others have caused the violation such as if the municipality "employ[ed] a tortfeasor."Monell, 436 U.S. at 690–94.
Lower court proceedings
The California Child Abuse and Neglect Reporting ActCal. Penal Code Ann. § 11164 et seq. (West Rev. Supp. 2010) required law enforcement and other state agencies to investigate allegations of child abuse, report all instances of reported child abuse the agency found “not unfounded” to the California Department of Justice, even if they were "inconclusive or unsubstantiated",Cal. Penal Code Ann. §§ 11169(a), 11170(a)(3). and required the department to include the reports in a Child Abuse Central Index. However, the Act did not provide procedures for reviewing whether a previously filed report was unfounded or for allowing individual people to challenge their inclusion in the index.
Two parents who were accused of child abuse but exonerated sought to have their names removed from the Index but were unable to convince the Los Angeles Sheriff's Department to remove them.  They consequently filed a §1983 case against the Attorney General of California, the Los Angeles County Sheriff, two detectives in the sheriff's department, and the County of Los Angeles, seeking damages, an injunction, and a declaration that the defendants had deprived them of their constitutional rights by failing to create a procedural mechanism through which one could contest inclusion in the Index.
The Ninth Circuit held in favor of the plaintiffs. Los Angeles County appealed, arguing that it was not liable because, with respect to the county, the plaintiffs were not prevailing parties because the county was a municipal entity. It argued that under Monell's holding, a municipal entity is liable under § 1983 only if a municipal "policy or custom" caused a plaintiff to be deprived of a federal right and it was state policy, not county policy, that brought about any deprivation here.Monell, 436 U.S. at 694.
 The Court's decision 
In an 8-0 decision delivered by Justice Stephen Breyer,Justice Elena Kagan, who was appointed to the Court on August 7, 2010, did not participate.  the Court concluded that Monell's holding applied to § 1983 claims against municipalities for prospective relief as well as to claims for damages.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 562
 References 
External links
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
Category:Child abuse case law
Category:History of Los Angeles County, California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Lotus Dev. Corp. v. Borland Int'l, Inc." ==> """
Lotus Dev. Corp. v. Borland Int'l, Inc., 516 U.S. 233 (1996), is a United States Supreme Court case that tested the extent of software copyright.. The lower court had held that copyright does not extend to the user interface of a computer program, such as the text and layout of menus. Due to the recusal of one justice, the Supreme Court decided the case with an eight-member bench that split evenly, leaving the lower court's decision affirmed but setting no national precedent.
Background information
Borland released a spreadsheet product, Quattro Pro, that had a compatibility mode in which its menu imitated that of Lotus 1-2-3, a competing product.  None of the source code or machine code that generated the menus was copied, but the names of the commands and the organization of those commands into a hierarchy were virtually identical.
Quattro Pro also contained a feature called "Key Reader", which allowed it to execute Lotus 1-2-3 keyboard macros.  In order to support this feature, Quattro Pro's code contained a copy of Lotus's menu hierarchy in which each command was represented by its first letter instead of its entire name.
Borland CEO Philippe Kahn took the case to the software development community arguing that Lotus's position would stifle innovation and damage the future of software development. The vast majority of the software development community supported Borland's position.
District Court case
Lotus filed suit in the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts on July 2, 1990, claiming that the structure of the menus was copyrighted by Lotus.  The district court ruled that Borland had infringed Lotus's copyright.  The ruling was based in part on the fact that an alternative satisfactory menu structure could be designed.  For example, the "Quit" command could be changed to "Exit".Lotus Dev. Corp. v. Borland Int'l, Inc., 831 F.Supp. 202 (D.Mass.1993)
Borland immediately removed the Lotus-based menu system from Quattro Pro, but retained support for its "Key Reader" feature, and Lotus filed a supplemental claim against this feature.  A district court held that this also constituted copyright infringement.
Circuit Court case
Borland appealed the decision of the district court arguing that the menu hierarchy is a "method of operation", which is not copyrightable according to 17 U.S.C. § 102(b).
The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit reversed the district court's decision, agreeing with Borland's legal theory that considered the menu hierarchy a "method of operation". The court agreed with the district court that an alternative menu hierarchy could be devised, but argued that despite this, the menu hierarchy is an uncopyrightable "method of operation".Lotus Dev. Corp. v. Borland Int'l, Inc., 49 F.3d 807, 815 (1st Cir. 1995)We hold that the Lotus menu command hierarchy is an uncopyrightable “method of operation.” The Lotus menu command hierarchy provides the means by which users control and operate Lotus 1–2–3. If users wish to copy material, for example, they use the “Copy” command. If users wish to print material, they use the “Print” command. Users must use the command terms to tell the computer what to do. Without the menu command hierarchy, users would not be able to access and control, or indeed make use of, Lotus 1–2–3's functional capabilities.The court made an analogy between the menu hierarchy and the arrangement of buttons on a VCR.  The buttons are used to control the playback of a video tape, just as the menu commands are used to control the operations of Lotus 1-2-3.  Since the buttons are essential to operating the VCR, their layout cannot be copyrighted.  Likewise, the menu commands, including the textual labels and the hierarchical layout, are essential to operating Lotus 1-2-3.Lotus Dev. Corp. v. Borland Int'l, Inc., 49 F.3d 807, 817 (1st Cir. 1995)
The court also considered the impact of their decision on users of software.  If menu hierarchies were copyrightable, users would be required to learn how to perform the same operation in a different way for every program, which the court finds "absurd".  Additionally, all macros would have to be re-written for each different program, which places an undue burden on users.Lotus Dev. Corp. v. Borland Int'l, Inc., 49 F.3d 807, 818 (1st Cir. 1995)
Concurring opinion
Judge Michael Boudin wrote a concurring opinion for this case.  In this opinion, he discusses the costs and benefits of copyright protection, as well as the potential similarity of software copyright protection to patent protection.  He argues that software is different from creative works, which makes it difficult to apply copyright law to software.
His opinion also considers the theory that Borland's use of the Lotus menu is "privileged".  That is, because Borland copied the menu for a legitimate purpose of compatibility, its use should be allowed.  This decision, if issued by the majority of the court, would have been narrower in scope than the "method of operations" decision.  Copying a menu hierarchy would be allowed in some circumstances, and disallowed in others.Lotus Dev. Corp. v. Borland Int'l, Inc., 49 F.3d 807, 819-21 (1st Cir. 1995) (Boudin, J., concurring)
Supreme Court case
Lotus petitioned the United States Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari. In a per curiam opinion, the Supreme Court affirmed the circuit court's judgment due to an evenly divided court, with Justice Stevens recusing.  Because the Court split evenly, it affirmed the First Circuit's decision without discussion and did not establish any national precedent on the copyright issue. Lotus's petition for a rehearing by the full court was denied. By the time the lawsuit ended, Borland had sold Quattro Pro to Novell, and Microsoft's Excel spreadsheet had emerged as the main challenger to Lotus 1-2-3.
Impact
The Lotus decision establishes a distinction in copyright law between the interface of a software product and its implementation. The implementation is subject to copyright. The public interface may also be subject to copyright to the extent that it contains expression (for example, the appearance of an icon). However, the set of available operations and the mechanics of how they are activated are not copyrightable. This standard allows software developers to create competing versions of copyrighted software products without infringing the copyright. See software clone for infringement and compliance cases.
Lotus v. Borland has been used as a lens through which to view the controversial case in Oracle America, Inc. v. Google, Inc., dealing with the copyrightability of software application programming interfaces (APIs) and interoperability of software. Software APIs are designed to allow developers to insure compatibility, but should APIs be found to be copyrightable, that could drastically affect the development of software, as the threat of litigation for building interoperability (a core feature of computing, as it has developed over the decades of worldwide use) would present a chilling effect and coerce the establishment of walled gardens around islands of mutually-incompatible software ecosystems, causing millions of man-hours to be lost in re-implementation and quality assurance testing of the same software across multiple concurrent systems, leading to divergent software development paths and a drastically increased attack surface for potential illicit exploitation.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 516
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
 17 U.S.C. § 102(b)
Perspective: Lotus Development Corp. v. Borland International, Massachusetts Lawyers Weekly, April 1995
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:United States computer case law
Category:Borland
Category:IBM
Category:Spreadsheet software
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Tie votes of the United States Supreme Court
"""

From "Louis K. Liggett Co. v. Lee" ==> """
Louis K. Liggett Co. v. Lee, 288 U.S. 517 (1933), is a corporate law decision from the United States Supreme Court..
In his opinion, Justice Brandeis endorsed the theories that state corporate law, and lack of federal standards, enabled a race to the bottom in corporate law rules, or one of "laxity". He also expounded the evidence that the Great Depression was caused by disparities of income and wealth brought about by the corporation, which he likened to Frankenstein's monster.
Facts
The case involved retail business taxes in the Florida being based on the number of stores and not the value or sales of the stores.
Judgment
The majority of the Supreme Court, with the opinion delivered by Roberts J, held that § 5 of the Florida Act, which increased tax if stores were present in more than one county, was unreasonable and arbitrary and violated the equal protection clause. 
Justice Brandeis dissented. He agreed with the race to the bottom theory of corporate law, proposed by Adolf Berle and Gardiner Means in The Modern Corporation and Private Property (1932).
See also
 US corporate law
 UK company law
References
External links
Category:United States corporate case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:Legal history of Florida
Category:1933 in United States case law
"""

From "Louisiana ex rel. Francis v. Resweber" ==> """
__NOTOC__ 
Louisiana ex rel. Francis v. Resweber, 329 U.S. 459 (1947), is a case in which the U.S. Supreme Court was asked whether imposing capital punishment (the electric chair) a second time, after it failed in an attempt to execute Willie Francis in 1946,The first time [Francis] found himself in the chair on May 3, 1946, it was improperly setup as the two in charge of setting it up, Captain Ephie Foster and an inmate who was also an electrician, Vincent Venezia, were drunk at the time.  When the switch was flipped to kill the boy, rather than this happening, he simply started jerking around violently in the chair.  "The Boy Who Was Executed Twice," Today I found out, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wdWXODwOcds January 10, 2017 (Retrieved February 12, 2017) constituted a violation of the United States Constitution. The issues raised surrounded the double jeopardy clause of the 5th Amendment, and the cruel and unusual punishment clause of the 8th Amendment, as made applicable to the State of Louisiana via the due process clause of the 14th Amendment.
In an opinion by Justice Stanley Forman Reed, which three other justices (Chief Justice Vinson and Associate Justices Hugo Black and Robert H. Jackson) joined, and with which Justice Felix Frankfurter concurred, the Court held that re-executing Francis did not constitute double jeopardy or cruel and unusual punishment.  Justice Reed wrote,
Our minds rebel against permitting the same sovereignty to punish an accused twice for the same offense. But where the accused successfully seeks review of a conviction, there is no double jeopardy upon a new trial. Even where a state obtains a new trial after conviction because of errors, while an accused may be placed on trial a second time, it is not the sort of hardship to the accused that is forbidden by the Fourteenth Amendment ... For we see no difference from a constitutional point of view between a new trial for error of law at the instance of the state that results in a death sentence instead of imprisonment for life and an execution that follows a failure of equipment. When an accident, with no suggestion of malevolence, prevents the consummation of a sentence, the state's subsequent course in the administration of its criminal law is not affected on that account by any requirement of due process under the Fourteenth Amendment. We find no double jeopardy here which can be said to amount to a denial of federal due process in the proposed execution. (Citations omitted).
Dissenting, however, Justice Harold Burton (joined by Justices William O. Douglas, Frank Murphy, and Wiley Rutledge) argued, 
How many deliberate and intentional reapplications of electric current does it take to produce a cruel, unusual and unconstitutional punishment? While five applications would be more cruel and unusual than one, the uniqueness of the present case demonstrates that, today, two separated applications are sufficiently 'cruel and unusual' to be prohibited. If five attempts would be 'cruel and unusual,' it would be difficult to draw the line between two, three, four and five. It is not difficult, however, as we here contend, to draw the line between the one continuous application prescribed by statute and any other application of the current. Lack of intent that the first application be less than fatal is not material. The intent of the executioner cannot lessen the torture or excuse the result.
Francis was successfully executed the following year.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 329
References
Further reading
 Gilbert King, The Execution of Willie Francis: Race, Murder, and the Search for Justice in the American South, Basic Civitas, New York, 2008.
 Daven Hiskey, The Teenager who was Executed Twice, http://www.todayifoundout.com/index.php/2012/09/the-teenager-who-was-executed-twice/ (Retrieved February 12, 2017)
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Capital punishment in Louisiana
Category:1947 in United States case law
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "Louisiana Power & Light Co. v. City of Thibodaux" ==> """
Louisiana Power & Light Co. v. City of Thibodaux, 360 U.S. 25 (1959), was a case in which the Supreme Court created a new doctrine of abstention.
Case
The city of Thibodaux, citing a 1900 state law, Act 111, sought to condemn buildings, land, equipment, poles, lines, and other properties that belonged to the Louisiana Power and Light Company and that were located in areas that had recently been annexed by the city. The company, a Florida corporation, challenged the city's authority to condemn only a part of a utility system. The case was originally brought in the Louisiana state courts, but then removed to the United States district court on the grounds of diversity of citizenship, the petitioner being a Florida corporation..
Although the 1900 law had never been judicially interpreted, it had been cited in a similar case by the state's Attorney General, who had concluded that a city of Louisiana did not possess the authority under that law that was being asserted by the city of Thibodaux.
The district court, on its own motion, stayed further proceedings in order to allow the Supreme Court of Louisiana to interpret Act 111. An appeals court rejected the district court's action. On appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court, the district court ruling was affirmed on the grounds that eminent domain is “intimately involved with sovereign prerogative,” that the Louisiana law cited was unclear, and that a federal ruling based upon that law could therefore not be determinative.
The case was argued before the Supreme Court on April 2, 1959, and decided on June 8, 1959.
Result
The court, overturning the Court of Appeals decision, concluded that “the District Court properly exercised the power it had in this case to stay proceedings pending a prompt state court construction of a state statute of dubious meaning.”
Majority opinion
The majority in Thibodaux consisted of Justices Black, Clark, Frankfurter, Harlan, Whittaker, and Stewart; the majority opinion was written by Justice Frankfurter.
The majority held that the district court's abstention was justified because the issue of eminent domain was “intimately involved with the sovereign prerogative.” Given that such matters “normally turn on legislation with much local variation interpreted in local settings,” it was proper for federal courts to defer to state courts “in a matter close to the political interests of a State” in the interests of “harmonious federal-state relations.” The majority also noted that the district court had not abdicated jurisdiction but simply postponed it, allowing for the possibility of the case being returned to the district court following a declaratory judgment about the state law by a Louisiana court.
The majority cited Justice Holmes's dissenting opinion in Madisonville Traction Co. v. St. Bernard Mining Co.: “The fundamental fact is that eminent domain is a prerogative of the state which, on the one hand, may be exercised in any way that the state thinks fit, and, on the other, may not be exercised except by an authority which the state confers.” The majority, specifically citing Railroad Commission v. Pullman Co., further noted: “We have increasingly recognized the wisdom of staying actions in the federal courts pending determination by a state court of decisive issues of state law.” The majority opinion went on to say that:
The special nature of eminent domain justifies a district judge, when his familiarity with the problems of local law so counsels him, to ascertain the meaning of a disputed state statute from the only tribunal empowered to speak definitively – the courts of the State under whose statute eminent domain is sought to be exercised – rather than himself make a dubious and tentative forecast. This course does not constitute abnegation of judicial duty. On the contrary, it is a wise and productive discharge of it. There is only postponement of decision for its best fruition.
The court then applied these principles to the specific case:
In providing on his own motion for a stay in this case, an experienced district judge was responding in a sensible way to a quandary about the power of the City of Thibodaux into which he was placed by an opinion of the Attorney General of Louisiana in which it was concluded that, in a strikingly similar case, a Louisiana city did not have the power here claimed by the City. A Louisiana statute apparently seems to grant such a power. But that statute has never been interpreted, in respect to a situation like that before the judge, by the Louisiana courts, and it would not be the first time that the authoritative tribunal has found in a statute less than meets the outsider's eye. Informed local courts may find meaning not discernible to the outsider. The consequence of allowing this to come to pass would be that this case would be the only case in which the Louisiana statute is construed as we would construe it, whereas the rights of all other litigants would be thereafter governed by a decision of the Supreme Court of Louisiana quite different from ours.
Caught between the language of an old but uninterpreted statute and the pronouncement of the Attorney General of Louisiana, the district judge determined to solve his conscientious perplexity by directing utilization of the legal resources of Louisiana for a prompt ascertainment of meaning through the only tribunal whose interpretation could be controlling – the Supreme Court of Louisiana. The District Court was thus exercising a fair and well considered judicial discretion in staying proceedings pending the institution of a declaratory judgment action and subsequent decision by the Supreme Court of Louisiana.
Finally, the majority claimed that the present case was “totally unlike” another case that had been decided that same day, County of Allegheny v. Mashuda Co., “except for the coincidence that both cases involve eminent domain proceedings.” In Mashuda, the Court held that a district court had been in error when it dismissed a complaint, and that, since the state law in question was clear and “only factual issues need be resolved,” there was no just reason “to refrain from prompt adjudication.”
Dissent
Justices Warren, Douglas, and Brennan dissented; Justice Brennan wrote the dissent.
The dissent argued that when a district court is presented with a case between citizens of different states, it is disrespectful to the concept of diversity jurisdiction to send the case to a state court. A judge can abdicate his duty, wrote Justice Brennan, “only in the exceptional circumstances where the order to the parties to repair to the state court would clearly serve one of two important countervailing interests: either the avoidance of a premature and perhaps unnecessary decision of a serious federal constitutional question or the avoidance of the hazard of unsettling some delicate balance in the area of federal-state relationships.” Justice Brennan, too, cited Railroad Commission v. Pullman Co., in which “this Court held that the District Court should have stayed its hand while state issues were resolved in a state court when an injunction was sought to restrain the enforcement of the order of a state administrative body on the ground that the order was not authorized by the state law and was violative of the Federal Constitution.”
Justice Brennan pointed out that the Supreme Court had “upheld an abstention when the exercise by the federal court of jurisdiction would disrupt a state administrative process” (Burford v. Sun Oil Co.) or “interfere with the collection of state taxes” (Toomer v. Witsell), or “otherwise create needless friction by unnecessarily enjoining state officials from executing domestic policies” (Alabama Public Service Commission v. Southern R. Co.). But no such circumstances, he stated, were present in the Louisiana case:
There is no more possibility of conflict with the State in this situation than there is in the ordinary negligence or contract case in which a District Court applies state law under its diversity jurisdiction. A decision by the District Court in this case would not interfere with Louisiana administrative processes, prohibit the collection of state taxes, or otherwise frustrate the execution of state domestic policies. Quite the reverse, this action is part of the process which the City must follow in order to carry out the State's policy of expropriating private property for public uses. Finally, in this case, the State of Louisiana, represented by its constituent organ the City of Thibodaux, urges the District Court to adjudicate the state law issue. How, conceivably, can the Court justify the abdication of responsibility to exercise jurisdiction on the ground of avoiding interference and conflict with the State when the State itself desires the federal court's adjudication? It is obvious that the abstention in this case was for the convenience of the District Court, not for the State.
Thibodaux abstention
The issues addressed in Thibodaux had previously been the subject of an earlier Supreme Court case, Railroad Commission v. Pullman Co. (1941), which established a principle called the "Pullman abstention".
Although the decisions in the two cases were similar, what set Thibodaux apart was that it did not involve a constitutional issue that could be avoided or modified by a state court interpretation of some underlying issue of state law. In Thibodaux, a ruling at the federal level would have amounted to an interpretation of a vague Louisiana law and, thus, a determination of the circumstances under which the city could or could not exercise the power it claimed to have under the 1900 Louisiana law.
The decision in Thibodaux gave rise to a new principle, the "Thibodaux abstention", which is defined as "[a] federal court’s act of declining to exercise its jurisdiction to allow a state court to decide difficult issues [o]f importance in order to avoid unnecessary friction between federal and state authorities".
A key difference between the Pullman and Thibodaux doctrines is that under Pullman the court retains jurisdiction over federal issues and does not dismiss the case, while under the Thibodaux doctrine the case will, in fact, be dismissed in some instances.
There are several other federal abstention doctrines that derive from various Supreme Court cases, including the so-called Younger and Colorado River abstentions. The Burford abstention, derived from Burford v. Sun Oil Co. (1943), in which a federal court sent a dispute over oil-drilling rights to a Texas court that was far more familiar with the issues involved, is similar to the Thibodaux abstention, and some abstentions are in fact identified as Burford-Thibodaux or Thibodaux-Burford abstentions.
Allegheny County v. Frank Mashuda Co.
A number of observers have commented on the difference between the rulings in Thibodaux and Allegheny County v. Frank Mashuda Co., which involved the question of whether a plaintiff's property could be confiscated under eminent domain in order to enlarge a private airport. In Allegheny County, the Court did not allow for abstention. “The apparent inconsistency between the two decisions has been the subject of considerable law review commentary,” notes one observer.
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1959 in United States case law
Category:United States abstention case law
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:Thibodaux, Louisiana
Category:Entergy
Category:Eminent domain
"""

From "Louisiana v. United States (1965)" ==> """
Louisiana v. United States, 380 U.S. 145 (1965), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that dealt with an "interpretation test" permitted by the Louisiana Constitution of 1921 alleged to deprive Louisiana Negroes of voting rights in violation of 42 U.S.C. Section 1971(a) and the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments.
The test gave complete discretion to registrars to deny an applicant the ability to register to vote if he could not "give a reasonable interpretation" of any clause in the Louisiana Constitution or the Constitution of the United States.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 380
External links
Category:1965 in United States case law
Category:African-American history of Louisiana
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:Louisiana elections
Category:United States Fifteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Louisville & Nashville Railroad Co. v. Mottley" ==> """
Louisville & Nashville Railroad Company v. Mottley, 211 U.S. 149 (1908), was a United States Supreme Court decision that held that under the existing statutory scheme, federal question jurisdiction could not be predicated on a plaintiff's anticipation that the defendant would raise a federal statute as a defense. Instead, such jurisdiction can only arise from a complaint by the plaintiff that the defendant has directly violated some provision of the Constitution, laws, or treaties of the United States.Louisville & Nashville R.R. v. Mottley, . This reading of the federal question jurisdiction statute is now known as the well-pleaded complaint rule.
Facts
The Mottleys, Erasmus and Annie, were a husband and wife who had been injured in a train wreck on September 7, 1871, in Jefferson County, Kentucky.  In exchange for releasing the railroad from liability, they were compensated with free passes from the Louisville and Nashville Railroad company, which were to be renewed annually.  Several decades later, in the Hepburn Act (1906), the U.S. Congress banned certain types of free passes starting from January 1, 1907 in order to prevent them from being used to bribe government officials, and the railroad refused to renew the Mottleys' passes in 1907. The Mottleys sued for specific performance of the rail passes in federal court.  They argued that either the federal statute did not apply because they had been issued the passes decades before the law went into effect, or if the law did apply, that it was unconstitutional because it deprived them of their property (the passes). The lower federal courts decided in favor of the Mottleys, and the railroad appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Issue
The Supreme Court, sua sponte, questioned the existence of subject matter jurisdiction, transforming the issue into whether this was a case that could have been brought in federal court in the first place.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court, in an opinion by Justice Moody, dismissed the case for lack of jurisdiction. There was no diversity of citizenship, and no grounds for federal question jurisdiction except that the case 'arose under federal law' which is insufficient to satisfy the federal question requirement.  The only way a party can get federal question jurisdiction is if the federal question arises in the plaintiff's well-pleaded complaint.
It is important to note that this holding was an interpretation of jurisdictional statutes rather than of the Constitution's Article III.  That is, "arising under" for Article III purposes is broader than the well-pleaded complaint rule.  It is well-established that Congress may grant lower federal courts less than the totality of Article III's possible federal question jurisdiction; for example, before 1980, federal question jurisdiction had an amount in controversy requirement, similar to the requirement that still exists in diversity cases.  By analogy, jurisdiction premised on diversity of citizenship in Article III is broader than the modern "total diversity" requirement under the jurisdictional statute, 28 U.S.C. § 1332.  For example, the Class Action Fairness Act allows federal jurisdiction based on diversity of citizenship without total diversity; this is based on Article III's broader sweep.
Later developments
Following the dismissal of their case, the Mottleys brought a similar action in Kentucky state court. The state court held for them, and ordered the railroad to issue the passes.  The railroad appealed to the Court of Appeals of Kentucky, Kentucky's highest court at the time, and lost.Louisville & Nashville R.R. v. Mottley, 133 Ky. 652, 118 S.W. 982 (1909).  The railroad appealed again to the U.S. Supreme Court, which ruled in favor of the railroad,Louisville & Nashville R.R. v. Mottley, . thereby handing the Mottleys yet another legal defeat.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 211
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 219
References
External links
 Louisville & Nashville R. Co. v. Mottley Case Brief at Lawnix.com
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States federal question jurisdiction case law
Category:Louisville and Nashville Railroad
Category:1908 in United States case law
Category:Railway litigation in 1908
Category:History of Louisville, Kentucky
"""

From "Louisville Joint Stock Land Bank v. Radford" ==> """
Louisville Joint Stock Land Bank v. Radford, 295 U.S. 555 (1935), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that ruled the Frazier–Lemke Farm Bankruptcy Act unconstitutional in violation of the Fifth Amendment.. This unanimous decision was one of the Court's many rulings that overturned President Roosevelt's New Deal.
Facts
In 1922 and 1924, Radford and his wife mortgaged a farm to the Louisville Joint Stock Land Bank in Christian County, Kentucky, comprising , with an appraised value of at least $18,000 at that time (approximately $,000 in  dollar). Mortgages were given to secure loans totaling $9,000, to be repaid in installments over 34 years with interest at the rate of 6 per cent. In 1931 and subsequent years, the Radfords defaulted in payment of taxes. In 1932 and 1933, they defaulted in their promise to pay the installments of interest and principal. In 1933, they also defaulted in their covenant to keep the buildings insured. The Bank urged the Radfords to refinance the debt under the provisions of the Emergency Farm Mortgage Act, which they declined to do so. The Bank then declared the entire indebtedness immediately payable, and filed a suit in the circuit court for Christian county in June 1933, against the Radfords and their tenant to foreclose the mortgages. In addition, invoking a covenant in the mortgage expressly providing therefore, the bank sought to appoint a receiver to take possession and control of the premises and to collect the rents and profits.
The application for the appointment of a receiver was denied and all proceedings in the suit were suspended, upon request of the Conciliation Commissioner for Christian County appointed under section 75 of the Bankruptcy Act, stating that Radford desired to avail himself of the provisions of that section. Radford filed a petition295 U.S. at 575. asking for an opportunity to submit a composition of his debts, in the federal court for Western Kentucky. The petition was promptly approved and a meeting of the creditors was held, but Radford failed to obtain the acceptance of the requisite majority in number and amount to the composition proposed. Then, the Bank offered to accept a deed of the mortgaged property in full satisfaction of the indebtedness to it and to assume the unpaid taxes. Radford refused to execute the deed; on June 30, 1934, the state court ordered a foreclosure sale.
The Frazier–Lemke Emergency Farm Mortgage Act was passed on June 28, 1934.11 U.S.C. § 203(s). The act was designed to give aid to debt-ridden farmers, allowing them to reacquire farms they had lost from foreclosure, or to petition the Bankruptcy Court within their district to suspend foreclosure proceedings.McKenna, at 100–01. The legislation's ultimate goal was to help those farmers scale down their mortgages. On August 6, 1934, and again on November 10, 1934, Radford filed amended petitions for relief thereunder. The second amended petition prayed that Radford be deemed bankrupt; that his property be appraised; and that he have the relief provided for in paragraphs 3 and 7 of subsection(s) of the Frazier–Lemke Amendment.11 U.S.C. § 203(s)(3, 7). That act provides, among other things, that a farmer who has failed to obtain the consents requisite to a composition under section 75 of the Bankruptcy Act, may, upon being adjudged a bankrupt, acquire alternative options in respect to mortgaged property:
By paragraph 3, the bankrupt may, if the mortgagee assents, purchase the property at its then appraised value, acquiring title as well as immediate possession, by agreeing to make deferred payments as follows: 2½ per cent. within two years; 2½ per cent. within three years; 5 per cent. within four years; 5 per cent. within five years; the balance within six years. All deferred payments to bear interest at the rate of 1 per cent. per annum.
By paragraph 7, the bankrupt may, if the mortgagee refuses the immediate purchase on the above basis, require the bankruptcy court to 'stay all proceedings for a period of five years, during which five years the debtor shall retain possession of all or any part of his property, under the control of the court, provided he pays a reasonable rental annually for that part of the property of which he retains possession; the first payment of such rental to be made within six months of the date of the order staying proceedings, such rental to be distributed among the secured and unsecured creditors, as their interests may appear, under the provisions of this Act (title). At the end of five years, or prior thereto, the debtor may pay into court the appraised price of the property of which he retains possession: Provided, That upon request of any lien holder on real estate the court shall cause a reappraisal of such real estate and the debtor may then pay the reappraised price, if acceptable to the lien holder, into the court, otherwise the original appraisal price shall be paid into court, and thereupon the court shall, by an order, turn over full possession and title of said property to the debtor and he may apply for his discharge as provided for by this Act (title): Provided, however, That the provisions of this Act (subsection) shall apply only to debts existing at the time this Act becomes effective (on June 28, 1934).
Answering the amended petition, the Bank claimed that the Frazier–Lemke Act was unconstitutional, and requested that Radford's amended petition be dismissed and that it be allowed to proceed with the foreclosure sale. It rejected the composition and extension proposal offered by Radford, and declined to consent to the proposed sale of that property to Radford at the appraised value or any value on the terms set forth in paragraph 3, and objected to his retaining possession thereof with the privilege of purchasing the same provided by paragraph 7. The federal court overruled the Bank's objections, adjudged Radford a bankrupt within the meaning of the Frazier–Lemke Act, and appointed a referee to take proceedings thereunder.
The referee ordered an appraisal of all of Radford's property, which found that 'the fair and reasonable value of the property of the debtor on which Louisville Joint Stock Bank has a mortgage' and also the 'market value of said land' was then $4,445. The referee approved the appraisal, although the Bank offered in open court to pay $9,205.09 in cash for the mortgaged property. Counsel for the bankrupt admitted that since the Bank had a valid lien upon it for the amount offered to be paid, if the Bank's offer to purchase the property were accepted, all the money paid in cash would be immediately returned to it in satisfaction of the mortgage indebtedness.
The Bank refused to sell the mortgaged property to Radford at the appraised value as prescribed by paragraph 3 of subsection (s). Thereupon, the referee ordered the suspension of all proceedings for the enforcement of the mortgages for five years, and that the possession of the mortgaged property, subject to liens, remain in Radford, under the control of the court, as provided in paragraph 7 of subsection (s). The referee fixed the rental for the first year at $325, and ordered that for each subsequent year the rental be fixed by the court. All the orders of the referee were, upon a petition for a review, approved by the District Court; and its decree was affirmed by the Circuit Court of Appeals on February 11, 1935.
Decision
Justice Brandeis wrote for a unanimous Court in invalidating the Frazier–Lemke Act, holding that this act unfairly deprived the bank of private property without just compensation, in violation of the Fifth Amendment.
The Court cited W.B. Worthen Co. v. Kavanaugh (1935). where the Court had held unconstitutional provisions of state legislation similar to the Frazier–Lemke Act, stating in that case that turning a mortgage into an undesirable investment for the mortgagee is an act of oppression by the government. The Court reversed the Circuit Court's decision, ruling that the Frazier–Lemke Act was unconstitutional in violation of the Fifth Amendment. "The Fifth Amendment," Brandeis declared, "commands that however great the Nation's need, private property shall not be thus taken over without just compensation."
Reaction
Along with Humphrey's Executor v. United States. and A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States,. both decided in 1935, this Court decision was a major setback for the Roosevelt administration's New Deal program. Roosevelt became distressed upon learning the unanimity of these three court decisions.  However, this would also be one of the few occasions where the court's three liberal judges agreed to overrule some of the New Deal legislation.  The worst of Roosevelt's problems from the Supreme Court came from other decisions where Justice Owen Roberts sided with the court's four conservative justices to override other New Deal legislation.  Roosevelt's setbacks with the Supreme Court eventually led to his attempt to pack the court.
See also
A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States (1935)
Humphrey's Executor v. United States (1935)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:Christian County, Kentucky
Category:New Deal in Kentucky
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States agricultural policy
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:Foreclosure
Category:Agriculture in Kentucky
Category:1935 in Kentucky
Category:Agricultural finance
Category:Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
"""

From "Louisville, New Orleans & Texas Railway Co. v. Mississippi" ==> """
Louisville, New Orleans & Texas Railway Co. v. Mississippi, 133 U.S. 587 (1890), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States upheld a Mississippi law that required railroads to racially segregate their passengers. The Court in Hall v. Decuir (1878) had struck down a similar Louisiana law on the grounds that it unreasonably interfered with Congress's power to regulate interstate commerce. A railroad challenged the Mississippi law on the same ground, arguing that it violated the Dormant Commerce Clause by burdening interstate commerce. The Supreme Court, dividing 7 to 2, disagreed. Writing for the majority, Justice David Josiah Brewer distinguished Hall on the basis that Mississippi's law, unlike Louisiana's, applied solely to intrastate commerce. Justices John Marshall Harlan and Joseph P. Bradley dissented. According to Harlan, the Mississippi law subjected all trains, including those involved in interstate commerce, to the segregation requirement. Finding no differences between the case and Hall, he voted to strike down the law.
The justices did not expressly rule on whether segregation violated the Equal Protection Clause: that issue was not raised until Plessy v. Ferguson (1896). But scholar John Semoche argues that Louisville Railway "was more pivotal that the more widely known" Plessy case, since the argument that it rejected was even more narrow than the one presented in Plessy. The decision has been heavily criticized by the scholarly academy: Benno Schmidt, for instance, wrote that "the Court revealed a greater commitment to the flourishing of segregation that to the flourishing of commerce". In the 1946 case of Morgan v. Virginia, the Supreme Court overruled Louisville Railway, returning to the rule set forth in Hall.
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1890 in United States case law
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
"""

From "Lovell v. City of Griffin" ==> """
Lovell v. City of Griffin, 303 U.S. 444 (1938), is a United States Supreme Court case.. This case was remarkable in its discussion of the requirement of persons to seek government sanction to distribute religious material. In this particular case, the Supreme Court ruled it was not constitutional for a city to require such sanction.
 Background 
Appellant, Alma Lovell, had been distributing literature as a Jehovah's Witness. She was arrested for this, pursuant to a Griffin, Georgia city ordinance which read, in part, that the
practice of distributing, either by hand or otherwise, circulars, handbooks, advertising, or literature of any kind, whether said articles are being delivered free, or whether same are being sold, within the limits of the City of Griffin, without first obtaining written permission from the City Manager of the City of Griffin, such practice shall be deemed a nuisance, and punishable as an offense against the City of Griffin.Lovell, 303 U.S. at 447.
Alma Lovell did not contest the fact that she was distributing material in violation of this ordinance, but attested that the ordinance itself was unconstitutional, in that it violated her First Amendment and Fourteenth Amendment rights.
Lovell was convicted in the recorder's court of the City of Griffin, and sentenced to punishment of 50 days in jail, as she had not paid her fine of $50. The county court denied Lovell's appeal. The Court of Appeals affirmed the judgment of the lower court, upholding her conviction. The Supreme Court of Georgia denied an application for certiorari. Lovell appealed further, reaching the jurisdiction of the United States Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
Chief Justice Hughes delivered the opinion of the court. Justice Cardozo did not take part in the proceedings.
The Court decided that the city ordinance was unconstitutionally overbroad. Because the ordinance restricted not merely the time, place, or manner of the materials distributed, the Court believed that it was in violation of the First Amendment, and, by extension, the Fourteenth Amendment, which guaranteed that the federal constitutional guarantees would be binding on individual states.
The Court reasoned that the ordinance violated the Freedom of the Press condition of the First Amendment, as the city demanded that all distributed periodicals, not merely those that were considered obscene, offensive to public morals, or which advocate unlawful conduct, obtain a license from the city before they could be distributed. The Court felt that the First Amendment was not limited to periodicals and newspapers, that it necessarily included the publication of leaflets and pamphlets as well.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Hughes Court
 Incorporation of the Bill of Rights
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:1938 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Griffin, Georgia
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
Category:1938 in religion
"""

From "Loving v. Virginia" ==> """
Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1 (1967), was a landmark civil rights decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in which the Court ruled that laws banning interracial marriage violate the Equal Protection and Due Process Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The case involved Mildred Loving, a woman of color, and her white husband Richard Loving, who in 1958 were sentenced to a year in prison for marrying each other. Their marriage violated Virginia's Racial Integrity Act of 1924, which criminalized marriage between people classified as "white" and people classified as "colored". The Lovings appealed their conviction to the Supreme Court of Virginia, which upheld it. They then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which agreed to hear their case. 
In June 1967, the Supreme Court issued a unanimous decision in the Lovings' favor and overturned their convictions. Its decision struck down Virginia's anti-miscegenation law and ended all race-based legal restrictions on marriage in the United States. Virginia had argued before the Court that its law was not a violation of the Equal Protection Clause because the punishment was the same regardless of the offender's race, and thus it "equally burdened" both caucasians and non-caucasians. The Court found that the law nonetheless violated the Equal Protection Clause because it was based solely on "distinctions drawn according to race" and outlawed conduct—namely, that of getting married—that was otherwise generally accepted and which citizens were free to do. Beginning in 2013, the decision was cited as precedent in U.S. federal court decisions holding restrictions on same-sex marriage in the United States unconstitutional, including in the Supreme Court decision Obergefell v. Hodges (2015).
Background
Anti-miscegenation laws in the United States
Anti-miscegenation laws had been in place in certain states since the colonial period. During the Reconstruction era in 1865, the Black Codes across the seven states of the lower South made interracial marriage illegal. The new Republican legislatures in six states repealed the restrictive laws. By 1894, when the Democratic Party in the South returned to power, restrictions were reimposed.
A major concern was how to draw the line between black and white in a society in which white men had many children with enslaved black women. On the one hand, a person's reputation as black or white was usually what mattered in practice. On the other hand, most laws used a "one drop of blood" rule, which meant that one black ancestor made a person black in the view of the law.Peter Wallenstein, "Reconstruction, Segregation, and Miscegenation: Interracial Marriage and the Law in the Lower South, 1865–1900." American Nineteenth Century History 6#1 (2005): 57–76. In 1967, 16 states still retained anti-miscegenation laws, mainly in the American South.Loving, 388 U.S. at 6.
 Plaintiffs 
Mildred Delores Loving was the daughter of Musial (Byrd) Jeter and Theoliver Jeter. She self-identified as Indian-Rappahannock, but was also reported as being of Cherokee, Portuguese, and African American ancestry. During the trial, it seemed clear that she identified herself as black, especially as far as her own lawyer was concerned. However, upon her arrest, the police report identified her as "Indian".
Richard Perry Loving was a white man, the son of Lola (Allen) Loving and Twillie Loving. Their families both lived in Caroline County, Virginia, which adhered to strict Jim Crow segregation laws, but their town of Central Point had been a visible mixed-race community since the 19th century. The couple met in high school and fell in love.
Mildred became pregnant, and in June 1958, the couple traveled to Washington, D.C. to marry, thereby evading Virginia's Racial Integrity Act of 1924, which made marriage between whites and non-whites a crime. A few weeks after they returned to Central Point, local police raided their home in the early morning hours of July 11, 1958, hoping to find them having sex, given that interracial sex was then also illegal in Virginia. When the officers found the Lovings sleeping in their bed, Mildred pointed out their marriage certificate on the bedroom wall. They were told the certificate was not valid in Virginia.
Criminal proceedings
The Lovings were charged under Section 20-58 of the Virginia Code, which prohibited interracial couples from being married out of state and then returning to Virginia, and Section 20-59, which classified miscegenation as a felony, punishable by a prison sentence of between one and five years.
On January 6, 1959, the Lovings pleaded guilty to "cohabiting as man and wife, against the peace and dignity of the Commonwealth". They were sentenced to one year in prison, with the sentence suspended on condition that the couple leave Virginia and not return together for at least 25 years. After their conviction, the couple moved to the District of Columbia.Loving, 388 U.S. at 3 ("On January 6, 1959, the Lovings pleaded guilty to the charge and were sentenced to one year in jail; however, the trial judge suspended the sentence for a period of 25 years on the condition that the Lovings leave the State and not return to Virginia together for 25 years ... After their convictions, the Lovings took up residence in the District of Columbia.")
Appellate proceedings
In 1963, frustrated by their inability to travel together to visit their families in Virginia, as well as their social isolation and financial difficulties in Washington, Mildred Loving wrote in protest to Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy. Kennedy referred her to the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU). The ACLU assigned volunteer cooperating attorneys Bernard S. Cohen and Philip J. Hirschkop, who filed a motion on behalf of the Lovings in Virginia's Caroline County Circuit Court, that requested the court to vacate the criminal judgments and set aside the Lovings' sentences on the grounds that the Virginia miscegenation statutes ran counter to the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause.
On October 28, 1964, after waiting almost a year for a response to their motion, the ACLU attorneys filed a federal class action lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia. This prompted the county court judge in the case, Leon M. Bazile (1890–1967), to issue a ruling on the long-pending motion to vacate. Echoing Johann Friedrich Blumenbach's 18th-century interpretation of race, Bazile denied the motion with the words:
On January 22, 1965, a three-judge district court panel postponed decision on the federal class-action case while the Lovings appealed Judge Bazile's decision on constitutional grounds to the Virginia Supreme Court. On March 7, 1966, Justice Harry L. Carrico (later Chief Justice of the Court) wrote an opinion for the court upholding the constitutionality of the anti-miscegenation statutes. Carrico cited as authority the Virginia Supreme Court's decision in Naim v. Naim (1955) and ruled that criminalization of the Lovings' marriage was not a violation of the Equal Protection Clause, because both the white and the non-white spouse were punished equally for miscegenation, a line of reasoning that echoed that of the United States Supreme Court in 1883 in Pace v. Alabama. However, the court did find the Lovings' sentences to be unconstitutionally vague, ordering that they be resentenced in the Caroline County Circuit Court. 
The Lovings, still supported by the ACLU, appealed the state supreme court's decision to the Supreme Court of the United States, where Virginia was represented by Robert McIlwaine of the state's attorney general's office. The Supreme Court agreed on December 12, 1966, to accept the case for final review. The Lovings did not attend the oral arguments in Washington, but one of their lawyers, Bernard S. Cohen, conveyed the personal message he had been given by Richard Loving: "Mr. Cohen, tell the Court I love my wife, and it is just unfair that I can't live with her in Virginia."
Precedents
thumb|Date range when U.S. states repealed anti-miscegenation laws: 
Before Loving v. Virginia, there had been several cases on the subject of interracial sexual relations. Within the state of Virginia, on October 3, 1878, in Kinney v. The Commonwealth, the Supreme Court of Virginia ruled that the marriage legalized in Washington, D.C. between Andrew Kinney, a black man, and Mahala Miller, a white woman, was "invalid" in Virginia. In the national case of Pace v. Alabama (1883), the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the conviction of an Alabama couple for interracial sex, affirmed on appeal by the Alabama Supreme Court, did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment. Interracial marital sex was deemed a felony, whereas extramarital sex ("adultery or fornication") was only a misdemeanor.
On appeal, the United States Supreme Court ruled that the criminalization of interracial sex was not a violation of the Equal Protection Clause because whites and non-whites were punished in equal measure for the offense of engaging in interracial sex. The court did not need to affirm the constitutionality of the ban on interracial marriage that was also part of Alabama's anti-miscegenation law, since the plaintiff, Mr. Pace, had chosen not to appeal that section of the law. After Pace v. Alabama, the constitutionality of anti-miscegenation laws banning marriage and sex between whites and non-whites remained unchallenged until the 1920s.
In Kirby v. Kirby (1921), Joe R. Kirby asked the state of Arizona for an annulment of his marriage. He charged that his marriage was invalid because his wife was of "negro" descent, thus violating the state's anti-miscegenation law. The Arizona Supreme Court judged Mayellen Kirby's race by observing her physical characteristics and determined that she was of mixed race, therefore granting Joe R. Kirby's annulment.
In the Monks case (Estate of Monks, 4. Civ. 2835, Records of California Court of Appeals, Fourth district), the Superior Court of San Diego County in 1939 decided to invalidate the marriage of Marie Antoinette and Allan Monks because she was deemed to have "one eighth negro blood". The court case involved a legal challenge over the conflicting wills that had been left by the late Allan Monks; an old one in favor of a friend named Ida Lee, and a newer one in favor of his wife. Lee's lawyers charged that the marriage of the Monkses, which had taken place in Arizona, was invalid under Arizona state law because Marie Antoinette was "a Negro" and Alan had been white. Despite conflicting testimony by various expert witnesses, the judge defined Marie Antoinette Monks' race by relying on the anatomical "expertise" of a surgeon. The judge ignored the arguments of an anthropologist and a biologist that it was impossible to tell a person's race from physical characteristics.
Monks then challenged the Arizona anti-miscegenation law itself, taking her case to the California Court of Appeals, Fourth District. Monks' lawyers pointed out that the anti-miscegenation law effectively prohibited Monks as a mixed-race person from marrying anyone: "As such, she is prohibited from marrying a negro or any descendant of a negro, a Mongolian or an Indian, a Malay or a Hindu, or any descendants of any of them. Likewise ... as a descendant of a negro she is prohibited from marrying a Caucasian or a descendant of a Caucasian." The Arizona anti-miscegenation statute thus prohibited Monks from contracting a valid marriage in Arizona, and was therefore an unconstitutional constraint on her liberty. However, the court dismissed this argument as inapplicable, because the case presented involved not two mixed-race spouses but a mixed-race and a white spouse: "Under the facts presented the appellant does not have the benefit of assailing the validity of the statute." Dismissing Monks' appeal in 1942, the United States Supreme Court refused to reopen the issue.
The turning point came with Perez v. Sharp (1948), also known as Perez v. Lippold. In Perez, the Supreme Court of California recognized that bans on interracial marriage violated the Fourteenth Amendment of the Federal Constitution.
Supreme Court decision
thumb|upright=1.0|right|Chief Justice Earl Warren, the author of the Supreme Court's unanimous opinion in Loving v. Virginia
On June 12, 1967, the Supreme Court issued a unanimous 9–0 decision in favor of the Lovings that overturned their criminal convictions and struck down Virginia's anti-miscegenation law. The Court's opinion was written by chief justice Earl Warren, and all the justices joined it. 
The Court first addressed whether Virginia's Racial Integrity Act violated the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause, which reads: "nor shall any State ... deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws." Virginia officials had argued that the Act did not violate the Equal Protection Clause because it "equally burdened" both whites and non-whites, since the punishment for violating the statute was the same regardless of the offender's race; for example, a white person who married a black person was subject to the same penalties as a black person who married a white person. 
The Court had accepted this "equal burden" argument 84 years earlier in its 1883 decision Pace v. Alabama. But in Loving, the Court rejected the argument.
The Court said that because the Virginia Racial Integrity Act used racial classification as a basis for imposing criminal culpability, the Equal Protection Clause required the Court to strictly scrutinize the Act's provisions.
Applying the strict scrutiny standard of review, the Court concluded that Virginia's Act had no discernible purpose other than "invidious racial discrimination" that was designed to "maintain White Supremacy". The Court therefore ruled that the Act violated the Equal Protection Clause.
The Court ended its opinion with a short section holding that Virginia's Racial Integrity Act also violated the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause. The Court said that the freedom to marry is a fundamental constitutional right, and it held that depriving Americans of it on an arbitrary basis such as race was unconstitutional.
Effects
For interracial marriage
Despite the Supreme Court's decision, anti-miscegenation laws remained on the books in several states, although the decision had made them unenforceable. State judges in Alabama continued to enforce its anti-miscegenation statute until 1970, when the Nixon administration obtained a ruling from a U.S. District Court in United States v. Brittain. In 2000, Alabama became the last state to adapt its laws to the Supreme Court's decision, when 60% of voters endorsed a constitutional amendment, Amendment 2, that removed anti-miscegenation language from the state constitution.
After Loving v. Virginia, the number of interracial marriages continued to increase across the United States and in the South. In Georgia, for instance, the number of interracial marriages increased from 21 in 1967 to 115 in 1970.Aldridge, The Changing Nature of Interracial Marriage in Georgia: A Research Note, 1973 At the national level, 0.4% of marriages were interracial in 1960, 2.0% in 1980, 12% in 2013, and 16% in 2015, almost 50 years after Loving.
For same-sex marriage
Loving v. Virginia was discussed in the context of the public debate about same-sex marriage in the United States.
In Hernandez v. Robles (2006), the majority opinion of the New York Court of Appeals—that state's highest court—declined to rely on the Loving case when deciding whether a right to same-sex marriage existed, holding that "the historical background of Loving is different from the history underlying this case." In the 2010 federal district court decision in Perry v. Schwarzenegger, overturning California's Proposition 8 which restricted marriage to opposite-sex couples, Judge Vaughn R. Walker cited Loving v. Virginia to conclude that "the [constitutional] right to marry protects an individual's choice of marital partner regardless of gender". On narrower grounds, the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed.
In June 2007, on the 40th anniversary of the Supreme Court's decision in Loving, Mildred Loving issued the following statement:
Up until 2014, five U.S. Courts of Appeals considered the constitutionality of state bans on same-sex marriage. In doing so they interpreted or used the Loving ruling differently:
The Fourth and Tenth Circuits used Loving along with other cases like Zablocki v. Redhail and Turner v. Safley to demonstrate that the U.S. Supreme Court has recognized a "fundamental right to marry" that a state cannot restrict unless it meets the court's "heightened scrutiny" standard. Using that standard, both courts struck down state bans on same-sex marriage.
Two other courts of appeals, the Seventh and Ninth Circuits, struck down state bans on the basis of a different line of argument. Instead of "fundamental rights" analysis, they reviewed bans on same-sex marriage as discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. The former cited Loving to demonstrate that the Supreme Court did not accept tradition as a justification for limiting access to marriage. The latter cited Loving as quoted in United States v. Windsor on the question of federalism: "state laws defining or regulating marriage, of course, must respect the constitutional rights of persons".
The only Court of Appeals to uphold state bans on same-sex marriage, the Sixth Circuit, said that when the Loving decision discussed marriage it was referring only to marriage between persons of the opposite sex.
In Obergefell v. Hodges (2015), the Supreme Court invoked Loving, among other cases, as precedent for its holding that states are required to allow same-sex marriages under both the Equal Protection Clause and the Due Process Clause of the Constitution. The court's decision in Obergefell cited Loving nearly a dozen times, and was based on the same principles – equality and an unenumerated right to marriage. During oral argument, the eventual author of the majority opinion, Justice Anthony Kennedy, noted that the ruling holding racial segregation unconstitutional and the ruling holding bans on interracial marriage unconstitutional (Brown v. Board of Education in 1954 and Loving v. Virginia in 1967, respectively) were made about 13 years apart, much like the ruling holding bans on same-sex sexual activity unconstitutional and the eventual ruling holding bans on same-sex marriage unconstitutional (Lawrence v. Texas in 2003 and Obergefell v. Hodges in 2015, respectively).
In popular culture
thumb|Graves of the Lovings in the St. Stephen's Baptist Church cemetery, Central Point, Virginia
In the United States, June 12, the date of the decision, has become known as Loving Day, an annual unofficial celebration of interracial marriages. In 2014, Mildred Loving was honored as one of the Library of Virginia's "Virginia Women in History". In 2017, the Virginia Department of Historic Resources dedicated a state historical marker, which tells the story of the Lovings, outside the Patrick Henry Building in Richmond –  the former site of the Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals.
The story of the Lovings became the basis of several films:
 The first, Mr. and Mrs. Loving (1996), was written and directed by Richard Friedenberg and starred Lela Rochon, Timothy Hutton, and Ruby Dee.* According to Mildred Loving, "not much of it was very true. The only part of it right was I had three children." 
 Nancy Buirski's documentary The Loving Story, premiered on HBO in February 2012The Loving Story , accessed March 25, 2015 and won a Peabody Award that year.72nd Annual Peabody Awards , May 2013.
 Loving, a dramatized telling of the story based on Buirski's documentary, was released in 2016. It was directed by Jeff Nichols and starred Ruth Negga and Joel Edgerton as the Lovings. Negga received an Academy Award nomination for her performance.
 A four-part film, The Loving Generation, premiered on Topic.com in February 2018. Directed and produced by Lacey Schwartz Delgado and Mehret Mandefro, it explores the lives of biracial children born after the Loving decision.
In music, Nanci Griffith's 2009 album The Loving Kind is named for the Lovings and includes a song about them. Satirist Roy Zimmerman's 2009 song "The Summer of Loving" is about the Lovings and their 1967 case. The title is a reference to the Summer of Love.
A 2015 novel by the French journalist Gilles Biassette, L'amour des Loving ("The Love of the Lovings", ), recounts the life of the Lovings and their case. A photo-essay about the couple by Grey Villet, created just before the case, was republished in 2017.
References
Footnotes
Citations
Bibliography
Further reading
Christopher Leslie (2004) Justice Alito's Dissent in Loving v. Virginia, University of California, p. 1564.
Dorothy Robert (2014) Loving v. Virginia as a civil rights decision , p. 177.
External links
 Links with the text of the court's decision 
 Other external links 
A Groundbreaking Interracial Marriage; Loving v. Virginia at 40. ABC News interview with Mildred Jeter Loving & video of original 1967 broadcast. June 14, 2007.
Resources at Oyez.org including complete audio of the oral arguments.
Loving Decision: 40 Years of Legal Interracial Unions, National Public Radio: All Things Considered, June 11, 2007.
The Fortieth Anniversary of Loving v. Virginia: The Legal Legacy of the Case that Ended Legal Prohibitions on Interracial Marriage, Findlaw commentary by Joanna Grossman.
Chin, Gabriel and Hrishi Karthikeyan, (2002) Asian Law Journal, vol. 9 "Preserving Racial Identity: Population Patterns and the Application of Anti-Miscegenation Statutes to Asian Americans, 1910–1950"
Category:1967 in Virginia
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:African-American history of Virginia
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Caroline County, Virginia
Category:Legal history of Virginia
Category:Native American history
Category:Race-related case law in the United States
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States family case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Rappahannock
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:Interracial marriage in the United States
Category:June 1967 events in the United States
Category:Marriage law in the United States
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
Category:Mildred and Richard Loving
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Lowenfield v. Phelps" ==> """
Lowenfield v. Phelps, 484 U.S. 231 (1988), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the two jury polls and the supplemental charge did not impermissibly coerce the jury to return a death sentence, and that the death sentence does not violate the Eighth Amendment simply because the single statutory "aggravating circumstance" found by the jury duplicates an element of the underlying offense of first-degree murder.
 Background 
In 1984, Leslie Lowenfield, a Guyanese immigrant welder, was convicted of the 1982 killing of his girlfriend, a sheriff's deputy, and four members of her family, including a 4-year-old girl.
 Opinion of the court 
The court, in an opinion by Chief Justice Rehnquist, held that the trial judge's polling of the jury and supplemental Allen instruction did not coerce the jury to return a verdict of guilty. The Court also rejected a challenge that Louisiana's death penalty statute did not sufficiently narrow the category of defendants who are eligible for the death penalty. The aggravating circumstance in the case, intentionally killing more than one person was found by the jury in the guilt phase after returning three first-degree murder verdicts.
 Subsequent developments 
Lowenfield was executed by electric chair on April 13, 1988, at the age of 34.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 484
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
General:
 Capital punishment in Louisiana
 Capital punishment in the United States
 List of people executed in Louisiana
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Allen charge case law
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Louisiana
Category:1988 in United States case law
"""

From "Lozman v. City of Riviera Beach (2013)" ==> """
Lozman v. City of Riviera Beach, 568 U.S. 115 (2013), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a vessel in admiralty law is something that a reasonable observer would consider designed for water transportation. The case arose from an in rem suit brought under admiralty jurisdiction by the city of Riviera Beach, Florida, against a floating home owned by resident Fane Lozman. Lozman argued that the floating home, which had no means by which to propel itself, was not a vessel under the Rules of Construction Act and thus not subject to admiralty jurisdiction. The Court resolved a circuit split as to what it means for a vessel to be "capable" of transportation by creating the reasonable observer standard, ruling in Lozman's favor.
The case was noted for the amusing factual question presented, which caused Chief Justice John Roberts to describe it as his favorite case of the term, and for the context of the dispute between Lozman and Riviera Beach: The two parties were involved in a number of related legal disputes, and Lozman proceeded pro se for part of the litigation. Lozman and the city returned to the Supreme Court in 2018 regarding Lozman's arrest at a city council meeting; the court held for Lozman that time as well.
 Background 
 Prior jurisprudence 
Title 1, Chapter 1 of the United States Code (also known as the Rules of Construction Act or Dictionary Act) states:
The word "vessel" includes every description of watercraft or other artificial contrivance used, or capable of being used, as a means of transportation on water.
In Stewart v. Dutra Construction Co. in 2005, the United States Supreme Court interpreted this to encompass "any watercraft practically capable of maritime transportation, regardless of its primary purpose or state of transit at a particular moment", but did not address whether a structure's intended use had a bearing on whether it should be considered a vessel.Maass, supra, at 896. In De La Rosa v. St. Charles Gaming Co., the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals interpreted Stewart as allowing such considerations, and ruled that a floating casino was not a vessel since its owners had no intention to use it for transportation, while in Bd. of Comm'rs of the Orleans Levee Dist. v. M/V Belle of Orleans the Eleventh Circuit held the opposite: "The owner's intentions with regard to a boat are analogous to the boat's 'purpose,' and Stewart clearly rejected any definition of 'vessel' that relies on such a purpose."Maass, supra, at 901.
 That Certain Unnamed Gray, Two-Story Vessel Approximately Fifty-Seven Feet in Length 
After activist Fane Lozman successfully sued to prevent the city from using eminent domain to seize properties along the waterfront, the city brought an in rem suit against Lozman's floating home under federal admiralty law, seeking a maritime lien for dockage fees and damages for trespass. Lozman responded pro se to the suit, City of Riviera Beach v. That Certain Unnamed Gray, Two-Story Vessel Approximately Fifty-Seven Feet in Length. He argued that his floating home, which had no way to propel itself, was not a "vessel" under the Rules of Construction Act, and that the District Court for the Southern District of Florida thus lacked admiralty jurisdiction. The district court rejected this argument and found that Lozman owed the city $3,000 under the lien. The Eleventh Circuit upheld the decision, citing past precedent that "the status of 'vessel' does not depend in any way on either the purpose for which the craft was constructed or its intended use." The district court ordered Lozman to sell the floating home. The city bought it at auction and destroyed it.
 Petition for certiorari 
The Eleventh Circuit's opinion in That Certain Unnamed Gray, Two-Story Vessel Approximately Fifty-Seven Feet in Length (and Belle of Orleans before it) created a circuit split with the Fifth Circuit's holding in De La Rosa as to whether a structure's purpose matters for determining whether it is a vessel.
Lozman chose not to continue pro se, and instead sought as counsel Jeffrey L. Fisher of the Stanford Law School Supreme Court Litigation Clinic after googling "appellate lawyers". Fisher works primarily in criminal law, but had experience with maritime cases such as Exxon Shipping Co. v. Baker. Fisher filed a petition for a writ of certiorari, which the Supreme Court granted in February 2012.
 At the Supreme Court 
 Oral arguments 
Oral arguments were held on 1 October 2012. Fisher advocated a standard that focuses on a vessel's purpose. He highlighted Lozman's home's unsuitability to transport people or goods, noting its "French doors on three sides a few feet above the water line" and lack of independent source of power or movement.Tr. of Oral Arg., Lozman, 568 U.S. 115, at 58:54. [Hereinafter Lozman Arg. Tr.] Justice Samuel Alito objected to Fisher's distinction between "purpose" and "function" on the basis that the statute "says nothing about purpose".Lozman Arg. Tr., supra, at 8:35.
Curtis E. Gannon, Assistant to the Solicitor General, argued on behalf of the United States that the justices should look to whether an indefinitely moored structure had ever been a vessel.
David C. Frederick, representing Riviera Beach, argued for a simple definition based on a "practical capability to float, move and carry goods or people".Lozman Arg. Tr., supra, at 36:16. Several justices responded with examples of objects that might meet this definition but would not typically be considered vessels, such as an inner tube (Chief Justice John Roberts) or a styrofoam sofa (Justice Stephen Breyer).
Justice Anthony Kennedy at one point referred to the floating home as a "magnificent structure ... which was mercifully destroyed", which drew laughter from the crowd.Lozman Arg. Tr., supra, at 4:40. Lozman later said that he had come close to walking out of the courtroom over the remark.
 Opinion of the court 
In a 7–2 decision written by Justice Breyer, the court ruled on 15 January 2013 in favor of a reasonable observer test for determining whether a structure is "capable of being used as a means of transportation on water" and is thus a vessel:Lozman, 568 U.S. 115, 120–121.
Not every floating structure is a "vessel." To state the obvious, a wooden washtub, a plastic dishpan, a swimming platform on pontoons, a large fishing net, a door taken off its hinges, or Pinocchio (when inside the whale) are not "vessels," even if they are "artificial contrivance[s]" capable of floating, moving under tow, and incidentally carrying even a fair-sized item or two when they do so. ... Consequently, in our view a structure does not fall within the scope of this statutory phrase unless a reasonable observer, looking to the home’s physical characteristics and activities, would consider it designed to a practical degree for carrying people or things over water.
The court then considered Lozman's floating home under that standard. Breyer emphasized that "But for the fact that it floats, nothing about Lozman's home suggests that it was designed to any practical degree to transport persons or things over water", and highlighted several attributes which made it ill-suited for those tasks.Lozman, 568 U.S. 115, 121–122. On that basis, the court found that it was not a vessel and reversed the Eleventh Circuit. The opinion drew a distinction between floating homes like Lozman's and houseboats that are capable of propelling themselves.
 Sotomayor's dissent 
Justice Sonia Sotomayor dissented, joined by Justice Kennedy. She began by noting that she "agree[d] with much of the Court's reasoning" and characterizing the Eleventh Circuit's test as "overinclusive". However, she criticized the introduction of a reasonable observer test as going against maritime industries' need for "clear and predictable legal rules for determining which ships are vessels."Lozman, 568 U.S. 115, 143. Sotomayor, J., dissenting. She further felt that the record was not clear enough to conclude that Lozman's home was not a vessel, and argued that the matter should have been instead remanded to the Eleventh Circuit for further consideration.
 Impact and subsequent developments 
The decision in Lozman was taken as definitive with respect to whether floating homes—as distinct from houseboats capable of self-propulsion—are vessels under admiralty law, but less so in other regards.Yankowski, supra, at 995. "As the dissent in Lozman points out, the majority's use of the term 'reasonable observer' will inevitably add confusion and subjectivity to the vessel standard." David R. Maass, writing in the Florida Law Review, criticized the reasonable observer test as making matters uncertain for lower courts;Maass, supra, at 906. Kathryn D. Yankowski, writing in the University of Miami Law Review, acknowledged this as "potentially problematic" but saw Lozman as a "fundamental addition" to maritime law that clarified the test lower courts should use.Yankowski, supra, at 1003.
Chief Justice Roberts referred to the case as his favorite of the 2012 term, and emphasized the impact of seeing a picture of the floating home, which he described as looking like "a house that got swept into the ocean somehow".
After winning at the Supreme Court, Lozman sought $270,000 in damages from the city for the loss of his floating home. A federal judge instead ordered that the city pay $7,500. ("For those and other reasons, Magistrate Lurana Snow is recommending that the city of Riviera Beach should pay Fane Lozman $7,500 for his former home—roughly $260,000 less than the former Marine is seeking."). The Eleventh Circuit upheld the ruling on appeal, and the Supreme Court denied a mandamus petition in April 2017.
Lozman's litigation against Riviera Beach regarding his floating home occurred parallel to suit alleging that his 2006 arrest at a city council meeting had been  retaliatory. That case, also called Lozman v. City of Riviera Beach, reached the Supreme Court in 2018. The Supreme Court again held in Lozman's favor, allowing the suit to proceed.Synder, supra, at 445.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2013 in United States case law
"""

From "Lozman v. City of Riviera Beach (2018)" ==> """
Lozman v. City of Riviera Beach, 585 U.S. ___ (2018), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court decided that the mere existence of probable cause for an arrest did not bar the plaintiff's First Amendment retaliatory arrest claim, but deferred consideration of the broader question of when it might. The case concerned a 42 U.S.C. § 1983 lawsuit filed against Riviera Beach by Fane Lozman, who had been arrested while criticizing local politicians during the public comments section of a City Council meeting. The city argued that under Hartman v. Moore he could not sue for retaliation, as they had probable cause to arrest him for the offense of disturbing a lawful assembly. Lozman conceded that they had probable cause, but argued that Hartman, a case about retaliatory prosecutions, did not extend to retaliatory arrests, and that instead Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle allowed his suit.
At oral arguments, justices expressed both sympathy for Lozman and hesitance to issue a ruling that might hinder law enforcement. Their eventual ruling in Lozman's favor was very narrow, holding that the Mt. Healthy test was appropriate "on facts like these", based on the alleged "official municipal policy" of retaliation and the importance of the right to petition. A year later, the court considered the matter again in Nieves v. Bartlett, that time finding that probable cause generally bars a claim of retaliatory arrest.
Lozman had already won once at the Supreme Court against Riviera Beach, in the 2013 admiralty case Lozman v. City of Riviera Beach, 568 U.S. 115. The second case was noted for the very rare occurrence of two parties returning to the court over a dispute separate from the first. They settled after the case was remanded, with the city reimbursing Lozman for $874,999 in legal fees and paying a nominal $1 in damages.
Background
 Prior jurisprudence 
In the 1977 case of Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle, (concerning Doyle's firing partly due to publicly criticizing school district policy). the Supreme Court established a standard of but-for causation for claims of official retaliation against speech. However, in the 2006 case of Hartman v. Moore, (concerning a prosecution Moore alleged to be in retaliation for his criticism of government policy). the Supreme Court established an exception for claims of retaliatory prosecution, requiring that a plaintiff show a lack of probable cause for their prosecution. Prior to Hartman there was already a circuit split as to whether the same principle applied to retaliatory arrests. Hartman further complicated the matter, with some circuits accepting the Hartman rule as controlling for retaliatory arrest suits and others accepting the Mt. Healthy rule.Koerner, supra, at 773–775.
The Supreme Court considered Hartman applicability to retaliatory arrest first in Reichle v. Howards (2012), but decided the case on grounds of qualified immunity instead. (citing  (concerning Howards's arrest after confronting the vice president in public)).
 Lozman and Riviera Beach 
thumb|left|Video of Lozman's arrest.|alt=See subtitles and description.
Fane Lozman sued the city of Riviera Beach, Florida, in June 2006 over a planned use of eminent domain, arguing that the city had violated open-meeting laws in approving a private development plan. (citing Lozman, 138 S.Ct. 1945, 1949). The City Council then held a closed-door session, the transcript of which was later made public. Council members discussed strategies to silence Lozman, including sending a private investigator after him, which Chairperson Elizabeth Wade said she thought "would help to intimidate" him and make him feel "feel the same kind of unwarranted heat" that council members felt. In September 2006, the city sued in state court to evict Lozman from his floating home in the city marina. Lozman argued that this was retaliation for constitutionally protected speech, and the court ruled in his favor.Snyder, supra, at 439 (citing ).
Lozman often spoke during the public comments portion of City Council meetings, often to criticize government corruption. At a meeting in November 2006, he began his remarks by noting the arrests of two officials of Palm Beach County, which Riviera Beach is a part of. The presiding council member ordered him to stop talking about the matter. When he refused, she ordered a police officer to arrest him. The officer removed Lozman from the room in handcuffs.
At the police station, Lozman was charged with disorderly conduct and resisting arrest without violence. The state's attorney found that there was probable cause for the charges but dismissed them as there was "no reasonable likelihood of successful prosecution." The city later said that Lozman had been ordered to stop speaking because the topics he was discussing were unrelated to the city. [Hereinafter Supreme Court sympathetic.]
 Proceedings in lower courts 
Lozman, acting as his own attorney, then sued Riviera Beach under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging several instances of deprivation of civil rights, including the arrest. Judge Daniel T. K. Hurley instructed the jury that, for Lozman to prevail on the claim of retaliatory arrest, he had to prove that the officer acted with impermissible animus toward his speech and that there was no probable cause for the arrest. Hurley allowed the city to argue that there had been probable cause to arrest Lozman for the offense of disturbing a lawful assembly, and instructed the jury to consider that question. The jury found for the city on every count of the complaint. Lozman appealed the judgment.
Regarding the jury instruction about probable cause, the Eleventh Circuit held that, even were they to accept Lozman's "compelling" argument that the jury instruction should have concerned animus by the city itself and not just by Aguirre, the error was harmless, as "The jury's determination that the arrest was supported by probable cause defeats Lozman's First Amendment retaliatory arrest claim as a matter of law." (quoting Lozman, 681 Fed.Appx. 746, 752 (citing )).
Lozman subsequently learned of the circuit split regarding probable cause in retaliatory arrest cases.Snyder, supra, at 442. "After losing on the merits at trial and on appeal, Lozman discovered—through his own research—a circuit split on the issue of whether the existence of probable cause is sufficient to negate a free-speech retaliatory-arrest claim." Having already successfully taken the city to the Supreme Court in Lozman v. City of Riviera Beach, 568 U.S. 115 (2013), represented by Jeffrey L. Fisher of the Stanford Law School Supreme Court Litigation Clinic, Lozman again obtained representation from Fisher and the clinic, this time with Pamela S. Karlan as lead counsel.Snyder, supra, at 441, 445.Pet. for a Writ of Cert. (archived copy), Lozman, 138 S.Ct. 1945. The Supreme Court granted certiorari in November 2017.
At the Supreme Court
 Oral arguments 
thumb|Pamela S. Karlan argued on behalf of Lozman.|alt=Pamela S. Karlan
Oral arguments were held on February 27, 2018, with Karlan representing Lozman and Shay Dvoretzky representing Riviera Beach. [Hereinafter Justices weigh threats.] The office of the United States Solicitor General, which had sided with Lozman in the 2013 Supreme Court case, appeared as amicus curiae on the city's side, represented by Deputy Solicitor General Jeffrey Wall.
Karlan argued for applying the Mt. Healthy test to cases of retaliatory arrest like Lozman's. Rather than seriously question which way to rule, the justices were primarily concerned with how to rule in Lozman's favor without setting an unwanted precedent.Tolman & Shapiro, supra, at 83–84 (quoting Lozman Arg. Tr., at 3:21, 5:47, 51:27). The justices expressed significant concerns to Karlan about what that might mean for law enforcement, giving examples of criminals who insult the police. Justice Anthony Kennedy expressed a desire to "cordon off or box off what happened here from the ordinary conduct of police officers", while Roberts and Justice Stephen Breyer drew distinctions from environments like a city council meeting and those like a bar or "the streets". Karlan was questioned extensively on how to avoid setting a bad precedent, and was seen as struggling.
When it was Dvoretsky's turn to speak, Justice Elena Kagan interrupted to warn him that "Ms. Karlan was having some difficulty with hypotheticals. But you might have some difficulty with the facts of your case," which elicited laughter from the gallery.Supreme court sympathetic, supra (quoting Tr. of Oral Arg. (archived copy), Lozman v. City of Riviera Beach, 138 S.Ct. 1945, at 27:33 [Hereinafter Lozman Arg. Tr.]). Dvoretsky argued for extending the Hartman test from retaliatory prosecutions to retaliatory arrests, or else risk deterring a police officer from making a valid arrest of, for example, someone wearing a Black Lives Matter t-shirt.Justices weigh threats, supra (quoting Lozman Arg. Tr., at 33:55).
Speaking for the federal government, Wall argued that Lozman's case was "troubling" but that "the court, as in Hartman, should not make a general rule for the facts of this case."Justices weigh threats, supra (quoting Lozman Arg Tr., at 30:44). Chief Justice John Roberts replied:Justices weigh threats, supra (quoting Lozman Arg. Tr., at 30:51).I found the video pretty chilling.
I mean, the fellow is up there for about 15 seconds, and the next thing he knows, he's being led off in handcuffs, speaking in a very calm voice the whole time. Now the Council may not have liked what he was talking about, but that doesn't mean they get to cuff him and lead him out.
 Opinion of the court 
thumb|Justice Anthony M. Kennedy wrote the opinion of the court.|alt=Anthony M. Kennedy
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy wrote for an eight-member majority. The majority held that the existence of probable cause did not categorically bar a claim of retaliatory arrest, but limited the decision's holding to Lozman's case and to others with "facts like these". [Hereinafter With facts like these.]Tolman & Shapiro, supra, at 75–78 (citing Lozman, 138 S.Ct. 1945, 1954–1955). The court observed the difficulty of proving causation in a case of alleged retaliatory arrest, as with retaliatory prosecution, but found there was no "presumption of regularity" with arrests as with prosecutions. While applying the Mt. Healthy standard to cases like Lozman's, the court declined to reach a decision as to which standard should apply in retaliatory arrest cases generally. It identified five factors that set Lozman's case apart from most others:
 An allegation of an "official municipal policy" (assumed for the sake of argument to exist)Lozman, 138 S.Ct. 1945, 1951 (quoting ).
 Objective evidence of such a policy in the form of the video of the arrest and the transcript of the preceding closed-door meeting
 Evidence of retaliation occurring prior to the arrest as well
 The lack of a close relationship between the speech Lozman was allegedly targeted for and the circumstances of his arrest
 The high importance of the right to petition within First Amendment jurisprudenceLozman, 138 S.Ct. 1945, 1954–1955 (quoting ).
In light of these, the court held that Lozman's case fell into a "unique class of retaliatory arrest claims," which "will require objective evidence of a policy motivated by retaliation to survive summary judgment." The court vacated the judgment below and remanded the case back to the Eleventh Circuit, but concluded by noting three arguments under which Lozman might be denied relief. (citing Lozman, 138 S.Ct. 1945, 1955. "Among other matters, the Court of Appeals may wish to consider (1) whether any reasonable juror could find that the City actually formed a retaliatory policy to intimidate Lozman during its June 2006 closed-door session; (2) whether any reasonable juror could find that the November 2006 arrest constituted an official act by the City; and (3) whether, under Mt. Healthy, the City has proved that it would have arrested Lozman regardless of any retaliatory animus—for example, if Lozman's conduct during prior city council meetings had also violated valid rules as to proper subjects of discussion, thus explaining his arrest here.").
 Thomas's dissent 
left|thumb|Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a solo dissent.|alt=Clarence Thomas
Justice Clarence Thomas, in a solo dissent, wrote that plaintiffs should categorically have to "plead and prove a lack of probable cause as an element of a First Amendment retaliatory-arrest claim".Tolman & Shapiro, supra, at 78–79 (citing Lozman, 138 S.Ct. 1945, 1955. Thomas, J., dissenting.). He criticized the majority for "leaving in place the decades-long disagreement among the federal courts".With facts like these, supra (quoting Lozman, 138 S.Ct. 1945, 1955. Thomas, J., dissenting.). He advocated an approach based on common law rules that existed prior to the enactment of § 1983 in 1871, analogizing Lozman's claim to the common law torts of false imprisonment, malicious prosecution, and malicious arrest.With facts like these, supra (citing Lozman, 138 S.Ct. 1945, 1957–1958. Thomas, J., dissenting.). He further argued that "the presence of probable cause will tend to disprove that the arrest was done out of retaliation for the plaintiff’s speech, and the absence of probable cause will tend to prove the opposite" and raised concerns about plaintiffs using the courts to harass police officers under the majority's holding, as "police officers almost always exchange words with suspects before arresting them".Snyder, supra, at 446 (quoting Lozman, 138 S.Ct. 1945, 1958. Thomas, J., dissenting.). Thomas's dissent interprets the majority's opinion as requiring a plaintiff to prevail on all five factors identified as relevant; in the Charleston Law Review, Arielle W. Tolman and David M. Shapiro write that this interpretation "appears incorrect" and that the majority "nowhere implies that each factor is required."
 Impact and subsequent developments 
The court's opinion in Lozman was unusual in that it was largely limited to Lozman's specific case, without setting a broader standard for anything beyond "facts like these". Heidi Kitrosser of SCOTUSblog compared its limited scope to the Onion headline "Supreme Court Issues Landmark 'It Depends' Ruling".With facts like these, supra (citing ). Writing in The Atlantic, Garrett Epps characterized the "narrow, and perhaps temporary, win for Fane Lozman" as part of a trend of the Supreme Court "keeping its head down", referencing also its decisions that term in Gill v. Whitford (holding that plaintiffs lacked standing to sue over partisan gerrymandering). and Benisek v. Lamone. (holding that the district court had not abused its discretion, without ruling on the merits of the partisan gerrymandering claim).
Lozman's narrow victory was noted for the extreme rarity of someone taking the same opponent to the Supreme Court in two different cases and winning both times. The case returned to the Eleventh Circuit, which in turn remanded it to the District Court to determine whether Lozman was entitled to a new trial, invoking the Supreme Court opinion's closing remarks. (citing Lozman, 138 S.Ct. 1945, 1955). Lozman and the city subsequently settled for $875,000: $1 for the arrest, the rest to offset his legal fees.
In November 2018, the Supreme Court heard oral arguments in Nieves v. Bartlett, which again posed the question of whether a plaintiff in a retaliatory arrest suit must show a lack of probable cause. Lozman and the First Amendment Foundation filed a brief amicus curiaeAmicus Br. of the First Amend. Found. & Fane Lozman in Supp. of Resp't (archived copy), Nieves, 139 S.Ct. 1715. supporting Russell Bartlett, who alleged that his arrest by an Alaska state trooper had been retaliatory. In Nieves, the court decided that probable cause does generally defeat a claim of retaliatory arrest, citing Thomas's dissent in Lozman.Nieves, 139 S.Ct. 1715, 1726. The opinion referred to Lozman's circumstances as "unusual" and Nieves's case as more "representative". (citing Nieves, 139 S.Ct. 1715, 1722). The Nieves decision nonetheless allowed that retaliatory arrest claims may be brought despite the presence of probable cause if the law in question was inconsistently enforced on the basis of protected speech. (citing Nieves, 139 S.Ct. 1715, 1727. "For example, at many intersections, jaywalking is endemic but rarely results in arrest. If an individual who has been vocally complaining about police conduct is arrested for jaywalking at such an intersection, it would seem insufficiently protective of First Amendment rights to dismiss the individual's retaliatory arrest claim on the ground that there was undoubted probable cause for the arrest.").
Lozman legacy, while nonzero, is limited. Viewed together, Lozman and Nieves have been taken to create two narrow exceptions to the application of the Hartman standard to retaliatory arrests. Writing before Nieves was decided, Tolman and Shapiro assess Lozman as "a victory—but not an unqualified one—for protesters who criticize the police and face a danger of retaliatory arrest", considering in particular protests by Black Lives Matter. Where retaliatory arrests occur as a result of "an individual officer's anger or vindictiveness" but probable cause did exist, Tolman and Shapiro see "an uncertain future"; but, in their analysis, Lozman leaves room for suits by protesters of law enforcement who are targeted by "official municipal policies" of retaliatory arrest.Tolman & Shapiro, supra, at 52–53. In the Cornell Law Review, Michael G. Mills highlights the case of Henneberry v. City of Newark, wherein the defendant did not attempt to argue that Lozman applied, even though he too had been arrested at the prompting of a city council member. Mills concludes that this is because "Lozman is incredibly fact-specific and therefore has little applicability".Mills, supra, at 2095 n.227.
 See also 
  considering and rejecting the applicability of Lozman to an arrest over a Facebook page parodying the police
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States constitutional torts case law
Category:Retaliatory arrest and prosecution
Category:Petition Clause case law
"""

From "Lucas v. Earl" ==> """
Lucas v. Earl, 281 U.S. 111 (1930), is a United States Supreme Court case concerning U.S. Federal income taxation, about a man who reported only half of his earnings for years 1920 and 1921. Guy C. Earl and his wife had entered into a contract that would potentially save a lot of tax. The contract specified that earnings were owned by the couple as joint tenants. It is unlikely that it was tax-motivated, since there was no income tax in 1901 when they executed the contract. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. delivered the Court’s opinion which generally stands for the proposition that income from services is taxed to the party who performed the services.. The case is used to support the proposition that the substance of the transaction, rather than the form, is controlling for tax purposes.See .
Facts and procedural history
Guy C. Earl was an attorney who entered into a contract with his wife whereby all property and earnings were to be "treated and considered . . . to be . . . owned by us [Earl and his wife] as joint tenants . . . with rights of survivorship."Lucas v. Earl, 281 U.S. at 113–14. Because of the contract, Earl only reported half of his salary as his income.Lucas v. Earl, 281 U.S. at 113. The issue before the court centered on whether Guy Earl alone or, alternatively, Earl and his wife, should be taxed on the salary and attorneys fees earned by Earl in 1920 and 1921.
The Bureau of Internal Revenue (the predecessor to the Internal Revenue Service) determined, and the Board of Tax Appeals (predecessor to the United States Tax Court) ruled, that the tax imposed on Mr. Earl was imposed on his entire salary, including the portion assigned to his wife.Lucas v. Earl, 281 U.S. at 111. Earl appealed, and the decision was reversed by the Circuit Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
Holding: the Anticipatory Assignment of Income Doctrine
The validity of Earl’s contract was not questioned.Lucas v. Earl, 281 U.S. at 114. However, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals and ruled in favor of the tax collector. The Supreme Court indicated there was "no doubt that the statute could tax salaries to those who earned them and provide that the tax could not be escaped by anticipatory arrangements and contracts however skillfully devised to prevent the salary when paid from vesting even for a second in the man who earned it."Lucas v. Earl, 281 U.S. at 114–15. Holmes concludes his opinion with the classic metaphor: The fruits cannot be attributed to a different tree from that on which they grew.
Married filing status
In Poe v. Seaborn, , decided the same year, the Supreme Court did allow a Washington couple to split income from property pursuant to State property laws.  Congress later (in the Revenue Act of 1948) eliminated the different tax results between community property states and common law states by creating married filing statuses.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 281
Poe v. Seaborn, 
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1930 in United States case law
Category:Marriage law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council" ==> """
Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council, 505 U.S. 1003 (1992), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States established the "total takings" test for evaluating whether a particular regulatory action constitutes a regulatory taking that requires compensation..
Background
Plaintiff/Petitioner  David H. Lucas, owner of two beachfront properties in Isle of Palms, South Carolina. 
Defendant/Respondent  South Carolina Coastal Council, a body that grants permits for the use of beachfront land.
State of law
South Carolina's Coastal Zone Management Act (1977) required owners of coast land in "critical areas" near beaches to obtain permits from Respondent South Carolina Coastal Council before committing the land to new uses.  The state's Beachfront Management Act (1988), S.C. Code Ann. § 48-39-10 et seq. (1989 Cum. Supp.), increased the regulations on the use of coastal land.
Facts of case
Petitioner David H. Lucas owned two vacant oceanfront lots in the Beachwood East Subdivision of the Wild Dunes development on the Isle of Palms in Charleston County, South Carolina.  The Beachfront Management Act, passed two years after his purchase of the lots, effectively prevented Petitioner Lucas from erecting homes on properties due to the effects it would have on the public beach.
Prior history
Lucas filed suit asserting that the restrictions on the use of his lots was a taking of his property without just compensation. The lower court agreed and awarded Lucas $1,232,387.50 as just compensation for the regulatory taking. The government of South Carolina appealed, and the Supreme Court of South Carolina reversed.Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council, 304 S.C. 376, 404 S.E.2d 895 (1991).
Procedural posture
Petitioner Lucas seeks reversal of the South Carolina Supreme Court judgment, reinstatement of the trial court judgment, and declaration that the Beachfront Management Act constituted a taking.
Supreme Court Review
Issue
Whether the South Carolina Supreme Court erred in holding that the Beachfront Management Act was a valid exercise of the police power and did not constitute a taking.
Arguments/theories
Petitioner  Not stated, presumed reflected in holding and reasoning.
Respondent  (1) The Beachfront Management Act is a valid exercise of the police power, as the beach/dune area of the shores is a valuable public resource, and the erection of structures on that land contributes to erosion and destruction of that resource.  (2) All property is held subject to the limitation that the state may regulate the property in such a way as to remove all value.
Rule of law
A regulation that deprives an owner of all economically beneficial uses of land constitutes a taking unless the proscribed use interests were not part of the title to begin with.  In other words, a law or decree with the effect of depriving all economically beneficial use must do no more than duplicate the result that could have been achieved in the courts under the law of nuisance. As a result, "total takings" analysis requires a consideration of (1) the degree of harm to public lands or adjacent property posed by the regulated activities, (2) the social value of such activities, and (3) the relative ease with which the alleged harms can be avoided through measures taken by either the claimant or the government.
Opinion of the Court
In a majority opinion by Justice Antonin Scalia, the Court found that the South Carolina Supreme Court erred in holding that the Beachfront Management Act was a valid exercise of the police power and did not constitute a taking.
Reasoning
The majority argued as follows: (1) Deprivation of all economically beneficial use is, from the perspective of a property owner, deprivation of the property itself.  (2) When all economically beneficial use is restricted, it is difficult to assume that the legislature is simply "adjusting" economical benefits and burdens. (3) Regulations that restrict all economically beneficial use may often be a guise of pressing that land into public service.  (4) Lucas's lands have been deprived of all economically beneficial use.  (5) There is no way to distinguish regulation that "prevents a harmful use" and confers benefits on nearby property.  (6) Contrary to Respondent South Carolina's assertion, title is not held subject to the limitation that the state may regulate away all the property's economically beneficial use.
Kennedy's Concurrence
Kennedy, J., concurring.  The determination of no value must be considered with reference to the owner's reasonable, investment-backed expectations.  Justice Kennedy also expressed concern with the idea that state regulation could go no further than duplicating the common law of nuisance without exposing itself to the challenge of categorical taking, as some fragile lands might prevent such public concern that the state can go further in regulating development than the common law of nuisance might otherwise permit.Ruhl J B et al (2007) Law and Policy of Ecosystem Services.  Island Press, Washington DC
Dissents
Blackmun, J., dissenting. The court should not have granted certiorari to hear this case and it ignores its jurisdictional limits, remakes its traditional rules of review and created simultaneously a new categorical rule and an exception. There could never be a total loss because the owner can still enjoy other attributes of ownership such as right to exclude others, picnic, swim, camp in a tent or live on the property in a movable trailer.
Additionally, state courts historically have been less likely to find that government action constituted a taking when the affected land is undeveloped. Neither is there a Common Law limit on the state's power to regulate harmful uses even to the point of destroying all economic value.
Stevens, J., dissenting. The categorical rule created by the court is unsound and an unwise addition to the law of takings. In the past the court had worked at rejecting an absolute formula for determining a taking and have frequently in the past held a law that renders property valueless may not constitute a taking. The new rule created by the court is arbitrary because a landowner whose property is diminished in value 95% recovers nothing while an owner whose property is diminished 100% recovers the land's full value.
Souter's statement
In an unusual filing, Justice Souter, a former state supreme court justice (in New Hampshire), wrote a statement in which he neither joined the majority or dissented and said the case should be dismissed on procedural grounds.  He wrote, "The case should have been dismissed as improperly granted, as the decision of the trial court that a total taking had occurred is highly questionable on the basis of the facts presented" because "The petition for review was granted on the assumption that the state [of South Carolina], by regulation, had deprived the owner of his entire economic interest in the subject property. Such was the state trial court's conclusion, which the state supreme court did not review."
Result
Judgment/disposition
Judgment reversed and cause remanded for determination of whether regulation could be enacted under state nuisance law.
Subsequent history
On remand at the South Carolina Supreme Court, the court granted the parties leave to amend their pleadings to determine what the actual damages were.Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council, 309 S.C. 424, 424 S.E.2d 484 (1992)
Legacy and other notes
Established the modern "total takings" test.
After paying Lucas $850,000 in compensation for the two lots, South Carolina proceeded to sell the lots to private parties for development.  A 5,000-square-foot private home now sits on one lot, while the other remains undeveloped.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 505
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Grape Bay Ltd v Attorney-General of Bermuda [1999] UKPC 43
English land law
South African land law
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States land use case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:1992 in the environment
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:Charleston County, South Carolina
Category:1992 in South Carolina
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Zoning in the United States
"""

From "Lucas v. United States" ==> """
Lucas v. United States, 163 U.S. 612 (1896), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that whether a Negro freedman was a member of the Choctaw Nation was a question of fact for the jury, and his non-Indian status may not be presumed.
Background
thumb|left|Judge Parker's courtroom where Lucas was tried
The Choctaw Nation was one of the Five Civilized Tribes in the Indian Territory (now the eastern part of Oklahoma), and under their treaty with the United States, were allowed to have its own court system to try Indian on Indian crime.Treaty with the Choctaw and Chichasaw, Apr. 28, 1866, ; Lucas v. United States, ; 2  918 (Charles J. Kappler ed., 1904). When the crime was Choctaw on Choctaw, the tribal courts would handle the trial, but if it involved a non-tribal member, the case was handled by the federal court in Fort Smith, Arkansas., at 8. Tribal members included freedmen, African-Americans who had been slaves and who had been adopted by the tribe after the Civil War., at 63; John Rockwell Snowden, Wayne Tyndall, & David Smith, American Indian Sovereignty and Naturalization: It's a Race Thing, 80  171, 210 (2001).
In 1894, Eli Lucas, a member of the Choctaw Nation, was indicted in the Circuit Court for the Western District of Arkansas for the murder of Levy Kemp, an African-American.Lucas, 163 U.S. at 612; ,  192 (1975); , at 62. In 1895, Lucas was tried in Judge Isaac Parker's court, where witnesses said that Lucas had followed Kemp after a ball game and killed him., at 63. The defense claimed that Lucas was not truthful when he had boasted that he had killed Kemp, but that some other, unknown person had committed the murder., at 192; , at 364.  Lucas was convicted of murder, and sentenced to hang.Lucas, 163 U.S. at 612; , at 192; , at 63.
Lucas's attorneys filed an appeal, and the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case., at 63-64.
Supreme Court
thumb|left|Justice Shiras, author of the Court's opinion
Justice George Shiras, Jr. delivered the opinion of the Court., at 64. Although the Court agreed that Kemp was not a Choctaw Freedman and therefore not a member of the tribe, it held that Judge Parker had erred., at 64. The trial court should not have presumed that Kemp was not a member of the tribe, the government should have been required to prove that element in order to establish jurisdiction., at 64. Shiras noted that §§ 2145-2146, Revised Statutes,Act of Mar. 3, 1885,  (codified as amended at ). stated that the federal courts did not have jurisdiction over Indian on Indian crime where the tribe had a tribal court., at 64-65. He also held that allowing John LeFlore testify as to what Kemp had told him was hearsay and inadmissible., at 64. The Court ordered that Lucas be retried, and reversed his conviction., at 364; , at 66; Territory News, , Jun. 4, 1896, at 1 (via Newspapers.com ). Lucas was then released to the Choctaw Nation for trial.Reversals and Acquittals of Capital Crimes after 1890, National Park Service, n.d. (last visited Aug. 6, 2015).
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Choctaw freedmen
Category:Indian Territory
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "Lucia v. Securities and Exchange Commission" ==> """
Lucia v. Securities and Exchange Commission, 585 U.S. ___ (2018), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States on the status of administrative law judges of the Securities and Exchange Commission. The Court held that they are considered inferior officers of the United States and so are subject to the Appointments Clause and must be appointed through the President or other delegated officer of the United States, rather than hired.. As "inferior" officers, their appointments are not subject to the Senate's advice and consent role.
 Background 
Like many other government agencies, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) uses administrative law judges (ALJ) to act as a judge in resolving disputes for the agency related to administrative law, those laws that describe how the agency is run. Prior to this case, through November 2017, the SEC had selected ALJ through an in-house hiring process, without seeking consult of the President or officers. 
In 2012, investment adviser Ray Lucia promoted a retirement investment strategy called "Buckets of Money" through several seminars. The SEC believed Lucia was offering misleading information in the presentations and charged Lucia and his investment company under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940. SEC ALJ Cameron Elliot was assigned the case, and after hearings, ruled against Lucia, fining him  and barring him for life from participating in the investment industry. Lucia appealed the case to the SEC, arguing that Elliot's position was considered an "officer of the United States" under the Appointments Clause, and therefore it was required that he be appointed to that position by the President or other officers. Because Elliot had not been appointed but instead hired through an in-house process, Lucia argued that Elliot was not empowered to issue the ruling.
The SEC rejected Lucia's claim that ALJs were officers of the United States; the ALJs used by SEC may issue decisions with significant ramifications for those charged, but the decisions are reviewed by the SEC Commissioners, who are appointed by the President, before they are approved and implemented. To the SEC, ALJs were only employees of the agency, and therefore did not need to be appointed. For this reason, the SEC dismissed Lucia's appeal.
Lucia appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, which also aligned with the SEC in that ALJs did not serve officers of the United States. Upon an en banc hearing within the Court of Appeals, the full ten-member panel was split, forcing them to issue a per curiam decision that maintained the SEC's stance. 
Lucia's argument was not the first time the question of ALJ's status had been raised in courts, but in at least two previous cases, the United States courts of appeals had ruled that the question was a matter of administrative review, not a constitutional question. Lucia's case at the SEC led one of the SEC commissioners hearing the case to question whether ALJ must be appointed or not. The case and the election of President Donald Trump, which put more pressure on the use of ALJs in the government made the SEC formally announce on November 20, 2017, that they would be appointed by its five commissioners to align with the Constitution's Appointments Clause and eliminate the constitutionality questions raised by this case.
Supreme Court
Lucia petitioned to the Supreme Court for writ of certiorari in July 2017; his petition presented the question of whether ALJs are officers of the United States and so are subject to the Appointments Clause. The Court granted the petition in January 2018 and set oral argument for April 23, 2018. 
During the case's review in lower courts, the United States government had backed the SEC's stance. With the election of Donald Trump as President, the government's stance had changed to favoring the argument that ALJs should be appointed. The SEC had already changed its process of hiring ALJs prior to the Supreme Court decision by requiring appointments to be approved by a vote of the Commission. In its brief to the Supreme Court, the government also held the stance that as ALJs should be appointed and able to be dismissed at the discretion of the President or other delegated officer. The Court did not consider that question during oral hearings and internal debates.
Decision
The Court announced judgment in favor of Lucia on June 21, 2018, reversing and remanding to the circuit court by 7–2. The decision affirmed Lucia's statement that ALJs are officers of the United States since they are effectively given quasi-judicial executive power and so must be appointed by the President or a delegated officer. The Court ruled that Lucia must have a new hearing before a different, properly-appointed officer from the SEC but otherwise did not comment on any other aspect of the case. The majority opinion was written by Justice Elena Kagan and was joined by Chief Justice John Roberts, as well as Justices Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito, and Neil Gorsuch. 
Concurring and dissenting opinions
Justice Thomas also wrote a concurring opinion, joined by Gorsuch. The decision is expected to allow any entity with a pending case before an SEC ALJ to request a new ruling, but the ruling was crafted as to prevent completed cases from being reopened; it is unknown if this case would apply to cases open at other agencies besides the SEC.
Justice Stephen Breyer concurred in part with the judgment and dissented in part, with Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Sonia Sotomayor joining in his dissent, which agreed that the appointment of ALJs by SEC staff, rather than the commissioners themselves, was illegal. That was because of a violation of the Administrative Procedure ActLucia, 585 U.S. at ___ (Breyer, J., dissenting)(slip op. at 2).  and so it was unnecessary to address the constitutional question.Lucia, 585 U.S. at ___ (Breyer, J., dissenting)(slip op. at 3). In addition, Breyer argued that it was problematic to determine the "inferior Officer" status of ALJs without first deciding the "pre-existing Free Enterprise Fund. question— namely, what effect that holding would have on the statutory 'for cause' removal protections that Congress provided for administrative law judges."Lucia, 585 U.S. at ___ (Breyer, J., dissenting)(slip op. at 12).  Finally, Breyer disagreed with the need for a hearing before a different ALJ, as it is not clear that the Constitution requires a hearing before a different "Officer" after an Appointments Clause violation.Lucia, 585 U.S. at ___ (Breyer, J., dissenting)(slip op. at 14).
Sotomayor also wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Ginsburg, which stated that ALJs should not be treated as officers as their judgments are not treated as final and binding.
 References 
External links
Category:2018 in United States case law
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission litigation
"""

From "Lucy v. Adams" ==> """
Lucy v. Adams, 350 U.S. 1 (1955), was a U.S. Supreme Court case that successfully established the right of all citizens to be accepted as students at the University of Alabama.
The case involved African American citizens Autherine Lucy and Polly Anne Myers, who were refused admission to the University of Alabama solely on account of their race or color.  
The Supreme Court affirmed the lower court decision, saying that it enjoins and restrains the respondent and others designated from denying these petitioners, solely on account of their race or color, the right to enroll in the University of Alabama and pursue courses of study there.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 350
 Sipuel v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma
 Sweatt v. Painter
 McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents
External links
Category:1955 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:University of Alabama
Category:African-American history of Alabama
Category:1955 in Alabama
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Ludwig v. Massachusetts" ==> """
Ludwig v. Massachusetts, 427 U.S. 618 (1976), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Massachusetts two-tier court system did not deprive Ludwig of his U.S. Const., Amend. XIV right to a jury trial and did not violate the double jeopardy clause of the U.S. Const., Amend. V.. 
Facts of the Case
On February 1, 1974, in the District Court of Northern Norfolk, Ludwig was charged with operating a motor vehicle “negligently . . . so that the lives and safety of the public might be endangered.” At the commencement of trial, Ludwig moved for a “speedy trial by jury,” citing the
Fifth and Sixth Amendments. The motion was denied, and, after a brief trial, the court adjudged
Ludwig guilty and imposed a fine of $20. Thereafter, Ludwig asserted his statutory right to a trial De novo before a six-man jury in the District Court. In the De novo proceeding, Ludwig filed a “motion to dismiss” on the grounds that he had been deprived of his federal constitutional right to a speedy jury trial in the first instance, and that he had been subjected to double jeopardy. The motion was denied. At the second trial, Ludwig waived a jury and, after trial by the court, again was adjudged guilty, and again was fined $20. Ludwig appealed to the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, which affirmed the decision of the trial court. The Massachusetts Court held that Ludwig was not deprived of his right to a jury trial nor was he twice put in jeopardy.
Analysis of the Court
Ludwig raised two issues on appeal, both of which the Supreme Court of the United States reasoned separately.
Right to Jury
The Court determined whether Ludwig’s right to a jury trial was infringed by first viewing the right in light of the common-law protection. The right to a jury trial, at common law, was reserved to serious criminal cases. In determining the scope of that right in state proceedings, the Court stated that the “Fourteenth Amendment guarantees a right of jury trial in all criminal cases which were they to be tried in a federal court would come within the Sixth Amendment's guarantee.” Therefore, only when an accused is charged with a “petty” offense, usually defined by reference to the maximum punishment that might be imposed, does the Constitution permit the Federal Government and the State to deprive a defendant of his liberty without affording him an opportunity to have his guilt determined by a jury.
The Court had previously held that a jury of 12 is not essential to the right. It additionally held that the jury's verdict need not be unanimous. What is important is that a majority verdict consists of “a group of laymen representative of a cross section of the community who have the duty and the opportunity to deliberate, free from outside attempts at intimidation, on the question of a defendant's guilt.”
There is no question that Ludwig’s right to a jury trial was intact. The Massachusetts courts provide a jury for all serious offenses and provides a jury upon appeal from the lower court’s decision.
Double Jeopardy 
The protection afforded by the principle of double jeopardy as a function of three related common-law pleas: Autrefois acquit, autrefois convict, and pardon. Only autrefois convict was at issue in the case. Ludwig was initially convicted. He argued that he could not be retried when he informed the trial court of his decision to “appeal” and to secure a trial De novo.
The decision to secure a new trial rests with the accused alone. A defendant who elects to be tried De novo in Massachusetts is in no different position than is a convicted defendant who successfully appeals on the basis of the trial record and gains a reversal of his conviction and a remand of his case for a new trial.
The only difference between an appeal on the record and an appeal resulting automatically in a new trial is that a convicted defendant in Massachusetts may obtain a “reversal” and a new trial without assignment of error in the proceedings at his first trial. Nothing in the Double Jeopardy Clause prohibits a State from affording a defendant two opportunities to avoid conviction and secure an acquittal.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 427
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:History of Norfolk County, Massachusetts
"""

From "Luis v. United States" ==> """
Luis v. United States, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution prohibits the pre-trial restraint of assets needed to retain a defendant's counsel of choice when those assets have not been used in conjunction with criminal activity., slip op. at 1, 16 (2016) (plurality opinion).
Background
United States federal law allows courts to freeze a criminal defendant's assets when that individual is accused of violating federal banking or healthcare laws.. However, assets may only be seized if they are "traceable to the crime" or if the property is "obtained as a result" of the crime and the defendant is either in the process of disposing or alienating those assets or the defendant intends to dispose of or alienate those assets in the future.. To freeze these assets, the Attorney General of the United States is authorized to initiate civil proceedings to obtain a restraining order that freezes these assets or "any such property or property of equivalent value".. In 2012, Luis Sila was charged by a federal grand jury of committing various health care crimes.Luis, slip op. at 1-2. Federal prosecutors claimed that Luis fraudulently procured nearly $45 million; prosecutors alleged that Luis spent most of the money she had acquired.Luis, slip op. at 2. In an attempt to preserve the $2 million remaining in her account for the payment of restitution and penalties, prosecutors applied for a pre-trial order that would prevent Luis from spending any of the remaining $2 million. The United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida approved the prosecutors' request and granted an order that prohibited Luis from "dissipating" her assets "up to the equivalent value of the proceeds of the Federal health care fraud ($45 million)".Luis, slip op. at 2 (quoting App. to Pet. for Cert. A–6) (internal citations omitted); see also 
Both Luis and federal prosecutors conceded that the court's order restrained assets that were entirely unrelated to the alleged criminal activity and that the order prevented Luis from hiring the attorney of her choice to defend her at her criminal trial. In its ruling, the district court also recognized that the order would prevent Luis from hiring the attorney of her choice, but the court stated that "there is no Sixth Amendment right to use untainted, substitute  assets  to  hire  counsel",Luis, slip op. at 2 (quoting United  States  v.  Luis,  966 F. Supp. 2d 1321 (S.D. Fla. June 21, 2013)) (internal citations omitted). and the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit affirmed the district court's ruling in a per curiam decision. Citing Caplin & Drysdale, Chartered  v. United  States. and United  States v. Monsanto,. the Eleventh Circuit held that the Supreme Court of the United States's criminal forfeiture jurisprudence foreclosed constitutional challenges to the seizure of untainted assets.Luis, 564 F. App'x at 494 (per curiam). Luis appealed the Eleventh Circuit's decision, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari to review the case.
Opinion of the Court
Writing for a plurality of the Court, Justice Stephen Breyer held that "the pretrial restraint of legitimate, untainted assets needed to retain counsel of choice violates the Sixth Amendment".Luis, slip op. at 3 (plurality opinion). In an opinion concurring in the judgment, Justice Clarence Thomas concluded that "the Sixth Amendment prevents the Government from freezing untainted assets in order to secure a potential forfeiture".Luis, slip op. at 1 (Thomas, J., concurring in the judgment). Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that the plurality opinion and Justice Thomas's opinion both "[create] perverse incentives and [provide] protection for defendants who spend stolen money rather than their own".Luis, slip op. at 17 (Kennedy, J., dissenting). Justice Elena Kagan also wrote a dissenting opinion in which she stated that "I am not altogether convinced that ... the Government’s interest in recovering the proceeds of crime ought to trump the defendant’s (often highly consequential) right to retain counsel of choice", but ultimately concluded that United States v. Monsanto should control the outcome of the case because Luis never asked the Court to overrule Monsanto in her arguments before the Court.Luis, slip op. at 1-2 (Kagan, J., dissenting).
Commentary and analysis
In her analysis of the case for SCOTUSblog, Amy Howe wrote that "it’s not clear how significant the effect of this decision will actually be" because the government can still "use tracing rules to distinguish between tainted and untainted assets when the two are intermingled".Amy Howe, Opinion analysis: Pretrial freeze of “untainted” assets violates the Sixth Amendment right to counsel of choice,  (March 31, 2016). Mark Joseph Stern described the case as "triumph for the right to counsel, at a time when it is in desperate need of a win" and wrote that the Court's decision "send[s] a clear message that the Sixth Amendment’s Assistance of Counsel provision remains robust".Mark Joseph Stern, The Supreme Court Affirms Your Right to Hire a Lawyer of Your Choosing,  (March 30, 2016). In a review of the case for Esquire, Charles P. Pierce praised the Court's decision and wrote that "my every instinct tells me that the Supreme Court shouldn't have to [declare that the government cannot] pauperize a criminal defendant".Charles P. Pierce, The Supreme Court Just Did Something the Supreme Court Shouldn't Have to Do,  (March 31, 2016).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2016 in United States case law
"""

From "Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife" ==> """
Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555 (1992), was a landmark Supreme Court of the United States decision, handed down on June 12, 1992, that heightened standing requirements under Article III of the United States Constitution. It is "one of the most influential cases in modern environmental standing jurisprudence." Lily Henning of the Legal Times stated that:
In [this] decision, hailed by the right and attacked by the left as well as by a broad swath of legal scholars, the Court made clear that plaintiffs must suffer a concrete, discernible injury—not a "conjectural or hypothetical one"—to be able to bring suit in federal court. It, in effect, made it more difficult for plaintiffs to challenge the actions of a government agency when the actions don't directly affect them.
In Lujan, the Court held that a group of American wildlife conservation and other environmental organizations lacked standing to challenge regulations jointly issued by the U.S. Secretaries of the Interior  and Commerce, regarding the geographic area to which a particular section of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 applied. The case arose over issues of US funding of development projects in Aswan, Egypt and Mahaweli, Sri Lanka that could harm endangered species in the affected areas. The government declared that the act did not apply to projects outside of the United States and Defenders of Wildlife sued.
 Opinion 
In Scalia's interpretation of Article III of the Constitution, plaintiffs must demonstrate that they have suffered an injury in fact, caused by the defendant, which a favorable court decision could redress, to meet the standing requirement to bring a case before the court.Lujan, 504 U.S. at 560-61. In his opinion for the majority, Justice Scalia stated that Defenders had failed to satisfy the “injury in fact” element.Lujan, 504 U.S. at 562. He wrote that the Court rejected the view that the citizen suit provision of the statute conferred upon “all persons an abstract, self-contained, non-instrumental ‘right’ to have the Executive observe the procedures required by law."Lujan, 504 U.S. at 573. Rather, he explained, an American citizen plaintiff must have suffered a tangible and particular harm.Lujan, 504 U.S. at 574. 
Additionally, in the portion of his opinion that garnered only plurality support, Justice Scalia determined that the plaintiffs failed to demonstrate the redressability element.Lujan, 504 U.S. at 568.
In his opinion concurring in part, Justice Anthony Kennedy, joined by Justice David Souter, asserted that an airline ticket to the affected geographic areas with endangered species in question would have been enough to satisfy the imminent threat of future injury requirement.Lujan, 504 U.S. at 578-80.
Justice John Paul Stevens concurred in the judgement as well, but disagreed with the Court's finding that Defenders lacked standing.Lujan, 504 U.S. at 582. Justice Stevens instead rested his opinion on a statutory construction of the Endangered Species Act.Lujan, 504 U.S. at 586.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 504
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Case Brief for Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife at Lawnix.com
Category:1992 in the environment
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States standing case law
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Egypt–United States relations
Category:Sri Lanka–United States relations
"""

From "Lujan v. G & G Fire Sprinklers, Inc." ==> """
Lujan v. G & G Fire Sprinklers, Inc., 532 U.S. 189 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned a provision of the California Labor Code which allowed the state to withhold payment to contractors or subcontractors if found in breach of contract, without a specific hearing on the matter. The Court upheld the provision because the companies were still able to pursue a claim in state court.
Opinion of the Court
Chief Justice Rehnquist delivered the unanimous Opinion of the Court, reversing the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals which had ruled the contested labor code regulation unconstitutional. Rehnquist stated that the companies involved would still be able to have the contract dispute reviewed in state court, despite the fact that the immediate withholding of funds was without a hearing. In sum he reasoned, "[I]f California makes ordinary judicial process available to G & G for resolving its contractual dispute, that process is due process.".
See also
 INS v. Chadha
 Due Process
 Labour relations
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:Government procurement in the United States
Category:Legal history of California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Lum v. Rice" ==> """
Lum v. Rice, 275 U.S. 78 (1927), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the exclusion on account of race of a child of Chinese ancestry from a public school did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The decision effectively approved the exclusion of any minority children from schools reserved for whites.
The case was brought by the Lum family of Rosedale, Mississippi, Chinese immigrants with two American-born children who had attended local public schools for white children without incident until, in the wake of an increase in anti-Chinese sentiment nationwide after passage of the Immigration Act of 1924, they were told by administrators that their children could only attend the district's school for black children. Adrienne Berard points out in Water Tossing Boulders that their reason for choosing to avoid black schools was motivated by racism. In fact, Katherine Lum later told a reporter, “I did not want my children to attend the ‘colored’ schools [because] the community would have classified us as Negroes.” They filed suit in local court to force the district to allow their daughters to continue attending the white school.
Earl Brewer, a former governor of the state, represented the Lums, arguing that forcing the girls to attend the inferior school violated their Fourteenth Amendment, and that since they were not Black they should be allowed to attend the schools for whites. He was able to win the writ of mandamus they sought, but then the school district appealed to the Mississippi Supreme Court, which heard the case en banc and unanimously reversed the lower court, holding that Mississippi's constitution and laws clearly distinguished Asians ("Mongolians", it called them) from whites, so the Lums could not attend white schools.
The U.S. Supreme Court granted Brewer's certiorari petition to review the case. The case was never argued; instead just decided on its briefs, and the Lums were so poor it led Justice Louis Brandeis to ask around if some other lawyer could be found on short notice to argue the case. Chief Justice William Howard Taft's unanimous opinion ended with a pronouncement that all racial segregation in schools was constitutional; while it was overturned by Brown v. Board of Education a quarter-century later, it gave greater legal foundation to educational segregation in the short term and set back efforts to end it.
Background
Legal discrimination against Blacks and Chinese in the late 19th century
In the late 19th century, following the Civil War, the United States began to deal with the place in society of two racial minorities: Blacks, especially those newly freed from slavery, and Chinese, who had begun emigrating to the West Coast in large numbers first to try their luck in the California Gold Rush and later to work on railroad construction and mining. Both came to be seen as a threat to an existing social hierarchy dominated by whites: Blacks for their newly free status, and the Chinese as cheap labor. States that had formerly allowed slavery dealt with the former through Jim Crow laws mandating racial segregation in public accommodations such as transport and public schools, Black Codes that made specific acts crimes when committed by Blacks, and vaguely worded anti-vagrancy laws that allowed many Black men to be taken into custody for purposes of convict leasing.
Legal discrimination against Chinese immigrants began in California during the 1870s. The Naturalization Act of 1870, which allowed unrestricted entry and a path to citizenship for any immigrants of African descent, denied it to anyone of Chinese descent. In 1882 Congress passed the first Chinese Exclusion Act, limiting further Chinese immigration to narrowly defined categories of people, including a bar on family members of Chinese citizens already in the U.S., the only time the law has mandated immigrants be denied admission explicitly on the grounds of racial identity or national origin.
In the 1885 case Tape v. Hurley, California's Supreme Court held that a Chinese student's exclusion from a San Francisco public school was unconstitutional; the state responded by allowing the establishment of segregated schools.
Two years earlier, in the Civil Rights Cases, the Court had held that the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution, both passed in the years after the war, only barred racial discrimination by the government, not private parties. In 1896's Plessy v. Ferguson, which went further and upheld the constitutionality of laws that mandated segregation in private facilities open to the public such as rail transport, Justice John Marshall Harlan, the sole dissenter as he had been in the Civil Rights Cases, noted the dissonance between the legal treatment of Blacks and Chinese:
Harlan's belief that the Chinese were culturally incapable of assimilating into American society and thus properly barred from naturalizing was personal; in United States v. Wong Kim Ark two years later, where the Court held that American-born Chinese were citizens, he joined Chief Justice Melville Fuller in dissenting in part on those grounds.
The Lum family
Jeu Gong Lum, a native of southern China, illegally immigrated to the U.S. from Canada in 1904 and settled in the lower Mississippi Delta, where immigration laws were less enforced as employers sought to replace Black workers who had left for the North. There he married Katherine Wong, a Chinese American woman who had been adopted as an orphan in China and raised mostly in the U.S. by a Chinese father who grew wealthy operating a general store. Lum, too, opened a general store in the small Bolivar County town of Benoit that primarily served the area's Black population, barred from many business establishments by strict racial segregation laws. Operating a store made Lum a merchant and thus exempt from the Exclusion Act. Black patrons preferred shopping at Chinese-owned stores since the Chinese were less insistent on being addressed with honorifics.
The couple had two daughters, Berda and Martha, and later a son, Hamilton. Both Gong Jeu and Katherine especially sought to make sure their children lived a better life than they had. While Berda resisted her parents' efforts to educate her, desiring to leave the Delta region when she grew up, Martha consistently earned good grades in the local school.
Underlying dispute
In 1923, the Lums bought a house in Rosedale and moved there. The girls attended Rosedale Consolidated High School of the Rosedale Consolidated School District for two semesters. The following September, that ended when the school district, in response to the passage of the Immigration Act of 1924, which effectively ended all immigration from Asia, told the Lum girls they could no longer attend its schools for whites because they were not considered white.
There was no school in the district maintained for Chinese students, and the Lum daughters were required to attend school. That left the district's school for colored children as the only public school available. It was underfunded and poorly equipped; the Lums did not want their daughters educated there. They retained local lawyer Earl L. Brewer, a former governor who had just overwhelmingly lost an election to the U.S. Senate, to represent them in legal action against the district. The Lums and their daughters were the plaintiffs; all the members of the school district's board of trustees, and other state education officials, were named as defendants, with the head of the board of trustees, Greek Rice, as the lead. Among the state officials was the state superintendent of education, Willard Faroe Bond, whom Brewer believed to have betrayed him politically while he was governor; Brewer thus drew some satisfaction from the knowledge that Bond would be personally served with the legal papers.
A lower court granted the plaintiff's request of a writ of mandamus to force the members of the board of trustees to admit the Lums. Their case was not that racial discrimination as such was illegal but that his daughter, had incorrectly been classified as colored by the authorities.
Mississippi Supreme Court
The trustees appealed to the Supreme Court of Mississippi, which decided to hear the case en banc, with all six justices participating. Assistant attorney general Elmer Clinton Sharp argued the case for the school district, reiterating the history of segregation in the state and saying that Asians and Native Americans were not considered white. Brewer argued in response that while the state constitution had indeed not put whites and Asians on equal footing, it had also distinguished Asians and Blacks, and therefore the Fourteenth Amendment required that the Lum children be schooled with whites.
The court reversed the lower court's decision and allowed the board of trustees to exclude Martha Lum from the school for white children. Justice George Ethridge, a former teacher to whom his colleagues generally deferred in matters related to education, wrote for a unanimous court that considered the case as a question of whether the Lum children were within the statutory definition of white. While some other states' courts and statutes had extended the definition of "white" to include members of other races who were not Black, Mississippi's constitution and statutes were clearer in defining white people as those not "colored". "[W]e think," he wrote, "that the constitutional convention used the word 'colored' in the broad sense rather than the restricted sense; its purpose being to provide schools for the white or Caucasian race, to which schools no other race could be admitted, carrying out the broad dominant purpose of preserving the purity and integrity of the white race and its social policy."Rice, at 788
Ethridge found the most relevant precedent to be Moreau v. Grandich, a 1917 case where, in an opinion he had also authored, a unanimous court upheld the dismissal of several children of a white couple from the Bay St. Louis schools after it was learned that they had a Black great-grandmother. While that case had not gone beyond the instant issue in deciding that those whose racial heritage was colored above a certain threshold were themselves legally colored, Ethridge wrote, "a careful reading of the opinion ... shows that the court did not intend to restrict the term 'colored' to persons having negro blood in their veins or who were descendants of negroes or of the negro race."Rice, at 779
The state had also, since 1892, prohibited marriages between whites and Asians, for whom it used the term "Mongolians", the latter being defined as anyone with more than one-eighth Asian ancestry. Asians and coloreds, also barred from marrying whites, were free to marry each other, Ethridge noted. He added that a pair of U.S. Supreme Court decisions and  had both held that Asians were not white or Caucasian in the historical sense of how that word had been understood in the United States.Rice, 781–784
Lum's right to an education was not affected by the decision, Ethridge concluded. She could attend the colored school, but did not have to, as she could also be educated privately, as long as she was educated. Lum and Brewer petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court for certiorari.
U.S. Supreme Court
Before the Court
After the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case in 1927, Brewer was preoccupied with representing the relatives of a Black man in Bolivar County who had been murdered immediately following his acquittal on murder charges in the death of a local white farmer's son, as they sought to have the killers brought to justice. Brewer handed the Lum case to a younger associate, James Flowers, who had prior to his employment with Brewer worked primarily as corporate counsel for several railroads in Mississippi. Flowers was aware that he was ignorant in the areas of law related to the case, especially the Fourteenth Amendment.
Flowers' brief for the Supreme Court justices was inconsistent, alternating between defending segregation but attacking it inasmuch as he argued the Constitution protected Lum from being forced to attend a colored school, yet ending with a suggestion that segregated schools were inherently unequal. Justice Louis Brandeis, who believed the Fourteenth Amendment allowed too much federal interference with state authority yet was open to arguments that discrimination against members of minority groups violated their due process rights under the Fifth Amendment, to the point that he had written several majority opinions to that effect (most recently Ng Fung Ho v. White, another case involving Chinese petitioners) was deeply disturbed by the brief; he asked a friend, Felix Frankfurter (himself later appointed to the Court), if it might be possible to find more competent counsel for the Lums.
The Lums themselves, realizing that the case had implications for all Chinese Americans, had similar concerns, and had arranged for a longtime friend of theirs, not a lawyer, to travel to Washington and be present at oral argument. That would be unnecessary. Within a week of filing the brief, the Court informed Flowers by telegram that it had scheduled the case for argument within the next week.
The short time available to travel to Washington, and the possibility that the case would be forfeited to the state if no one argued for the Lums, was the least of Flowers' concerns. He had never argued a case before any court, considering himself a poor public speaker. First he sought a continuance but learned that was unlikely, so then he and Brewer asked if the case could be decided purely on the basis of the briefs. The Court allowed that, and there would be no oral argument of Lum v. Rice before it.
Opinion of the Court
Late in November 1927 the Court announced its decision. In a nine-page unanimous opinion, with no footnotes, written by Chief Justice and former U.S. President William Howard Taft, it affirmed the Mississippi Supreme Court's ruling and thus the position of the board of trustees. Taft held that the petitioner had not shown that there were no segregated schools accessible for the education of Martha Lum in Mississippi:
Taft further stated that given the accessibility of segregated schools, the question then was whether a person of Chinese ancestry, born in and a citizen of the United States, was denied equal protection of the law by being given the opportunity to attend a school that received "only children of the brown, yellow or black races." In reference to Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education, Taft concluded that the "right and power of the state to regulate the method of providing for the education of its youth at public expense is clear." Additionally, Taft pointed to a number of federal and state court decisions, most prominently Plessy v. Ferguson, all of which had upheld segregation in the public sphere and particularly in the realm of public education. Accordingly, Taft concluded:
Aftermath
The Lums had pre-emptively moved across the river to Arkansas, which did not restrict Chinese attendance at its schools as strictly, in case the decision went down against them. When it did, they settled in Elaine, where they opened another grocery and Katherine was able to find a high school that would accept her daughters. It was not as prosperous a market as the one in Rosedale, and in later years the family left the Delta region entirely.
Other Chinese in Mississippi likewise began leaving the Delta, some even returning to China; save for those who found a few school districts still willing to accept their children in their white schools. Other Chinese families established private schools; in the late 1930s the state of Mississippi formally established some schools for Chinese students. They were never well-attended, and the last one closed in 1947.
Earl Brewer continued to pursue civil rights cases in the courts. In 1936 he successfully argued Brown v. Mississippi before the Supreme Court, which held that confessions obtained through beatings and torture were inadmissible as evidence, reversing the convictions of several of his clients. Brewer died in 1942, before he could live to see schools desegregated, but that had happened by the time Jeu Gong died in 1965 and Katherine in 1988.
Press reaction
Newspapers around the country carried the Associated Press account of the decision. Some responded with editorials. The Los Angeles Times put its response, praising the Court and advocating for further segregation, on the front page:
The Chicago Defender, a prominent Black newspaper, also ran a front-page editorial, condemning the decision as ignoring the "separate but equal" provisions supposedly governing segregation in light of the conditions found in many schools for Black children only:
Legacy
Lum continued to be cited in briefs supporting racial segregation, and court decisions upholding it, until it was effectively overruled 27 years later by the Court's decision in Brown v. Board of Education, which outlawed segregation in public schools. An important part of the decision still stands—the power of the state to make racial distinctions in its school system, and to determine the race of its students. It has not been overturned because it was not an issue in Brown.
It is remembered today for increasing the scope of permissible segregation. Historian and educator James Loewen called Lum "the most racist Supreme Court decision in the twentieth century". Legal scholar Jamal Greene has called it an "ugly and unfortunate" decision. "The Court's ruling had established a precedent more powerful than the Lum family could have imagined", observed Adrienne Berard, in Water Tossing Boulders, a history of the case. "By fighting, they had only made the enemy stronger."
See also
1927 in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 275
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Taft Court
Notes
References
Further reading
 White, G. Edward. "The lost episode of Gong Lum v. Rice." Green Bag 18.2 (2015): 191–205. online
External links
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1927 in United States case law
Category:Education in Bolivar County, Mississippi
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:Anti-Chinese sentiment in the United States
Category:Asian-American issues
Category:Legal history of Mississippi
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:Education segregation in Mississippi
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
Category:1927 in Mississippi
"""

From "Lumiere v. Mae Edna Wilder, Inc." ==> """
Lumiere v. Mae Edna Wilder, Inc., 261 U.S. 174 (1923), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held a person or corporation cannot file suits under the Copyright Act in areas in which they do not have an office and do no business..
 References 
External links
Category:1923 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
"""

From "Luna Perez v. Sturgis Public Schools" ==> """
Luna Perez v. Sturgis Public Schools, 598 U.S. __(2023),Perez v Sturgis Public Schools, . Docket No. 21-887, was a United States Supreme Court decision in which the Court held that an Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) lawsuit seeking compensatory damages for denial of a Free and Appropriate Public Education (FAPE) can proceed without exhausting the administrative procedures of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), because compensatory damages are not available under IDEA. This case holds significant implications for disabled students who allege they were failed by school officials.
Background
Miguel Luna Perez, a deaf student, attended schools in Michigan's Sturgis Public Schools District from age 9 to 20. Under his individualized education program (IEP), Sturgis schools were to provide aides to translate classroom instruction into sign language. However, Perez's parents alleged that Sturgis failed to provide qualified aides. In fact, Sturgis never provided Perez with a qualified sign-language interpreter. One aide assigned to Perez did not know sign language but did attempt to teach herself, Gayle Cunningham.Perez v. Sturgis Public Schools, 3 F. 4th 236, 246 Cunningham never had any official training or certification in sign language. This was to be his sole facilitator of communication. It was also alleged Sturgis failed to properly evaluate her interpreting ability and misrepresented her skills and ability to Perez's family.
Cunningham "essentially invented the signing system she used" and her "command of sign language remained so poor that, when briefly paired with a different deaf student who used sign language, the other deaf student could not understand her at all." Perez had no way of knowing what was actually being said around him because he had no independent understanding of what was being said. Perez's parents further alleged that the aides were absent from class for hours on end. This was because, in 2015, Cunningham was given other duties away from Perez, leaving him with no means to communicate with others. It was alleged that he was learning nothing in his classes due to the absence of a qualified sign language interpreter. Perez was also excluded from the English Language Learner program from Sturgis extracurricular activities because he was deaf.
Sturgis Schools misrepresented Perez's educational progress and academic achievement, awarding him inflated grades and advancing him no matter of his actual progress. He was given As and Bs in nearly every class and was on the Honor Roll every semester. His parents had assumed that he was on track to earn a high-school diploma. Just months before his graduation from high school with his class, he and his parents were informed he would not be awarded a high school diploma but a certificate of completion.Perez v. Sturgis Public Schools, 3 F. 4th 236, 239 This was because Perez was years behind where he should have been academically.
 Michigan Department of Education Administrative Complaint 
In response to these revelations, Perez and his family filed an administrative complaint with the Michigan Department of Education. The complaint was filed in December 2017.  The complaint alleged Sturgis denied him an adequate education and violated federal and state disability laws: the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), the Rehabilitation Act, and two Michigan disabilities laws. The complaint alleged that Sturgis Public Schools had failed to meet its requirements under the IDEA and did not provide Perez with Free and Appropriate Public Education (FAPE). 
In June 2018 a written settlement offer was provided. Prior to hearing before the Department of Education, the Perez family and Sturgis Public Schools settled the IDEA/FAPE complaint.  Sturgis Schools agreed to provide Perez with all the "forward-looking equitable relief he sought," including paying for Perez to at attended the Michigan School for the Deaf. The school also agreed to pay for "post-secondary compensatory education" and for sign language instruction for Perez and his family. It also paid the family's attorney's fees. The Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) dismissed the case and remaining claims in August 2018 with prejudice. 
 Federal District Court holding 
Just months after the settlement and dismissal with prejudice in December 2018. Perez and his family filed a complaint in the Federal District Court in the Western District of Michigan under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
It was alleged the school discriminated against him by not providing the resources necessary for him to participate fully in class. Along with declaratory relief, Perez sought compensatory damages for his emotional distress.
Sturgis Schools filed a motion and argued that IDEA 20 U. S. C. §1415(l), barred Perez from bringing an ADA claim without first exhausting all of IDEA's administrative dispute resolution procedures. The district court agreed with Sturgis and granted the Sturgis motion, and dismissed the litigation. The District Court dismissed the ADA claim for failure to exhaust and declined to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the remaining state-law claims. Perez and his family filed a timely appeal to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals.
 Sixth Circuit holding 
The case was argued October 9, 2020 before a three judge panel in the Sixth Circuit court. The court issued its opinion on June 25, 2021.  It was argued before Judge Danny J Boggs, Jane B Stanch, and Amul Thapar. The Sixth Circuit court held that "Sometimes a school falls shore" in providing a "free appropriate public education(FAPE). When this happens, parents can seek redress through the IDEA, which encourages informal conflict resolution, but there is an increasingly formal mechanism if disagreement persists.
The Sixth Circuit held that Perez could use under federal laws protecting the rights of children with disabilities, including the ADA, but he must first complete the IDEA's  "full administrative process" 20 U.S.C. 1415(l).
Because Perez settled his complaint before completing the administrative process, which according to the court had included compensation for the loss and his other claims.
The Circuit Court asked if this barred his ADA suit and stated it depended on three questions.Perez v. Sturgis Public Schools, 3 F. 4th 236, 240
 Is his case subject to the IDEA's exhaustion provision?
 If so, has Perez exhausted the IDEA's administrative procedures to the extent necessary?
 And if he has not, should we allow his suit to proceed anyway?
The Circuit Court looking to Fry v. Napoleon Community Schools, 580 U.S. 154 (2017). Believing the Supreme Court to hold  "Is the crux of the complaint the denial of a free appropriate public education? (describing the key as whether the complaint's (cite removed) essence—even though not its wording—is the provision of a [free appropriate public education]"). If so, the exhaustion requirement should apply."
The Circuit court held that Under Fry, "it's clear that Perez seeks relief for the school's failure to meet its IDEA obligations."Perez v. Sturgis Public Schools, 3 F. 4th 236, 241
The Circuit Court even noted that Perez was not seeking relief for the denial of FAPE under a specific remedy that was and is not available under IDEA: Compensatory damages for emotional distress. So the choice of remedy/relief in the Sixth Circuit at the time did not matter.  Covington v. Knox Cnty. Sch. Sys. , 205 F.3d 912, 916–17 (6th Cir. 2000). Most other circuits agree. See id. (collecting cases); McMillen v. New Caney Indep. Sch. Dist., 939 F.3d 640, 647–48 (5th Cir. 2019).
The Court then again turned to Fry for support. "The focus of the analysis is not the kind of relief the plaintiff wants but the kind of harm he wants relief from. We thus agree that Fry's analysis "comports with reading ‘relief’ to focus on the conduct the plaintiff complains about." McMillen, 939 F.3d at 648"  The court used this logic to buttress the fact that Preze's claim for relief was subject to the IDEA's administrative exhaustion requirements.
It was held that because he settled the matter and did not follow the full Administrative procedures, he could only sue under the ADA only if he could also bring an IDEA action in court.
Perez argued that it would have been futile to file an ADA claim under the IDEA and go through the exhaustion of the IDEA claim because the administrative process can not provide for damages for his emotional distress. Perez argued that judicial estoppel prevents Sturgis from invoking the exhaustion requirement. The court did not find either argument persuasive.Perez v. Sturgis Public Schools, 3 F. 4th 236, 242
The Court noted, "Section 1415(l) does not come with a "futility" exception, and the Supreme Court has instructed us not to create exceptions to statutory exhaustion requirements."
 Sixth Circuit Dissent 
Circuit Judge Jane B Stranch issued a dissent. She highlighted unlike the majority, the Supreme Court in Frye gave lower courts the framework for evaluating the relief plaintiffs seek and exhausting the IDEA's remedies under the law. It was her view on a motion to dismiss reading the complaint in Perez's favor.Perez v. Sturgis Public Schools, 3 F. 4th 236,246 He was not seeking IDEA relief and should be allowed to move forward. In her dissent, she highlights the difference between who is covered by the IDEA, ADA, and Title II of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
Judge Stranch read the exhaustion requirement to apply when a suit " "seek[s] relief that is also available" under the IDEA. Id. at 752 (quoting § 1415(l)). And a suit seeks relief  available under the IDEA when it seeks relief for the denial of a FAPE, a free appropriate public education."
She then moves on to what was the Gravamen of Perez's complaint.
The dissent went on to highly that because the major was misconstruing Perez's allegation as "simple discrimination in an education context," she highlighters that the major replicates the errors of the Sixth Circuits pre-Fry approach, where the Supreme Court in Fry had reversed the Sixth Circuit before.Perez v. Sturgis Public Schools, 3 F. 4th 236, 247
The dissent then looks to sister circuits and highlights how the sixth circuit is at odds with them. "Perez, as "master of his claim," filed a cognizable complaint under the ADA that is supported by the governing precedent of the Supreme Court and this Circuit. The majority opinion ignores that precedent and places us at odds with our sister circuits. Because it is wrong to dismiss this case, I respectfully dissent."Perez v. Sturgis Public Schools, 3 F. 4th 236, 250
 Amici Curiae filed in the Supreme Court 
For Perez
The Biden Administration via the Department of Justice filed a brief in support of the Perez family.  The Department of Justice highlighted what it saw as areas of the Sixth Circuit opinion.  The Department of Justice view was that Section 1415(l)'s Exhaustion requirements does not apply because the monetary relief suit under the ADA litigation is not available under the IDEA.
Former United States Senator Tom Harkin and Representatives Tony Coelhor and George Miller filed an amici curiae in support of the Perez family. The were elected members of Congress when the IDEA was passed and were involved in the amendment and reauthorization.
They argued that the exhaustion provision was darted to be narrow only when seeking relief that is also available under the IDEA. The legislature stated "Specifically, Congress enacted § 1415(l) to overturn the Supreme Court's holding in Smith v. Robinson, 468 U.S. 992 (1984). In Smith, this Court held that the Education for All Handicapped Children Act (the “EHA”) provided the exclusive rights and procedures for challenging the failure to provide a free appropriate public education, precluding substantively identical claims under both the Constitution and other laws. Id. at 1011-13, 1019-21."
In closing the brief it highlighted "As this case illustrates, children with disabilities have available remedies under the ADA or related laws that often exceed the remedies available under the IDEA. Congress did not mean for the IDEA to leave children with disabilities worse off, by preempting their general rights and remedies, or by imposing procedural obstacles that would not otherwise apply."
A joint Amici Curiae brief filed by The United States, The Autistic Self Advocacy Network, Communication First, the Coelho Center for Disability Law, Policy and Innovation, Council of Parent attorneys and Advocates, Education Law Center, Innisfree Foundation, Learning Rights Law Center, The National Center for Learning Disabilities, The National Center for Youth Law, the National Disability Rights Network, the national disability rights network, the national federation of the blind.
 For Sturgis Public Schools 
A joint brief of AASA, The School Superintendents Association, the Council of Administrators of Special Education, The American Physicals Therapy Association, the Association of School Business Officials International, The National Association of Pupil Services Administrators, and the National Association of School Nurses.  The organization attempted to claim "Weakening the exhaustion requirement will undermine the collaborative nature of the IDEA process, and will shift the parties’ focus to money rather than the student's education needs, will waste money on litigation that could more effectively be spent on students themselves, and will discourage settlements by making them more expensive. "
The brief attempts to shift from the case at hand to a hypothetical case of "Timothy" of a student in a School District in Texas who has autism. Unlike Mr. Perez the hypothetical student had not been in school in years. They hypo then goes on to talk about parents removed "Timothy" from public school to private school and now the district is being asked to pay for education, but that can't know where the money goes. They further attempted to argue that students and parents could avoid the administrative exhaustion requirements by seeking monetary damages and weaken the collaborative benefits of the IDEA.
"Overturning the Sixth Circuit's decision would open the floodgates for parents seeking monetary gain for claims that most likely could have been resolved using the IDEA's collaborative processes of IEP meetings, resolution sessions, mediations, or due process hearings.
 Opinion of the Supreme Court 
The Court unanimously reversed the Sixth Circuit's judgment and remanded the case. The court clarified that the IDEA did not bar Perez from pursuing his ADA claims, allowing him to seek monetary damages unavailable under IDEA. The case was sent back to the lower courts to continue litigation, as the administrative exhumation requirements under IDEA  §1415(l) did not preclude Perez's lawsuit. 
"Because §1415(l)’s exhaustion requirement applies only to suits that “see[k] relief . . . also available under” IDEA, it poses no bar where a non-IDEA plaintiff sues for a remedy that is unavailable under IDEA. This interpretation admittedly treats “remedies” as synonymous with the “relief” a plaintiff “seek[s].”  But that is how an ordinary reader would interpret the provision, based on a number of contextual clues. " Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote in the opinion that Perez' arguments "better comports with the statute's terms." 
Justice  Gorsuch, writing the opinion, highlighted the case's impact on "a great many children with disabilities and their parents."  
Reactions
The superintendent of Sturgis Public Schools Dr. Arthur Ebert, responded to the news of the case by stating that "he was not in a position to comment on the details or outcome of the case."  Roman Martinez the Perez's family lawyer stated in email about the case "“We are thrilled with today's decision. The Court's ruling vindicates the rights of students with disabilities to obtain full relief when they suffer discrimination. Miguel and his family look forward to pursuing their legal claims under the Americans with Disabilities Act.” He went on to state: "The court's ruling vindicates the rights of students with disabilities to obtain full relief when they suffer discrimination. Miguel and his family look forward to pursuing their legal claims."
It has been noted this case now allows families of disabled student force schools and school districts to have meaningful interaction to address disabilities not pay lip service to the Free Appropriate public education.  Some disability experts think this could help shift the balance of power between parents and schools as they try to craft necessary accommodations in "contentious negotiations over the education of individual disabled students."
The Autism Alliance of Michigan (AAoM) Applauded the Supreme Courts ruling on the case, noting that Michigan faces some of the lowest graduated rates for students with disabilities in the United States.
Some commentators believe that this case will "expand the number of cases that arguably could be brought by sidestepping the administrative hearing requirements and is likely to increase the number of cases in which we see “attempts at artful pleading” which the Fry court attempted to avoid in an effort to go directly to federal court."
 See also 
 Education for All Handicapped Children Act
 Fry v. Napoleon Community Schools
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 598
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States disability case law
Category:Special education in the United States
Category:Education in St. Joseph County, Michigan
Category:Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
"""

From "Luna Torres v. Lynch" ==> """
Luna Torres v. Lynch, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court decided the interpretation of section 1101(a)(43) of the federal Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), which includes "aggravated felony" as a possible reason for deporting a non-citizen.  The INA specifies certain offenses described in the federal criminal code as qualifying as an aggravated felony.  The question before the court was if the plaintiff Jorge Luna Torres, who had been convicted under a state arson statute mostly identical to the federal statute but lacking an interstate or foreign commerce element in the federal law, fell under this definition of aggravated felony.  The Court affirmed the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit original decision: the difference was merely "jurisdictional", and Torres still qualified for the accelerated deportation process described under the INA.
 Background 
George Luna Torres ("Torres"), a green card holder (lawful permanent resident) of the United States since childhood and a citizen of the Dominican Republic, was convicted in 1999 of "attempted arson" (arson in the third degree) under section 150.10 of the New York Penal Law.  Torres was sentenced to one day of imprisonment after his guilty plea. 
Seven years later, in 2006, the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) placed Torres in removal proceedings.  The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) lists about 80 federal offenses as qualifying for "aggravated felony" status, and ICE charged that Torres' 1999 conviction is described by 18 U.S.C. § 844(i), a federal arson statute and one of the statues listed by the INA.  The Immigration Judge found Torres removable from the United States as charged, which the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) affirmed. Torres filed a petition for review with the Second Circuit. Under the Chevron doctrine, the Second Circuit, in an eight paragraph opinion, deferred to the BIA's judgment reasoning, stating that they did not have jurisdiction to investigate the BIA's finding, which was at least facially reasonable.  Torres appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Elena Kagan authored a 5–3 decision affirming the Second Circuit. The opinion cited section 1101(a)(43)'s penultimate sentence, which says "The term [aggravated felony] applies to an offense described in this paragraph whether in violation of Federal or State law...".  Justice Kagan wrote that "the whole point of § 1101(a)(43)'s penultimate sentence is to make clear that a listed [conviction] should lead to swift removal, no matter whether [the listed offense] violates federal, state, or foreign law."  Kagan wrote that the state arson law not including the interstate commerce restriction was a "jurisdictional element" that was not relevant to the applicability of the INA, which intended to also punish violations of state law, and such a difference was only a minor disparity.Luna Torres v. Lynch, No. 14–1096, 578 U.S. ____ (2016).Luna Torres v. Lynch.  Harvard Law Review.  November 10, 2016.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote a dissenting opinion, with whom Thomas and Breyer joined.  The dissent argued that Congress had intended for federal crimes to be treated as more serious than state crimes by the plain language of the INA.  The federal arson statute required that the act be "used in interstate or foreign commerce", and this standard was not met in Torres's case.
 Notes and references 
 External links 
 SCOTUSblog coverage
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "Luther v. Borden" ==> """
Luther v. Borden, 48 U.S. (7 How.) 1 (1849), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States established the political question doctrine in controversies arising under the Guarantee Clause of Article Four of the United States Constitution (Art. IV, § 4).
Martin Luther was part of the Dorr Rebellion, an attempt to overthrow the charter government of Rhode Island that had stymied the efforts of those who wished to broaden the voting rights of state residents.  The rebellion began as a political effort but turned violent.  Martin Luther was arrested by Luther M. Borden, a state official, who searched his home and allegedly damaged his property.  Luther contended that the charter government was not "republican" in nature because it restricted the electorate to only the most propertied classes; because Article Four states that "the United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union a Republican Form of Government," Luther argued that the Supreme Court should find that Borden acted without proper authority.  In doing so, the Court would necessarily find that the "Dorrite" alternative republican government was the lawful government of Rhode Island, superseding the charter government.
Court's decision
The Supreme Court found that it was up to the President and Congress to enforce this clause and that, as an inherently political question, it was outside the purview of the Court. The case was cited as justification for Congress' actions towards southern states in the post-Civil War Reconstruction Era.Hubbs, Todd. 2006. "Luther v. Borden". Federalism in America: An Encyclopedia.
The ruling established that the "republican form of government" clause of Article Four was non-justiciable, a ruling that still holds today.  However, two decades after Luther v. Borden was decided, the Fourteenth Amendment, which included the Equal Protection Clause, was added to the Constitution. Baker v. Carr, in which the Court found that the Court could examine Tennessee's apportionment of legislative districts, was based on the Equal Protection Clause, and many subsequent cases that covered much of the same ground as Luther v. Borden followed suit.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 48
Dorr Rebellion
Judicial restraint
References
Further reading
Dennison, George M. "The Dorr War and Political Questions," Supreme Court Historical Society Yearbook (1979), pp 45-62
 Schuchman, John S. "The Political Background of the Political-Question Doctrine: The Judges and the Dorr War," American Journal of Legal History (1972) 6#2 pp 111-125. in JSTOR
External links
Category:1849 in Rhode Island
Category:1849 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:Dorr Rebellion
Category:Guarantee Clause case law
Category:Legal history of Rhode Island
Category:United States political question doctrine case law
"""

From "Lyeth v. Hoey" ==> """
Lyeth v. Hoey, 305 U.S. 188 (1938), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that property received by an heir under a settlement agreement resolving a dispute over the decedent's will is property acquired by "inheritance," which exempts the value of such property from the income tax..
 Background 
The Petitioner was a grandson of Mary B. Longyear, who died in 1931, a resident of Massachusetts, leaving as her heirs four surviving children and the petitioner and his brother, who were sons of a deceased daughter. In her will, the decedent gave to her heirs certain small legacies. The entire residuary estate, amounting to more than $3,000,000, was bequeathed to an Endowment Trust, the income from which was payable to another trust described as the Longyear Foundation. The main purpose of the Longyear Foundation was to preserve "the records of the earthly life of Mary Baker Eddy," the founder of the Christian Science religion.
When the will was offered for probate in Massachusetts, there was objection by the heirs upon the grounds, among others, of lack of testamentary capacity and undue influence. After a hearing, the probate court granted a motion for the framing of issues for trial before a jury. In that situation, a compromise agreement was entered into between the heirs, the legatees, the devisees, and the executors under the will and the Attorney General of Massachusetts. This agreement provided that the will should be admitted to probate and letters testamentary issued; that the specific and pecuniary bequests to individuals should be enforced; that the bequest of the residuary estate to the Endowment Trust should be disregarded; that $200,000 should be paid to the heirs, and a like amount to the Endowment Trust, and that the net residue of the estate, as defined, should be equally divided between the trustees of the Endowment Trust and the heirs.
The question presented was whether property received from the estate of a decedent in compromise of a claim (settlement of litigation) as an heir was taxable as income. Because of a conflict with the decision of the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Magruder v. Segebade, certiorari was granted..
 Opinion of the Court 
Writing for the majority, Chief Justice Hughes held that whether the petitioner would receive any property in his capacity as heir depended upon the validity of his ancestor's will and the extent to which it would dispose of his ancestor's estate. When, by compromise and the decree enforcing it, that disposition was limited, what he got from the estate came to him because he was heir, the compromise serving to remove pro tanto the impediment to his inheritance. As such, the exemption applies.
 See also 
 Estate tax in the United States
 Inheritance tax
References
 External links 
Category:Inheritance tax
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1938 in United States case law
"""

From "Lynch v. Donnelly" ==> """
Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 U.S. 668 (1984), was a United States Supreme Court case challenging the legality of Christmas decorations on town property.
Background
Pawtucket, Rhode Island's annual Christmas display in the city's shopping district, consisting of a Santa Claus house, a Christmas tree, a banner reading "Season's Greetings," and a crèche, was challenged in court. The crèche had been a part of the display since at least 1943. The plaintiffs brought the suit to the District Court of Rhode Island, which permanently enjoined the city from displaying the Nativity scene as a violation of the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Court of Appeals for the First Circuit affirmed the district court's ruling. The city then petitioned to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
Ruling
Chief Justice Burger delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Justices White, Powell, Rehnquist, and O'Connor joined. The Supreme Court reversed previous rulings in a vote of 5–4, ruling that the display was not an effort to advocate a particular religious message and had "legitimate secular purposes." It held that the crèche did not violate the Establishment Clause based on the test created in Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971). They ruled that the crèche is a passive representation of religion and that there was "insufficient evidence to establish that the inclusion of the crèche is a purposeful or surreptitious effort to express some kind of subtle governmental advocacy of a particular religious" view. They also stated that the Constitution "affirmatively mandates accommodation, not merely tolerance of all religions, and forbids hostility toward any."
The Court ruled that the crèche has a legitimate secular purpose within a larger holiday display to celebrate the season and the origins of Christmas which has long been a part of Western culture. The Federal "Government has long recognized—indeed it has subsidized—holidays with religious significance." For example, the first Congress that passed the First Amendment enacted legislation providing for paid Chaplains in the House and Senate, and "It has long been the practice that federal employees are released from duties on Thanksgiving and Christmas while being paid." The court compared the crèche to the display of religious paintings in government funded museums. In addition, the crèche requires only minimal expenses for assembly and dismantling. The Court also stated, "no inquiry into potential political divisiveness is even called for" because the situation does not involve direct aid to church-sponsored organizations and because the crèche been displayed for 40 years with no problems.
Concurrence
Justice O’Connor, in her concurring opinion, offered a "clarification" of how the Establishment Clause should be read:
This is sometimes referred to as the "Endorsement test." A law which fails this test is found to be unconstitutional because it "endorses" religion or religious beliefs in such a way that it tells those who agree that they are favored insiders and those who disagree that they are disfavored outsiders. The other side of the coin would be the "disapproval" of religion or religious beliefs in such a way that those who agree with the beliefs are told that they are disfavored outsiders while those who disagree with the beliefs are told that they are favored insiders.
Dissent
Justices Brennan, Marshall, Blackmun, and Stevens dissented. The dissenting opinion argued that the case did not pass the Lemon test. The secular display surrounding their secular purpose of celebrating of a national holiday could have been done without a clearly religious symbol that supports only one religion to the exclusion of others giving one group public approval of their views. Even if other religious groups are allowed to include "'competing efforts [by religious groups] to gain or maintain the support of government' may 'occasio[n] considerable civil strife.'" The religious crèche is also placed in a central location within the display, which makes even less of the Court's idea that Pawtucket was just including all of the traditional images. The dissenting opinion also mentions that it cannot be compared to a religious display in a museum because it is not solely being considered as a piece of art but as a religious symbol as well. The government recognition of Christmas previously has only been to recognize the secular parts of Christmas, such as spending time with family. The minority also dissented, noting that "Those who believe in the message of the nativity receive the unique and exclusive benefit of public recognition and approval of their views" and that the creche provides "a significant symbolic benefit to religion..." The dissent argued "The effect on minority religious groups, as well as on those who may reject religion, is to convey the message that their views are not similarly worthy of public recognition nor entitled to public support.  It was precisely this sort of chauvinism that the Establishment Clause was intended forever to prohibit."
 See also 
 Christmas controversies
 County of Allegheny v. American Civil Liberties Union (1989)
 Endorsement test
References
Further reading
External links
United States Supreme Court Opinions from Volume 465
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:1984 in religion
Category:Pawtucket, Rhode Island
Category:Christmas in the United States
"""

From "Lyng v. Castillo" ==> """
Lyng v. Castillo, 477 U.S. 635 (1986), reversed a lower court's decision that the change in the statutory definition of a household violated the appellee's due process rights. The program rules for food stamps were changed in 1981 and 1982 which changed the definitions of households. The Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the District Court erred in using heightened scrutiny to analyze the validity of the household definition..
Earlier, the Supreme Court ruled in Department of Agriculture v. Moreno (1973) that a provision of the Food Stamp Act of 1971 was unconstitutional because a household, if an unrelated individual lived in it, would have its benefits reduced or eliminated..
 Background 
Eligibility for the federal food stamp program is determined on a household basis. However, the exact definition of the term "household" fluctuates and may not include all people living on the same property. Distant family members (farther than first cousin), tenants, subleasers, non-legally related minors, and non-married spouses are excluded.
The plaintiffs argued that some or all of the groups should be included in proposals for eligibility and quantity of aid supplied. The disputed section is as follows:
"Household" means (1) an individual who lives alone or who, while living with others, customarily purchases foods and prepares meals for home consumption separate and apart from the others, or (2) a group of individuals who live together and customarily purchase food and prepare meals together for home consumption; except that parents and children, or siblings, who live together shall be treated as a group of individuals who customarily purchase and prepare meals together for home consumption even if they do not do so, unless one of the parents, or siblings, is an elderly or disabled member.
Majority opinion
Justice Stevens, writing for the Court, ruled that since it was possible for those excluded from the household to petition for the federal food stamp program separately, they would not be considered in federal food stamp applications.
Eligibility and benefit levels in the federal food stamp program are determined on a household, rather than an individual, basis. The statutory definition of the term "household," as amended in 1981 and 1982, generally treats parents, children and siblings who live together as a single household, but it does not treat more distant relatives or groups of unrelated persons who live together as a single household unless they also customarily purchase food and prepare meals together.
Although there are variations in the facts of the four cases that were consolidated in the District Court, they all raise the question whether the statutory distinction between parents, children, and siblings and all other groups of individuals violates the guarantee of equal treatment in the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.477 U.S. at 637.
Dissents
Justices Brennan, White, and Marshall all authored dissenting opinions.
Brennan's dissent
Justice Brennan said he "would affirm on the ground that the challenged classifications violate the Equal Protection Clause because they fail the rational basis test."
Marshall's dissent
Justice Marshall argued:
This case demonstrates yet again the lack of vitality in this Court's recent equal protection jurisprudence. When it moved beyond the rule that merely grouped parents and children, and, in the 1982 amendments, grouped siblings together as well, Congress interfered substantially with the desires of demonstrably separate families to remain separate families. It did so, moreover, while recognizing that distinct families living together often are genuinely separate households, and that the food stamp program should permit separate families that are not related to live together, but maintain separate households. ... Congress nevertheless assumed that related families are less likely to be genuinely separate households than are unrelated families, and failed even to provide related families a chance to rebut the legislative presumption. In view of the importance to the affected families of their family life and their very survival, the Court's extreme deference to this untested assumption is simply inappropriate. I respectfully dissent.477 U.S. at 637 (Marshall, J., dissenting).
White's dissent
Justice White agreed with the last three paragraphs of Justice Marshall's dissenting opinion, saying that "the classification at issue in this case is irrational."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 477
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
 Lupu Ira C. "WHERE RIGHTS BEGIN: THE PROBLEM OF BURDENS ON THE FREE EXERCISE OF RELIGION." Harvard Law Review MARCH, 1989 102 Harv. L. Rev. 933
 Weber Gerald R. Jr. The Striker Amendment to the Food Stamp Act: Politics Chipping Away at the Union, Family, and Social Welfare Georgia Law Review Spring 1988 22 Ga. L. Rev. 741
External links
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
"""

From "Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Ass'n" ==> """
Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Association, 485 U.S. 439 (1988), was a United States Supreme Court landmark case in which the Court ruled on the applicability of the Free Exercise Clause to the practice of religion on Native American sacred lands, specifically in the Chimney Rock area of the Six Rivers National Forest in California. This area, also known as the High Country, was used by the Yurok, Karuk, and Tolowa tribes as a religious site.
The ruling is considered a key example of judicial restraint by the Supreme Court.
 Background 
In 1982, the United States Forest Service drew up a report known as the Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) that examined the environmental impact of constructing a proposed road through and possibly harvesting timber in the Six Rivers National Forest. Due to the religious importance of the area, the study found that if the U.S. Forest Service’s plans went forward, the damage done to the land would be severe and irreparable. Therefore, the report advised against both the road and timber harvesting. Additionally, the EIS suggested possible alternative was routes that avoided key religious sites. However, this recommendation and the rest of the report was rejected by the U.S. Forest Service.. The report commissioned by the United States Forest Service recognized that the construction of the road would destroy the religion of the American Indian tribes.
American Indian groups (led by the Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Association) and the State of California sued for an injunction, challenging both the road building and timber harvesting decisions. The court issued a permanent injunction that prohibited the Government from constructing the Chimney Rock section of the road or putting the timber harvesting plan into effect, holding, inter alia, that such actions would violate respondent Indians' rights under the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment and would violate certain federal statutes.
The Trial Court found for Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Association and issued an injunction. The USFS appealed. The Appellate Court affirmed and the USFS appealed again bringing the case to the U.S. Supreme Court.
As a case before the U.S. Supreme Court, Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective was argued on November 30, 1987. The petitioner, Richard E. Lyng, the U.S. Secretary of Agriculture at the time, claimed that constructing a road and harvesting timber through lands considered sacred by Native American tribes did not violate the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. The respondent in the case was the Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Association, et al.
With the claim at hand, the U.S. Supreme Court decided to rule on the question of whether the First Amendment’s Free Exercise Clause prohibited the government from harvesting or developing the Chimney Rock Area.https://www.oyez.org/cases/1980-1989/1987/1987_86_1013 
 Opinion of the Court 
After much deliberation, the holding of the court was released on April 19, 1988. In a vote of 5-3 (Anthony M. Kennedy did not participate), the court ruled that "construction of the proposed road does not violate the First Amendment regardless of its effect on the religious practices of the respondents because it compels no behavior contrary to their belief".
In support of the decision, Justice Sandra Day O’Connor cited Bowen v. Roy (1986), a previous  U.S. Supreme Court case that involved a family who did not wish to give their child a social security number for religious reasons. Also argued with regard to the Free Exercise Clause, this holding of the court in this case was that the government could not change its system and make an exception for an individual because of religiously based reasons. Judging by the parallels in this case with that of Lyng, Justice O’ Connor found that although damage would certainly be done to the Six Rivers/Chimney Rock area, the road construction and timber harvesting would not force individuals to violate their beliefs or be denied of the equal rights shared by other citizens of the United States. In deciding the case, the Supreme Court had to determine whether a government action would cause a "substantial burden" on religion. Since the United States Forest Service's report had recognized that the religion of tribes would effectively be irreparably harmed, the tribes had a strong argument that they met this element of the law. However, the Supreme Court set out new requirements for proving substantial burden. The Court stated that a substantial burden only exist where the government imposes a sanction (fine or imprisonment) or denies a benefit to individuals that they would otherwise be entitled to receive. Since this case involved neither, the decision found that no substantial burden existed.
Justice William J. Brennan Jr. disagreed with the majority opinion and, with a citation of the case Sherbert v. Verner (1963), declared that the holding of Lyng stripped Native Americans of their Constitutional protection against threats to their religious practices.
The United States Supreme Court reversed and allowed the road to be built.
The Supreme Court cited Bowen v. Roy (476 U.S. 693 (1986)) and, in a 3-5 decision, found that the Free Exercise Clause affords an individual protection from certain forms of governmental compulsions, but it does not afford an individual a right to dictate the conduct of the government's internal procedures.
 Subsequent developments 
After the case was decided, Congress intervened and designated the area a "wilderness" under the Wilderness Act, and the road was not built.http://www.invispress.com/law/natural/cemetery.html The Act protected the High Country, by adding it to the Siskiyou Wilderness Area.
Suzan Shown Harjo, a Cheyenne-Muskogee writer and activist who influenced the drafting of the American Indian Religious Freedom Act (AIRFA) of 1978, called Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Association a "stunning defeat" for the Native American cause.  In a twenty-five-year retrospective of AIRFA, published in 2004, she described how the Lyng decision galvanized Native American activists to press for other claims, for example in fishing rights, and how it helped to inspire efforts towards the "repatriation" of Native American cultural materials while contributing to the establishment of the Smithsonian's National Museum of the American Indian.
 See also 
 List of U.S. Supreme Court Cases involving Indian tribes
 American Indian Religious Freedom Act
 Related cases 
 Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205 (1972)
 Thomas v. Review Board of the Indiana Employment Security Division, 450 U.S. 707 (1981)
 References 
Further reading
 Canby, William C. Jr. (2004).  American Indian Law.  Minnesota: Thomson West
External links
Category:Native American cemeteries
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:United States Native American criminal jurisdiction case law
Category:1988 in the environment
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:Six Rivers National Forest
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Indigenous peoples and the environment
Category:Native American history of California
"""

From "Lyons v. Oklahoma" ==> """
Lyons v. Oklahoma, 322 U.S. 596 (1944), was a United States Supreme Court case about the beatings and subsequent coerced confessions of William Douglas Lyons, a man convicted of a triple-murder in Oklahoma.. His attorneys included Thurgood Marshall.
 History 
William Douglas Lyons was a 21-year-old illiterate African American sharecropper. For several hours, Lyons was beaten with a blackjack weapon. Eventually he said he murdered a white family and burned down their home in Choctaw County.
Thurgood Marshall travelled to Oklahoma to assist the defense shortly after the trial of Joseph Spell. Marshall cross-examined the police who were involved. Marshall had a strong case asserting Lyons's innocence, however the judge allowed for a jury's determination. The jury decided that the second confession by Lyon's, given twelve hours after his beatings had ended, was a voluntary confession.
The case was overshadowed by early events related to World War II and the court's decision on the Sherman Act.
 Outcome 
Lyons was paroled in 1961 and pardoned by the Governor of Oklahoma in 1965 after 20 years in prison. He subsequently disappeared into obscurity.LYONS V. OKLAHOMA, THE NAACP, AND COERCED Confessions Virginia Law Review 2003 pdf file Lyons was spared the death penalty in the case, despite the gruesome nature of the murder, after his defense exposed abuses by police and officials. Many observers thought he would be cleared after problems with the case against him were exposed at trial. Marshall was troubled by the outcome and believed there was strong evidence of his client's innocence. The case highlighted issues of what constituted a forced confession. Some observers also suggested the murder may have been carried out by poorly supervised prisoners at a nearby work camp and Lyons used as a scapegoat to avoid bad publicity and possible investigations of local law officers and politicians.
A photo of Lyons with six policemen and attorneys is held by the Library of Congress. An appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court failed, the majority deciding, over a strong dissent, that a series of beatings, long interrogations and threats to induce a confession do not render a second confession 11 hours later involuntary.
See also
Chambers v. Florida
Groveland Four
References
External links
Category:1944 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Choctaw County, Oklahoma
Category:Law enforcement in Oklahoma
Category:African-American history of Oklahoma
Category:False confessions
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
"""

From "M. K. B. v. Warden" ==> """
M. K. B. v. Warden, 540 U.S. 804 (2003),. 540 U.S. 1213 (2004),. is a sealed case in South Florida.
M.K.B. are the initials of Mohamed Kamel Bellahouel, an immigrant Algerian waiter who was interviewed by federal officials.CNN.com - Supreme Court requests government to justify secret detention - Nov. 5, 2003News Groups Seek to Open Secret Case – New York TimesCNN.com - Court declines appeal on 9/11 secrecy - Feb. 23, 2004 He has reportedly been freed on a $10,000 bond.  The only information about the case was inadvertently released and reported by The Christian Science Monitor. In 2004, the United States Supreme Court notably sided with the government's request to grant the case total secrecy.
 References 
 External links 
 "Supreme Court asks for more input on secret September 11 case"
 "Secret 9/11 case before high court"
 "Supreme Court decision may limit access to terror cases"
 "MKB v. Warden. Was is it?"
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
Category:Algeria–United States relations
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "M.L.B. v. S.L.J." ==> """
M.L.B. v. S.L.J., 519 U.S. 102 (1996), was a Supreme Court of the United States case regarding a controversy over the Fourteenth Amendment. The petitioner, M.L.B., argued that the Mississippi Chancery Courts could not terminate her parental rights on the basis that she was unable to pay the court fees. M.L.B. had been sued by S.L.J. to terminate M.L.B.'s parental rights and gain the ability to adopt the children. The judge declared in favor of S.L.J. under the premise that the decree was fair, as it was based on the fulfilling of the burden of proof by the father and his second wife with "clear and convincing evidence."
Despite the statement, the Chancery Court never elaborated on the evidence or clearly explained why M.L.B.'s parental rights had been dismissed. When M.L.B. went to appeal, she was unable to pay for the record preparation fees of $2,352.36 and so was denied. She then went to appeal under in forma pauperis but was again denied on the grounds that in forma pauperis is not demanded in civil cases, only criminal cases.
The case was then brought to the Supreme Court, where M.L.B. held that an inability to pay court fees should not be decisive of something as precious as parental rights. She used the guidelines set out in the due process and equal protection clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment to fight her case.
The Supreme Court decided in the petitioner's favor and stated that in matters regarding parental rights, a court may not stop a party from appealing the case based on financial means.
Because this ruling extended in forma pauperis to civil cases, there was a question of how liberally it could be applied. It was then clarified that in forma pauperis may be applied to civil cases only if state controls or intrusions on family relationships are involved. The Supreme Court decided that the family unit is considered so fundamental that its liberty interests should be protected by the Fourteenth Amendment. The protection of appellate rights was considered to be just as important as that of criminal rights.
Context
On November 15, 1993, respondent S.L.J., the biological father of the children, sued petitioner M.L.B., the biological mother, in a Mississippi Chancery Court for adoptive rights of the petitioner's natural children. After a three-day trial, the court decided in favor of S.L.J.. M.L.B. filed for an appeal where she intended to argue that the Chancery Court's decision was unsupported by the evidence or lack thereof. The fees the Court charged her for the record preparations was too high for the petitioner to pay and, determined to keep her parental rights, she asked for in forma pauperis. When she went to the Mississippi Supreme Court, M.L.B.'s motions were denied, but on April 1, 1996, the US Supreme Court] agreed to hear the petitioner's case through writ of certiorari. M.L.B. went into the case, ready to back her stance through the Fourteenth Amendment. In section 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment, it is stated, "No state shall... deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws."
When making its decision, the Supreme Court also took into account many cases that were related to issues with the Fourteenth Amendment. It looked at Griffin v. Illinois, which i decided that if an appeal was granted, the indigent defendants must be granted the same level of appellate review as defendants who could afford every record or transcript. It also considered Mayer v. Chicago in which a destitute criminal's right to appeal was upheld again. The case came while the need for such changes in the law was growing.
The court also took into account cases in which the family was involved. Lassiter v. Department of Social Services of Durham Cty, 452 U.S. 18, which stated that indigent defendants in a parental termination case are not required by the Constitution to be provided with counsel, but they should be determined by the circumstances. In the 1990s, the divorce rate was almost 50%.
In 1993, the year of the original case, the poverty rate was at 15.1%, with 39.3 million people living under the official poverty level. Although the window this case opened for in forma pauperis in civil cases was narrow, it was also highly necessary.
Issue
When M.L.B. was unable to appeal because of her financial difficulties, she felt that at least in forma pauperis should apply. It did not apply to parenthood, which was not a criminal case. The conflict then arose of whether or not the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution allowed a state to condition appeals made by indigent persons if a court decreed a termination of parental rights.
The court was reluctant to extend in forma pauperis to any civil case for fear that it would open the door for too many minor civil cases. When making its decision, the Supreme Court looked at the situation and considered family a fundamental right of a citizen.
Opinion
Majority
A 6-3 opinion decided that "just as a state may not block an indigent petty offender's access to an appeal afforded others, so Mississippi may not deny M.L.B., because of her poverty, appellate review of the sufficiency of the evidence on which the trial court found her unfit to remain a parent." The court stated that due process could not be halted by a lack of funds in a case if the termination of parental rights was at risk. Ginsburg wrote the majority opinion and was joined by O'Connor, Souter, Breyer, and Stevens. The concurrence was written by Kennedy.
A case that contributed to the court's opinion was Griffin v. Illinois, . Before that case, only convicted felons sentenced to death had access to an appellate review if they were unable to pay for transcripts. The court then decided that all criminal cases, even noncapital ones, would be allowed the same right, in accordance with the Fourteenth Amendment. The other largely-influential case was Mayer v. Chicago, , which decided that any offence, even "quasi-criminal" ones in nature, may be appealed, regardless of financial means. M.L.B. argued that what was at stake for her was far greater than what was at stake for a "quasi-criminal" and that her right to appeal should in no way be determined by her wallet. The court made their ruling based on that argument and reversed the one made by the Mississippi Supreme Court.
Concurring opinion
The concurrence was written by Kennedy. He reiterated the impact that both Griffin v. Illinois and Mayer v. Chicago had on the case. Also, the court must reverse the previous ruling because of the importance of the rights inherent in any family matters. Appellate review is not always necessary, but if it is granted, the court must not bar litigants from fulfilling their appeal by a lack of funds in cases as grave as this one. On family matters, cases like Boddie v. Connecticut and Lassiter v. Department of Social Services of Durham City were cited as grounds for the decision.
Dissenting opinion
The dissenting opinion was written by Thomas and joined by Rehnquist and Scalia. In it, they contend that if they allow for free transcripts in a civil appeal in this one case, it will be applied too liberally to other civil cases. There is also issue over M.L.B.'s claims that she should be protected under Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses, as there is no clear explanation how they apply. Also, the Due Process Clause does not state that a state is even obliged to provide for an appeal. Furthermore, the petitioner has gone through an entire court process that was provided for her, ensuring her due process. The state's duty to M.L.B. has thus been fulfilled. M.L.B.'s motives, as well, are questioned, as the petitioner may care less about due process and more about delaying the sting of termination of her parental rights. The majority cited irrelevant Supreme Court that apply to criminal, not civil, cases.
Aftermath
The ruling opened the doors for the destitute to fight for their parental rights. During the 1990s, poverty levels hit remarkable lows, but divorce rates remained high.
References
External links
 http://works.bepress.com/lloyd_anderson/9/
 http://www.ncjj.org/PDF/Snapshots/1996/vol1_no7_terminationparentalrights.pdf
 http://law2.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/conlaw/mlbvslj.html
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment case law
"""

From "Machinists v. Wisconsin Employment Rel. Comm'n" ==> """
Machinists v. Wisconsin Employment Rel. Comm'n, 427 U.S. 132 (1976), is a US labor law case, concerning the scope of federal preemption against state law for labor rights.
Facts
The Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission sought to hold a union liable for an unfair labor practice, by refusing to work overtime. An employer claimed to the National Labor Relations Board that his staff had committed an unfair practice by refusing to work overtime, but this was dismissed, as there was no violation. The employer then tried to make the same claim to the Wisconsin Employment Relations Commission, which upheld the claim and made a cease-and-desist order against the union. The Wisconsin Circuit Court affirmed this and so did the Wisconsin Supreme Court affirmed. The union appealed to the US Supreme Court.
Judgment
Brennan J held that the Wisconsin Supreme Court had not been entitled to make a ruling against the union, because its jurisdiction was preempted by the National Labor Relations Act. Such matters were to be left to "be controlled by the free play of economic forces". The judgment included the following.
See also
United States labor law
References
External links
Category:Legal history of Wisconsin
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers
"""

From "Madison v. Alabama" ==> """
Madison v. Alabama, 586 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution, barring cruel and unusual punishment. The case deals with whether the Eighth Amendment prohibits executing a person for a crime they do not remember.
Background
Vernon Madison (August 22, 1950 – February 22, 2020) shot police officer Julius Schulte twice in the back of the head in Mobile, Alabama in April 1985. Schulte was mediating a domestic disturbance between Madison and his ex-girlfriend; Madison also shot and injured her. Madison was an inmate at Holman Correctional Facility from September 1985 up until his death on February 22, 2020
Three trials were held, as the convictions from the first two were overturned: the first because prosecutors unconstitutionally excluded black people from the jury and the second because they introduced evidence improperly. In the third trial, the jury decided on a sentence of life in prison, but the judge Ferrill McRae overruled them and gave Madison a sentence of death in 1994.
The execution was scheduled to occur in May 2016; the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals granted a stay on the day of the execution, which the Supreme Court upheld 5-3 (at the time, one seat on the nine-member court was empty owing to Justice Antonin Scalia's death a few months prior).
In Dunn v. Madison, in November 2017, the Supreme Court unanimously overturned a 2-1 decision by the 11th Circuit, which had stopped the execution on the basis that Madison "does not rationally understand the connection between his crime and his execution".Madison v. Commissioner, Ala. Dept. of Corrections, 851 F.3d 1173 (11th Cir. 2017); reversed sub. nom., Dunn v. Madison, 138 S. Ct. 9 (2017). The Circuit Court was overruling a state court decision that had denied Madison's petition on the basis that Supreme Court precedent only barred execution if he lacked "understanding he is being executed as punishment for a crime". The Supreme Court did not rule on the merits of the case, but ruled that the Circuit Court overstepped its authority under the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, which set the standard for which federal courts can overturn a lower court's decision.
The execution was scheduled for January 2018; the Supreme Court granted a stay 30 minutes before Madison was scheduled to be executed, with Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito, and Neil Gorsuch dissenting.
Madison's health
Madison had severe strokes in 2015 and 2016, resulting in vascular dementia and inability to remember killing police officer Schulte in 1985. Prior to his death, he was blind and had suffered a significant mental decline; he only remembered the alphabet up to the letter G and had slurred speech. The strokes caused physical damage as well, leaving him incontinent, unable to walk without a walker, and with slurred speech. However, according to the psychologist appointed by Alabama courts seeking his execution, he understood that he would be executed and the reason for that.
On Saturday, February 22, 2020, Vernon Madison died while he was still on death row at Alabama's Holman Correctional Facility in Atmore. He was 69 years old. He was never executed. Officials did not cite a cause of death, but they did say that foul play was unlikely. News reports said shortly after his death that results of an autopsy were pending.
Precedent
In Ford v. Wainwright,. the Supreme Court held in 1986 that executing the insane is not allowed due to the Eighth Amendment, and in Panetti v. Quarterman,. they held in 2007 that to be sentenced to death, an inmate must understand "the meaning and purpose of" his death sentence.
Case
The Supreme Court decided to hear the case in February 2018. Oral arguments were held on October 2, 2018. At oral argument, Alabama Deputy Attorney General Thomas Govan surprised some observers as well as Justices by agreeing with defense counsel Bryan Stevenson that dementia could be a form of incapacitation sufficient to meet the Ford and Panetti standards prohibiting the execution of some incapacitated inmates. Govan argued only that Madison's condition did not meet those tests because he still had the cognitive ability to understand why he was being executed, even if he could not recall the crime. Stevenson argued that Madison was disabled beyond solely memory loss and thus his execution would violate the Eighth Amendment's prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment.
Decision
In a 5-3 opinion, authored by Justice Kagan, the Court held that the Eighth Amendment may permit executing a prisoner even if he or she cannot remember committing his or her crime, but it may prohibit executing a prisoner who suffers from dementia or another disorder, rather than psychotic delusions. The Court held that if a prisoner is unable to rationally understand the reasons for his sentence, the Eighth Amendment forbids his execution.
Justice Alito in dissent, joined by Justice Thomas and Justice Gorsuch, would not have reached this question, stating that Madison presented only the first question (whether a state can execute a prisoner who cannot remember committing his crime) in his petition.
The Court remanded the case for the lower court to determine whether Madison was able to rationally understand the reasons for his sentence.
References
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Alabama
"""

From "Madsen v. Women's Health Center, Inc." ==> """
Madsen v. Women's Health Center, Inc., 512 U.S. 753 (1994), is a United States Supreme Court case where Petitioners challenged the constitutionality of an injunction entered by a Florida state court which prohibits antiabortion protesters from demonstrating in certain places, and in various ways outside of a health clinic that performs abortions.. 
The Petitioners, Madsen and other abortion protesters (Petitioners) regularly protested the Respondents, the Women’s Health Center and other abortion clinics (Respondent), in Melbourne, Florida as well as in front of the homes of clinic employees. The Respondents then sought and were granted, by a Florida trial court, an injunction on several grounds, restraining the Petitioner’s ability to protest, which was upheld by the Florida Supreme Court. The Petitioner’s appeal to the United States Supreme Court claimed that the injunction restricted their rights to free speech under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. The U.S. Supreme Court affirmed in part and reversed in part.
 Background 
 Facts 
The Petitioners protest abortion clinics run by Respondents. The Petitioners picketed and demonstrated where the public street gives access to the clinic. The Petitioners have been permanently enjoined by a Florida court from blocking or interfering with public access to the clinic and from physically abusing persons entering or leaving the clinic. Six months later, the Respondents sought to broaden the injunction, complaining that the Petitioners still impede potential patients. The trial court then issued a broader injunction, for which the Petitioners challenge as a violation of their First Amendment constitutional rights. The Amendment injunction prohibits the Petitioners from entering the premises of the Respondents, blocking or impeding access to the Respondents’ premises, from picketing and demonstrating or entering a portion of public right of way or private property within 36 feet of the property line of the Clinic, from causing excess noise from 7:30 am to noon Monday thru Saturday when procedures and recovery periods occur, from physically approaching or causing noise within 300 feet of any of the Respondents’ employees homes, from harassing anyone trying to gain access Respondents’ clinic, from displaying certain objectionable images and from inciting others to commit any of these prohibited acts. Upon appeal the Florida Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the injunction, causing the Petitioners to appeal.
The petitioners in Madsen v. Women's Health Center, Inc. were members of Operation Rescue America (hereinafter Operation Rescue), a group whose goal is to close down abortion clinics throughout the country. The Aware Woman Center for Choice, operated by the Women's Health Center, Inc., a women's health care clinic, provided abortions and counseling to its clients. Members of Operation Rescue engaged in picketing and demonstrations in front of and around the clinic, essentially blocking the entrance to the clinic.
The members of Operation Rescue were extremely open about their intent to have the clinics incapacitated. They stated to the press that they intended to shut down a clinic. The literature of the organization stated that "their members should ignore the law of the State and the police officers who remove them from their blockading positions." Women's Health Center, Inc., brought an action for injunctive relief prohibiting Operation Rescue members from engaging in these activities.
 Issues 
 Whether the State has a significant state interest enabling it to restrict the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights?
 Whether the 36 foot buffer zone around the clinic entrances and driveway are constitutional restrictions on the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights?
 Whether the 36 foot provision as applied to private property around the clinic is a constitutional restriction on the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights?
 Whether the noise prohibition provision of the injunction is a constitutional restriction on the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights?
 Whether the images observable prohibition is a constitutional restriction of the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights?
 Whether the 300-foot no approach zone around the clinic and employee residences is a permissible restriction of the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights?
 Opinion of the Court 
 Majority opinion 
thumb|right|150px|Justice William Rehnquist authored the majority opinion for Madsen v. Women's Health Center, Inc.
The Madsen majority sustained the constitutionality of the Clinic's thirty-six foot buffer zone and the noise-level provision, finding that they burdened no more speech than necessary to serve the injunction's goals. However, the Court struck down the thirty-six foot buffer zone as applied to the private property north and west of the Clinic, the 'images observable' provision, the three hundred foot no-approach zone around the Clinic, and the three hundred foot buffer zone around residences. The Court found that these provisions " [swept] more broadly than necessary" to protect the state's interests. Thus, the judgment of the Florida Supreme Court was affirmed in part and reversed in part.
 Regular concurrence 
Justice Souter, concurring.
I join the Court's opinion and write separately only to clarify two matters in the record. First, the trial judge made reasonably clear that the issue of who was acting "in concert" with the named defendants was a matter to be taken up in individual cases, and not to be decided on the basis of protesters' viewpoints. See Tr. 40, 43, 93, 115, 119-120 (Apr. 12, 1993, Hearing). Second, petitioners themselves acknowledge that the governmental interests in protection of public safety and order, of the free flow of traffic, and of property rights are reflected in Florida law. See Brief for Petitioners 17, and n. 7 (citing, e.g., Fla. Stat. §§ 870.041-870.047 (1991) (public peace); § 316.2045 (obstruction of public streets, highways, and roads)).
 Special concurrence 
Justice Stevens, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
The certiorari petition presented three questions, corresponding to petitioners' three major challenges to the trial court's injunction.[1] The Court correctly and unequivocally rejects petitioners' argument that the injunction is a "content-based restriction on free speech," ante, at 762-764, as well as their challenge to the injunction on the basis that it applies to persons acting "in concert" with them, ante, at 775-776. I therefore join Parts II and IV of the Court's opinion, which properly dispose of the first and third questions presented. I part company with the Court, however, on its treatment of the second question presented, including its enunciation of the applicable standard of review.
Concludes that under the circumstances the prohibition against physically approaching in the 300-foot zone around the clinic withstands the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional challenge. This is because the Petitioners’ “counseling” of the clinic’s patients is a form of expression analogous to labor picketing. It is a mixture of content and communication. Just as the First Amendment of the Constitution protects the speaker’s right to offer “sidewalk counseling” to all passersby. That protection, however, does not encompass attempts to abuse an unreceptive or captive audience, at least under the circumstances in this case. The dissent also feels that the injunction generally should be no more burdensome than necessary to provide complete relief. Therefore, standards fashioned to determine the constitutionality of statutes should not be used to evaluate injunctions.
 Dissenting opinion 
The injunction in this case departs so far from the established jurisprudence of the Supreme Court that in any other context it would have been regarded as a candidate for summary reversal. But since this decision deals with abortion, no legal rule or doctrine is safe from ad hoc nullification by the Supreme Court when an occasion for its application arises in a case involving state regulation of abortion. The dissent believes that the 36 foot speech-free zone did not meet the burden for the test the Supreme Court set, as it burdens more speech than necessary. The dissent charges that speech-restricting injunctions are deserving of strict scrutiny by the Supreme Court and that the Supreme Court did not award it this level of review in this case and therefore dissents from all portions of the judgment upholding the injunction.
 Held 
Refer to above Issues
Yes. - The State has a strong interest in protecting a woman’s freedom to seek lawful medical or counseling services in connection with her pregnancy. The State also has an interest in ensuring public safety, and public order, in promoting the free flow of traffic on its streets and sidewalks. The State also has a strong interest in protecting residential privacy. The combination of which is sufficient to justify an appropriately tailored injunction to protect them.
Yes. - The 36-foot buffer zone around the clinic entrances and driveway burdens no more speech than necessary to accomplish the governmental interest at stake.
No. - The 36-foot buffer zone on private property around the clinic burdens more speech than necessary to protect access to the clinic, as nothing in the record indicates that the Petitioners’ activities on the private property have obstructed access to the clinic.
Yes. - The limited noise restrictions limit no more speech than necessary to ensure the health and well-being of the patients at the clinic. The First Amendment of the Constitution does not demand that patients at a medical facility undertake Herculean efforts to escape the cacophony of political protests.
No. - The images observable provision in the injunction limits more speech than necessary to achieve the purpose of limiting threats to clinic patients or their families. It is much easier for the clinic to pull its curtains than for a patient to stop up her ears, and no more is required to avoid seeing placards through the windows of the clinic. Therefore, this provision is an unconstitutional restriction because of the availability of this less restrictive means.
No. - The record before the Supreme Court does not contain sufficient justification for this broad ban on picketing, it appears that a limitation, on the time, duration of picketing, and number of pickets outside a smaller zone could have accomplished the desired result, while placing a lesser restriction on the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights.
 See also 
 Frisby v. Schultz, a 1988 Supreme Court decision which barred protests outside residential homes.
 References 
External links
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:Melbourne, Florida
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States reproductive rights case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Mahanoy Area School District v. B.L." ==> """
Mahanoy Area School District v. B.L., 594 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the ability of schools to regulate student speech made off-campus, including speech made on social media. The case challenged past interpretation of Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District and Bethel School District v. Fraser, previous Supreme Court decisions related to student speech which may be disruptive to the educational environment, in light of online communications.
The case centered on Brandi Levy, identified as B.L. in pleadings, a student at Mahanoy Area High School in Mahanoy City, Pennsylvania, who posted an angry, profane Snapchat message from an off-campus location after she failed to make the school's varsity cheerleading squad. Though sent to a private circle of friends and deleted later, the message was shown to school staff, and Levy was suspended from cheerleading the next year under the school's policy relating to social media. 
The Supreme Court affirmed the Third Circuit's ruling in regards to Levy's case in an 8–1 decision in June 2021, though overruled the Third Circuit's opinion related to off-campus speech relative to Tinker. The Court affirmed that through Tinker, schools may have a valid interest to regulate student speech off-campus that is disruptive, but did not define when this regulation can occur, leaving this open for lower courts in future litigation. The Supreme Court ruled specifically for Levy, holding that the school's interests to prevent disruption under Tinker were not sufficient to overcome her First Amendment rights.
Background
Brandi Levy was a ninth-grade student and junior varsity (JV) cheerleader at Mahanoy Area High School, a public secondary school operated by the Mahanoy Area School District, covering the area in and around Mahanoy City in Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania. In addition to cheering at football, basketball, and wrestling matches, her obligations as a cheerleader included raising additional funding for the squad from the community.Mahanoy I,  289 F. Supp. 3d at 610. As a condition of being a cheerleader, she was required to sign a code of conduct that required squad members to show respect for their teammates, coaches, the school, teachers, and other schools' cheerleaders; the rule also forbade the use of profanity. Another rule forbade cheerleaders from posting "negative information" about "cheerleading, cheerleaders or coaches" on the Internet.Mahanoy II, 376 F. Supp. 3d at 432–33. The code had been written by previous cheerleading coaches and approved by the school board.Mahanoy II, 376 F. Supp. 3d at 438.
Near the end of the 2016–17 academic year, Levy tried out for the next year's cheerleading squad. She hoped to make the varsity squad, but the two coaches, both teachers in the district, found her only good enough for the JV squad. An eighth-grader at the tryouts, meanwhile, made the varsity squad.
thumb|left|Centre St. in Mahanoy City, Pennsylvania on which the Cocoa Hut convenience store is located.
The following weekend, Levy and a friend commiserated about the apparent unfairness of this at the Cocoa Hut, a convenience store in downtown Mahanoy City where students often socialized. Using Levy's smartphone, the two took a selfie with middle fingers raised and posted it to her Snapchat account with the text "fuck school fuck softball fuck cheer fuck everything". A followup Snap expressed their frustration about being kept on the JV squad while the incoming freshman girl made varsity; they believed they were being treated unfairly. Levy sent the two Snaps to a group of approximately 250 friends, many of whom were fellow students, and some of them were cheerleaders themselves.
The Snap itself self-deleted in a short period of time, but one of Levy's teammates took a screenshot. One of those teammates was the daughter of one of the coaches, and had herself been suspended from cheering at a few games after she had posted disparaging remarks online about another school's cheerleading uniforms.Mahanoy II, 376 F. Supp. 3d at 444. By the time school resumed the following week, the screenshot had been widely shared among students, especially the cheerleaders. Some who had seen it came to the cheerleading coaches "visibly upset" by the Snap over the next few days.Mahanoy III, 964 F.3d at 175–76. At the end of the week one of the coaches pulled Levy out of class to inform her that she was suspended from cheerleading for the next year as a result of her Snap. Levy's parents appealed the suspension to the school board, which upheld it.
Lower courts
 District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania 
Levy, represented by her parents and supported by the American Civil Liberties Union, sued the school in federal court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania. Her attorney emphasized that her remarks were those of frustration made on her own social media account on her own time and contained neither threats nor any mention of the name of her school. In October 2017, four months after Levy was suspended from cheerleading, Judge A. Richard Caputo granted her a preliminary injunction that prohibited the school from enforcing the suspension. Caputo held that Levy would suffer irreparable harm without the injunction. "Simply put, the ability of a school to punish lewd or profane speech disappears once a student exits school grounds." 
Caputo added that the school could not curb Levy's off-campus speech per Bethel School District v. Fraser and that the speech did not disrupt the school's operation per Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District. He rejected the district's arguments that Levy had waived her constitutional rights by joining the cheerleading squad based on previous case law, that it could not be liable for the coaches' actions since it had approved the code Levy had signed, and that she had no constitutional right to be a cheerleader since it was irrelevant whether she did or not. "The District's concession that Levy's speech occurred off-campus is all but fatal", he said, finding that Tinker and Frasers exceptions did not apply as her speech was neither disruptive nor on-campus respectively. Caputo allowed that there were some other cases which allowed schools to impose greater speech limits on student athletes, but those did not come into play since Levy was not engaging in school-sponsored speech.Mahanoy II, 376 F. Supp. 3d at 437–43.
Third Circuit
The school district appealed Caputo's decision to the Third Circuit Court of Appeals. A three-judge panel acknowledged that "B.L.'s snap was crude, rude, and juvenile, just as we might expect of an adolescent", but upheld the District Court's holding in her favor, again finding that both Tinker and Fraser did not support restricting her off-campus speech. Writing for the panel, Judge Cheryl Ann Krause agreed with Caputo that the speech had clearly been off-campus, thus punishing Levy for it violated her First Amendment rights. The school district appealed this ruling.
Supreme Court of the United States
The school district petitioned the Supreme Court to take the case, arguing that particularly with the COVID-19 pandemic, the nature of online communications required reevaluation of the distinction between on versus off-campus speech in the context of distance learning. The Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Amicus curiae supporting Levy arrived from free speech advocacy groups and religious groups such as the Alliance Defending Freedom which expressed concern that a ruling favoring the school could lead to prosecution of a student's religious beliefs. Those supporting the school included anti-cyberbullying advocacy groups like the Cyberbullying Research Center, who believed that a ruling favoring the student would limit schools' ability to regulate and take action against cyberbullying. The federal government under acting solicitor general Elizabeth Prelogar urged the Supreme Court to find an intermediate position, by recognizing that while the court had previously ruled that off-campus speech cannot be regulated, there are some types of student speech over which schools should have oversight when that speech threatens the school or targets individual members of the school.
Oral arguments
Oral arguments were heard on April 28, 2021. Reporters for the Associated Press and Reuters who observed the oral arguments stated that it was unclear if the court would accept the bright-line ruling of the Third Circuit, as they argued there were compelling reasons for the school to have authority over some types of off-campus speech made on social media. At the same time, the reporters stated that the Justices were also wary of giving schools too much oversight of off-campus speech due to the extent of off-campus speech's reach into the schools due to social media use. The Justices considered whether this case was an appropriate vehicle to define new bounds for protections related to student speech, arguing under Tinker that Levy's Snapchat post may simply not have been sufficiently disruptive to warrant action by the school. Vox Ian Millhiser stated that the Justices argued for a more narrow ruling than the case had appeared to originally merit and it was unlikely to become a landmark decision.
The New York Times reported that the Justices seemed sympathetic to Levy. Justice Stephen Breyer doubted that her Snap had been significantly disruptive to the school's operations, and that if it was, "my goodness, every school in the country would be doing nothing but punishing." Justice Brett Kavanaugh, a youth basketball coach himself, said the yearlong suspension seemed excessive, but he appeared to reporter Adam Liptak to be expressing the views of several other Justices when he said the court's opinion should not be a "treatise" and that "the First Amendment does not categorically prohibit public schools from disciplining students for speech that occurs off campus, period."
Decision
thumb|Justice Stephen Breyer who wrote the majority opinion
The Supreme Court issued its decision on June 23, 2021, and affirmed the Third Circuit's ruling in an 8–1 judgement. The majority opinion was written by Justice Breyer, and overruled some of the Third Circuit's majority opinion in relationship to Tinker in that it was too broad towards off-campus speech, and that schools may have a legitimate interest to restrict off-campus speech, such as in relation to harassment and bullying. However, the majority did not try to define the bounds when this applies: "We do not now set forth a broad, highly general First Amendment rule stating just what counts as 'off campus' speech and whether or how ordinary First Amendment standards must give way off campus to a school’s special need to prevent… substantial disruption of learning-related activities or the protection of those who make up a school community." 
Breyer identified three factors related to off-campus speech that should be considered in future litigation: that off-campus speech is usually the responsibility of the student's parents, that off-campus speech covers virtually any activity outside of the school facility, and that the school has a responsibility to protect unpopular ideas by students. Of the latter point, Breyer said "The school itself has an interest in protecting a student's unpopular expression, especially when the expression takes place off campus," because "America's public schools are the nurseries of democracy." 
Turning specifically to Levy's case, Breyer wrote that while the school may have a valid interest to control student speech off campus, the school district violated Levy's First Amendment rights in reprimanding her for her post. Breyer stated that if Levy had been an adult, her Snapchat post would have been protected by the First Amendment, and that there was no evidence that her post created the type of disruption that Tinker addressed. Other aspects of Levy's case worked in her favor, including the fact that her Snapchat message was sent to a private circle of friends, and that it did not explicitly name the school or target any individuals. Breyer wrote: "It might be tempting to dismiss (the student's) words as unworthy of the robust First Amendment protections discussed herein. But sometimes it is necessary to protect the superfluous in order to preserve the necessary." 
Justice Samuel Alito wrote a concurring opinion opining that "there is a category of speech that is almost always beyond the regulatory authority of a public school. This is student speech that is not expressly and specifically directed at the school, school administrators, teachers, or fellow students and that addresses matters of public concern, including sensitive subjects like politics, religion, and social relations. Speech on such matters lies at the heart of the First Amendment's protection." He considered that a school that punished a student for speaking out against it would be attempting a "heckler's veto".
Justice Clarence Thomas, the lone dissenter, opined that the Tinker Court had never sufficiently explained how the First Amendment would have been understood as applying to student speech at the time the Fourteenth Amendment was ratified, and cited prior state cases from that period suggesting it was not; Thomas stated "a more searching review reveals that schools historically could discipline students in circumstances like those presented here". Thomas wrote "the majority fails to consider whether schools often will have more authority, not less, to discipline students who transmit speech through social media". He also wrote that the school should have been able to restrict Levy's speech as students "who are active in extracurricular programs have a greater potential, by virtue of their participation, to harm those programs".
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
Notes
References
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Cheerleading
Category:Education in Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania
Category:History of Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania
Category:Snap Inc.
Category:Student rights case law in the United States
Category:United States children's rights case law
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Internet case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Maine Community Health Options v. United States" ==> """
Maine Community Health Options v. United States, 590 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the expired Risk Corridors program of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), through which the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) mitigated losses of unprofitable healthcare plans through the profits of the profitable plans during the first three years of the program. Congress had passed legislation as riders in appropriations bills, which prevented the government from making payments to the unprofitable plans. Several of the insurers went bankrupt from the lack of payment, and multiple insurers sued the government to recover their funds on the basis the risk corridor was a commitment to be paid. The Federal Circuit Appeals Court rejected those claims, concluding that the subsequent appropriation riders absolved the government of its responsibility to pay. In the 8–1 decision that consolidated three of the subsequent appeals, the Supreme Court ruled that Congress's riders did not cancel the government's obligation under the ACA to pay the full amount to the unprofitable plans, and that the insurers had properly sought relief through a Tucker Act action in the Court of Federal Claims.
Background
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), also known as "Obamacare", passed as law in 2010. Part of the law established a healthcare plan marketplace where consumers could shop for and select individual plans. Because this was a rather new concept, drawing in new insurers alongside well-established ones, and considered to be potentially risky, the ACA included a Risk Corridor program, described at  to limit the amount of profit or losses any single healthcare plan could make or lose during the first three years of implementation of the ACA, from 2014 through 2016. Based on calculations set by the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), profitable healthcare plans would pay a portion of those profits to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Service (CMS), and subsequently the CMS would pay to cover a portion of the losses to the unprofitable plans. The amounts that plans were to pay or were to be covered by the government were based on percentage differentials of expected versus actual medical costs, and did not cover all gains or losses by insurers, leaving those that were drastically under-performing still responsible for their losses. Conceptually, the idea was that by the end of 2016, healthcare plans would have enough data from three years of operations to be able to minimize risk and thus should not have significant losses or profit. As passed by the ACA, there were no set limit to how much the government would collect or pay out, nor for the program to be fiscally neutral, though this was the intended target. Similar risk corridors had been used successfully before, notably in Medicare Part D coverage.
The Republican Party had generally been against the ACA, and with the 2014 United States elections, gained controlled of the Senate while retaining control of the House of Representatives. Senator Marco Rubio introduced legislation in November 2013 to amend the ACA to repeal the Risk Corridor program, which he had described as "taxpayer-funded bailouts", but which failed to pass. Rubio was able to successfully able to introduce a rider into the 2014 appropriations for the DHHS that prevented CMS from using other accounts to fund payments for the Risk Corridors program, effectively requiring it to be fiscally neutral. In tallying the 2014 year-end funds, CMS found they had an approximate  deficit in payments to under-performing insurers due to the new rider. CMS were forced to reduce payments that year on a pro rata basis, approximately down to 12.6% of the originally promised payments, with the expectation to pay the remaining owed funds from the profitable plan payments in 2015 and 2016. A similar rider was introduced in the subsequent 2015 appropriations bill to limit the funds the CMS could use to pay out insurers, and with 2015 also having another large deficit towards underperforming insurers, CMS could issue no 2015 payments and only cover a portion of the owed 2014 payments. A similar situation occurred in 2016, with yet another rider and another deficit. By the end of 2016, CMS estimated it still owed insurers over  from the Risk Corridor program. Over a dozen insurers were forced to declare bankruptcy as a result of the lack of payments.
Some of the insurers that were owed money by the CMS sued the government for failure to pay. The Supreme Court case here is a consolidation of three cases from four different insurers: Maine Community Health Options, Moda Health Plan, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina, and the Land Of Lincoln Mutual Health Insurance Company. All four had filed separate suits at the United States Court of Federal Claims under the Tucker Act, asserting that §1342 of the ACA held the government responsible to fulfill the payments promised by the Risk Corridor program. Of the four cases, only Moda Health had been given partial summary judgement that the government was still required to fulfill payments. All four cases were appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit which ruled in favor of the government in all three cases, in that the riders of the appropriation bills eliminated the responsibility of the government to fulfill the payments.
Supreme Court
All four insurers petitioned the Supreme Court to hear the case, which they certified in June 2019 for the 2019–2020 term, consolidating the three cases under Maine Community Health Options. Oral arguments were heard on December 10, 2019, during which observed felt that a bi-partisan majority group of the Justices appeared to side with the insurers, asking questions that compared the Risk Corridor program and its equivalency to a typical business contract. Only Justice Samuel Alito appeared to side with the government's stance.
The Court issued its decision on April 27, 2020. In the 8–1 decision, the majority ruled that the Risk Corridor program as defined in §1342 was an obligation for the government to pay the amount owed set by the predetermined calculation to the insurers, and that Congress improperly used appropriation riders to try to cancel this obligation. Further, the majority ruled that the insurers could bring a damages action in the Court of Federal Claims against the government under the Tucker Act. Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote the majority which was joined by all but Justice Alito. Sotomayor wrote that their decision reflected "a principle as old as the nation itself: The government should honor its obligations." Sotomayor affirmed that insurers "may seek to collect payment through a damages action in the Court of Federal Claims" via the Tucker Act. Justice Alito wrote in the sole dissenting opinion that the majority's decision was "a massive bailout for insurance companies that took a calculated risk and lost" and that "This money will have to be paid even though Congress has pointedly declined to appropriate money for that purpose."
 References 
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Maine v. Taylor" ==> """
Maine v. Taylor, 477 U.S. 131 (1986), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that there was an exception to the "virtually per se rule of invalidity"  of the dormant commerce clause.. The Supreme Court of the United States found that a Maine law prohibiting the importation of out-of-state bait fish was constitutional because Maine authorities couldn't be certain that imported fish would be free of "parasites and nonnative species" that might pose environmental harm to local ecology. Discriminatory laws may be upheld only if they serve "legitimate local purposes that could not adequately be served by available nondiscriminatory alternatives," wrote Justice Blackmun, author of the majority opinion. In City of Philadelphia v. New Jersey, the Court had previously ruled that New Jersey's ban of out-of-state solid waste was facially discriminatory to the state's residents in a national market and was therefore overturned..
See also
 Missouri, Kansas, & Texas Railway Company of Texas v. Clay May: 1904 case on invasive species  
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 477
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:1986 in the environment
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Environment of Maine
Category:Fishing in the United States
Category:Agriculture in Maine
Category:Invasive species in the United States
Category:United States environmental case law
"""

From "Mallory v. Norfolk Southern Railway Co." ==> """
Mallory v. Norfolk Southern Railway Co. (Docket 21–1168) is a pending United States Supreme Court case related to personal jurisdiction.
 Background 
Robert Mallory sued Norfolk Southern Railway in the Pennsylvania Court of Common Pleas under the Federal Employers Liability Act, asserting his work for the corporation exposed him to carcinogens. Mallory had worked for the railroad in Ohio and Virginia, and both he and the company resided in Virginia at the time as well. The sole basis for personal jurisdiction over the company in Pennsylvania was that it had implicitly consented by registering to do business in the commonwealth. In Pennoyer v. Neff, the Supreme Court delivered a major ruling on personal jurisdiction, which was later upended by the International Shoe Co. v. Washington decision. The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania sided with the railroad, ruling that consent-by-registration jurisdiction violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, applying recent precedents.
Mallory filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case on April 25, 2022.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States personal jurisdiction case law
"""

From "Malloy v. Hogan" ==> """
Malloy v. Hogan, 378 U.S. 1 (1964), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States deemed defendants' Fifth Amendment privilege not to be compelled to be witnesses against themselves was applicable within state courts as well as federal courts, overruling the decision in Twining v. New Jersey (1908). The majority decision holds that the Fourteenth Amendment allows the federal government to enforce the first eight amendments on state governments.
The test for voluntariness used in the Malloy decision was later abrogated by Arizona v. Fulminante (1991).
Background
Malloy, a petitioner, was sentenced to a year in jail for unlawful gambling. After three months, he was released from jail and put on probation for two years and was asked to testify to a state inquiry into gambling and other criminal activities in which Malloy was involved.
He refused to answer the questions to avoid incriminating himself. The court put him back in jail until he testified.
Question
Is a state witness's Fifth Amendment guarantee against self-incrimination protected by the Fourteenth Amendment?
Decision
In a 5–4 decision, Justice Brennan wrote the majority of the court in support of Malloy. The court noted that "the American judicial system is accusatorial, not inquisitorial" and the Fourteenth Amendment protects a witness against self-incrimination. Therefore, both state and federal officials must "establish guilt by evidence that is free and independent of a suspect's or witnesses' statements."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 378
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:Gambling in the United States
"""

From "Malloy v. South Carolina" ==> """
Malloy v. South Carolina, , was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that retroactively changing the execution method does not violate the Ex post facto clause.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court decisions on capital punishment
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1915 in United States case law
"""

From "Malony v. Adsit" ==> """
Malony v. Adsit, 175 U.S. 281 (1899), is a United States Supreme Court case involving a land lot in the city of Juneau, Alaska. In resolving the land dispute it was held that a bill of exceptions could only be considered if authenticated by the judge who sat on the trial.
 Background 
In 1891, O. H. Adsit had been ejected from a land lot he had taken possession of in 1881. In 1896, he filed suit in the district court to recover possession of the tract. Adsit claimed ownership on grounds of prior occupancy and actual possession at the time of the ejectment. The defendant, John Malony, filed a demurrer. He argued that the stated facts did not constitute a sufficient cause of action. The district court held in favor of Adsit, and Malony appealed to the Supreme Court.
Prior to his appeal, Malony had filed a bill of exceptions in the trial court. This bill allows for either party to state in writing any objections to the decision of the court on a point of law. The object of the bill is to put the question of law on record for the information of the court of error having cognizance of such cause. At the time of the filing, the judge who presided over the trial had been succeeded on the bench, and the new judge allowed and signed the bill.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice George Shiras Jr. delivered the opinion of the Court. Malony had filed a bill of exceptions in the trial court which had not been signed by the judge who sat on the trial. Shiras concluded that a bill of exceptions which had not been authenticated by the presiding judge could not be considered by the appellate court. Since Malony's demurrer had been overruled, and the bill of exceptions filed was void, the Court had to rule on the facts as presented by the lower court. The judgment of the district court was affirmed.
 Subsequent developments 
In 1900, Congress amended the law to allow, in certain cases, for the signature of another judge to suffice as authentication. Section 953 of the Revised Statutes, as amended by the Act of June 5, 1900, c. 717, 31 Stat. 270, 28 U.S.C. § 776 (28 USCA § 776).  Both Adsit and Delaney later became mayors of Juneau.
 External links 
Category:1899 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1899 in Alaska
Category:Juneau, Alaska
"""

From "Mancusi v. DeForte" ==> """
Mancusi v. DeForte, 392 U.S. 364 (1968), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court on privacy and the Fourth Amendment. It originated in the lower courts as United States ex rel. Frank DeForte, appellant v. Vincent R. Mancusi, Warden of Attica Prison, Attica, New York, appellee, a petition for a writ of habeas corpus by a prisoner who had exhausted all his state appeals. By a 6–3 margin the Court affirmed the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit's reversal of a district court denial of the petition.
The prisoner, Frank DeForte, was one of several labor union officials on Long Island who had been convicted of racketeering-related charges connected to a scheme in which they attempted to monopolize the jukebox market in the New York Metropolitan area. Early in the investigation, local prosecutors had issued a subpoena duces tecum for records from the union officials. When they refused to comply, the prosecutors went to the union offices themselves and seized the records from the officials' desks themselves. DeForte had been present and voiced his objections. The state later admitted the action was illegal but the documents, which formed the bulk of the case against the officials, were not suppressed at trial. Both the state's appellate court and the New York State Court of Appeals sustained the verdict, and all the defendants went to prison. There they began filing habeas petitions to the federal courts. The first, alleging that the court's orders to the jury to continue deliberating after they had done so for almost 24 hours and twice asked for a break constituted coercion, was denied.
DeForte's second, arguing as he had at trial and on his state appeal, that the search of his desk violated his reasonable expectation of privacy and thus his Fourth Amendment rights, was the one the Supreme Court heard. Justice John Marshall Harlan II wrote for the majority that under the Court's recent holding in Katz v. United States, DeForte had a reasonable expectation of privacy over the papers he kept at work even though they were not his personal property and he shared the office with his co-defendants. Nor did the subpoena authorize the prosecutor to act as he might with a search warrant, since the subpoena was not subject to independent judicial review before its execution. In dissent, Hugo Black, who had also dissented in Katz, said he could not find why the Court chose to depart from previous holdings that documents in the possession of one's employer enjoyed no Fourth Amendment protection, and was misreading the cases it relied on.
The case is seen as a seminal case in privacy law, since it extended it for the first time to a non-residential space. Lower courts have used it to guide them in distinguishing Fourth Amendment claims into the present day. The Supreme Court has, in later holdings, extended it to include public employees during administrative investigations and considered its application in the context of modern telecommunications.
Background of the case
For most of American history the Fourth Amendment's requirement that the people "be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures" was taken to apply strictly only to their physical bodies and real property they had an ownership interest in. Advances in communications technology at the start of the Information Age would challenge that. In the 1928 case Olmstead v. United States the Court upheld a bootlegging conviction that relied solely on transcripts of telephone conversations that had been obtained through warrantless wiretapping of the defendants' telephone lines, an action illegal under Washington state law.Olmstead v. United States,  The majority held that since the Prohibition agents had not actually trespassed on the bootleggers' property to place the wiretaps, the Fourth Amendment had not been violated, and that the language of the amendment in any event referred only to material things.Olmstead, 277 U.S. at 462–69, Taft, C.J. One of the dissenting justices, Louis Brandeis, wrote a frequently quoted opinion arguing that the Fourth Amendment protected not just those rights associated with property but "the right to be let alone", speculating that future technological advances might be yet more intrusive.Olmstead, 277 U.S. at 471, 478, Brandeis, J., dissenting.
In the ensuing decades the Olmstead majority's holding began to seem more and more inadequate. Telephone use became more widespread, and the public grew concerned over the idea that anyone, not just the government, could listen into private and intimate conversations which once took place only in person. Improvements in audio recording technology meant that such intrusions were possible without a human actually present. This led Congress to pass anti-wiretapping statutes which still allowed law enforcement to listen in with the telephone company's permission, since those companies were the lawful owners of the wires and switches where the wiretapping could take place.
The Warren Court was the first to recognize that the traditional application of the Fourth Amendment to property one owned had its shortcomings. In Jones v. United States, a drug prosecution where the defendant had challenged the use of evidence taken during a search of an apartment he had access to, the Court had extended the Fourth Amendment's protections to anyone "legitimately on the premises"., Frankfurter, J.That aspect of Jones would be overruled as too broad in Rakas v. Illinois, , which replaced it with a rule that defendants must show that they had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the place searched. A line of cases in the area of reproductive freedom had also entertainedPoe v. Ullman, . and eventually adoptedGriswold v. Connecticut, . the idea that personal privacy in that area was protected independently of the premises of a dwelling. In Mapp v. Ohio, the Court extended the exclusionary rule under which evidence obtained unconstitutionally cannot be used at trial, to state as well as federal prosecutions,Mapp v. Ohio,  greatly increasing the cases of alleged Fourth Amendment violations it was asked to review.
Underlying prosecution
In the late 1950s, allegations of racketeering activities by some labor unions led the U.S. Senate to create a Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management to investigate."New Senate Unit to Widen Inquiry In Labor Rackets." New York Times. January 24, 1957; "Teamster Study Is 3 Months Old." New York Times. May 26, 1957; "Senate Votes Inquiry on Labor Rackets." New York Times. January 31, 1957. It soon became known as the Labor Rackets Committee or the McClellan Committee, after its chair, John McClellan of Arkansas. Chief committee counsel Robert F. Kennedy was frequently criticized for apparent disregard of witnesses' constitutional rights. The committee and its large staff devoted much of their attention to the International Brotherhood of Teamsters (IBT), where Jimmy Hoffa had been allegedly working with organized crime figures to unseat Dave Beck as union head. It feared that if Hoffa led the Teamsters, the union would have enough power to disrupt the U.S. economy.
The committee had focused on some of the paper locals Hoffa had purportedly created to stack votes in his favor during the leadership election.Loftus, Joseph A. "Top Beck Aide Links Hoffa to 'Phony' Teamster Locals." New York Times. August 20, 1957. The officers of one, Local 266 in Manhattan, were nominally attempting to organize juke box and coin-operated game servicemen in the New York metropolitan area. District attorneys around New York began their own investigations into allegations that Local 266 was trying to intimidate employers into allowing the Teamsters to represent their employees instead of other unions they already had collective bargaining agreements with. McClellan called Local 266 "phony and gangster-ridden".
Criminal investigation and trial
In May 1959 prosecutors from the Nassau County district attorney's office, who had been investigating Local 266 for three months, subpoenaed its records. The local refused to produce them. The prosecutors then went to the headquarters themselves with the subpoena and took, according to a contemporary account, "records, membership lists, bank books and even pictures on the wall." The local's vice president, Frank DeForte, was present at the time and objected strongly to the seizure of the documents.
The Nassau County prosecutors took the documents back to Mineola and presented it to a grand jury. It indicted 15 defendants, including DeForte and the other Local 266 officials, on 16 separate counts of conspiracy, criminal coercion and extortion. The trial began the following February.
Over the next three and a half months the jury heard 125 witnesses and reviewed 100 written documents submitted as exhibits. In May, after closing arguments, it received its instructions and withdrew to deliberate over the fate of the 10 remaining defendants. After breaks for lunch and dinner, the jury continued deliberating until late in the evening. The foreman sent a note to the judge saying jurors were fatigued and asking for advice. The judge asked if they wanted coffee and sandwiches. The foreman responded that the jurors felt that they were unable to reach a decision on all the charges and could benefit from some rest.
All-night jury deliberations
The jurors were told to continue. They took their sandwiches and coffee four hours later, at 2:30 a.m. Almost two hours further into the night, the foreman sent another note to the judge saying the jurors were at an impasse and needed to get some sleep. The judge called them into the courtroom to tell them that it would not be until 6 a.m. at the earliest that any hotel rooms could be arranged and that any rest they got would thus be brief as they would have to return to the courtroom by 1 p.m. He asked if they would rather continue to deliberate, resolve their impasse and go home.DeGrandis, 335 F.2d at 174–75.
The foreman said the jury would prefer to get some sleep. The judge responded by telling them to go back to their rooms while overnight accommodations were sought. At 5 a.m. he summoned them back into the courtroom to tell them that most of the nearby hotels and motels were fully booked. The only possibility that might work was four rooms at a motel where cots could be set up. The foreman asked to retire and consider this. Again the judge reminded them it might be better to continue on.DeGrandis, 335 F.2d at 175.
After the jury withdrew, they again began to deliberate, requesting more exhibits, testimony and additional instructions. Following a breakfast break after 6 a.m., they returned to the courtroom and were instructed as they had requested. The jury again withdrew for three hours. As noon approached the judge sent a note asking if they were close to a verdict. The reply said they were. Following another helping of sandwiches and coffee, they returned with their verdict just before 2 p.m., 28 hours after deliberations began.
They returned a mixture of verdicts. For one defendant they could not agree; another was acquitted of all charges. The remaining defendants were convicted of at least some of the charges.DeGrandis, 335 F.2d at 176. At sentencing most received fines and suspended sentences. The judge was harsher with DeForte and the other Local 266 officials, president Joseph De Grandis and secretary Ernest Zundel. All three were sentenced to prison. De Grandis, with a prior felony conviction, got seven and a half to eight years. DeForte and Zundel, both of whom were first-time felons, got terms of three to five years.
Appeals to state courts
Lawyers for the three indicated they would appeal the conviction. They challenged the original seizure of the papers by the district attorney's office as unconstitutional, and argued the long deliberations without sleep had improperly coerced the jury and tainted the result. Two years later, in 1962, the Second Department of the New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division, upheld the conviction. A five-judge panel handed down a short decision addressing the Fourth Amendment claim.
"Such records were not the defendants' private, personal papers; they were the property of the union", the appellate division wrote. "Whatever possession the defendants had of these records was merely in their capacity as representatives of the union, and not in their private or individual capacity." It dismissed the other arguments as "untenable".
The defendants next took the case to the New York Court of Appeals, the highest court in the state. In a 4–3 decision, it affirmed the Appellate Division without comment late in 1962. The dissenters, including Chief Judge Charles S. Desmond, found the dispositive issue was not the seizure of the documents but the long deliberations. "[K]eeping the jury in deliberation for over 24 consecutive hours without any respite, and after they had advised the court of their fatigue on more than one occasion," they wrote, "constitutes coercion of the jury as matter of law." The next year the Supreme Court denied certiorari, ending the original case.Certiorari denied, .
Habeas petitions
The three began serving their prison sentences in the Hudson Valley. De Grandis went to Green Haven Correctional Facility in Dutchess County, while DeForte and Zundel were sent to Sing Sing in Westchester County. Both prisons were within the jurisdiction of the federal Southern District of New York, and the three filed petitions for writs of habeas corpus with that court, alleging they had been unlawfully detained due to the alleged constitutional violations involved in both the evidence collection and trial.
Jury coercion claim
Their first petition, arguing as the dissenters at the state Court of Appeals had that the marathon jury deliberation was coercive, was rejected. They appealed to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. In July 1964 a three-judge panel upheld the lower court. Leonard Moore recounted the history of the deliberations in detail. He criticized the trial judge for failing to anticipate that the jury might need to spend the night in a hotel, but found that the lack of sleep had not unduly affected its verdict.
"[T]he mere fact that a jury has been without sleep will not vitiate its verdict if its agreement was deliberate and voluntary and not due to fatigue and exhaustion," Moore wrote. He found it significant that the jury had, when finally offered the real possibility of sleep in the early morning, instead chosen to continue deliberations and made some progress. "It might well be that, figuratively speaking, the jury had gotten its second wind." He found further proof of the jury's clarity of mind in the range of verdicts it delivered, suggesting it had seriously considered the case and not just reached a verdict out of sleep-deprived desperation.
Fourth Amendment claim
DeForte was transferred further upstate, to Attica. In 1966 he filed another habeas petition against the warden, Vincent Mancusi, with the Western District of New York. This time he focused on the use of unlawfully obtained evidence at trial. He initially challenged both the seizure of the documents and the use of illegal wiretaps, but later withdrew the latter claim.
Two related arguments were raised against the document seizure. The first was procedural. Since Mapp had been decided prior to his conviction, DeForte argued, it should be applied to the trial and the evidence suppressed. More specifically to the case, he cited Jones. In an early interpretation of that case, Henzel v. United States, the Fifth Circuit had held that a defendant convicted of mail fraud had standing to challenge the use of corporate records against him.
Judge John Oliver Henderson denied the petition late in the year. He found Henzel to be a flawed precedent, writing that it "ignore[s] the personal nature of Fourth Amendment rights". Jones could not easily be applied to situations where corporate or organizational records were involved, even where, as in Henzel, the defendant had been the sole stockholder of the corporation from which the records were seized. "Envision, for example, a case in which the corporation's janitor was present during an illegal search and seizure but the corporation's vice-president was not."DeForte, 261 F.Supp. at 581–82.
He found a more recent interpretation of Jones, the Third Circuit case United States v. Grosso, to be controlling. There the court had upheld the use of records seized from a third party against a defendant convicted of involvement in a gambling ring. It held that the Supreme Court had only intended Jones to be applicable to a limited class of cases, and that those involving the seizure of corporate records did not fall into that category.
Since that was in accord with similar precedent in the Second Circuit, he found DeForte had no standing to challenge the use of the union records and denied the petition. Aware that there was recent authority to the contrary, he certified probable cause for an appeal.DeForte, 261 F.Supp. at 582. In June 1967 the Second Circuit heard the case again.
Success on appeal
A few weeks later DeForte prevailed. Judge Irving Kaufman wrote for another panel that reversed Henderson and ordered the writ issued. "The quest for a clear solution to the perplexing query as to who may challenge an allegedly unlawful search and seizure has been confounded by thorny problems" he began. After Mapp, state courts had to consider that question too, with only a few potentially conflicting Supreme Court decisions to guide them. Kaufman called Jones the first serious attempt to develop standards for making these decisions.DeForte, 379 F.2d at 899–901.
Jones had presented a defendant with a quandary: if he had, as case law up to that point required, claimed a possessory interest in the seized narcotics in order to suppress them, he would also have been incriminating himself, in violation of his rights under the Fifth Amendment. The Court resolved the issue by holding that in cases where mere possession of the property in question was the offense alleged, defendants need not have to admit to such ownership to challenge the admissibility of such evidence, and that they only had to demonstrate they were legitimately on the premises where the search occurred.Jones, 362 U.S. at 263, Frankfurter, J., cited at DeForte, 379 F.2d 901–02.As noted above, the "legitimately on premises" rule was overruled in Rakas, in favor of a doctrine that defendants must show they a reasonable expectation of privacy in the area searched. The other half of Jones, the "automatic standing" rule for defendants charged with possession offenses, was formally overruled in United States v. Salvucci , where the majority held that the principle established by Simmons v. United States, , that testimony by defendants at an evidentiary hearing challenging the admissibility of evidence under the Fourth Amendment could not be used against them at trial, made the Jones rule unnecessary.
But while Jones had said what was not necessary to challenge a search, it did not say what was. That question would have to be established on a case-by-case basis. Turning to the specifics of the case, Kaufman took note of established precedent that the search of an office could be held unconstitutional. The state had argued that despite DeForte's presence in the office he lacked standing since the search was directed at Local 266, not him personally, and he did not have a separate office. But Kaufman noted that as an officer of the local, DeForte would necessarily have been targeted personally by the investigation, and in fact the local itself had not been indicted.DeForte, 379 F.2d at 902–03.
"[DeForte's] office also served as his place of business and in which he spent a considerable part of each day," Kaufman observed. "It appears to us to have been a clear invasion of privacy for the state's officials to have descended upon what was the union's office de jure, but DeForte's office de facto, and without a warrant and over his vigorous protests to have seized books and records, a substantial portion of which he had prepared and which were in his custody." Therefore, he had standing to challenge that search, and thus the conviction had to be set aside.
The state had cited other cases decided by the circuit in support of its position, but Kaufman found most of them irrelevant since they preceded Jones. Three had been decided afterwards, but they were easily distinguished.The three were United States v. Fago, 319 F.2d 791 (2d Cir. 1963); United States v. Bozza, 365 F.2d 206 (2d Cir. 1966) and  In Bozza the evidence at issue was a stolen gun seized from the home of another member of the burglary ring which none of the appellants had been charged with possessing, nor had they asserted a possessory interest or been present at the execution of the search. In Fago, the corporate records had been lawfully obtained by a county prosecutor looking into alleged corruption and then turned over to the Internal Revenue Service when they were found to contain evidence of tax evasion. And in Granello the defendants never asserted that they had owned or prepared the documents used as evidence of tax evasion. The judge agreed with the position DeForte had argued before Henderson, that Henzel was the most relevant case of the available precedents.DeForte, 379 F.2d at 904–05.
Before the Court
The prosecutors appealed to the Supreme Court, which this time granted certiorari. It put the case on the docket for its 1967 term. At the end of that year, before it heard oral arguments in what was now Mancusi v. DeForte, the Court handed down Katz v. United States, which changed some of the law under which DeForte's case had progressed.
Katz arose from circumstances similar to Olmstead, four decades earlier. The defendant, a Southern California bookmaker, had been convicted of gambling charges based largely on recordings of his end of conversations made by a bug on the outside of the telephone booth he had conducted his business from. At trial he had unsuccessfully tried to suppress that evidence; the Ninth Circuit held that it was lawfully obtained since, as in Olmstead, there had been no physical entry into the phone booth.Katz v. United States, .
Justice Potter Stewart wrote for a seven-justice majority that overturned Olmstead and recognized the underlying principle of Brandeis's dissent in that case. "The Fourth Amendment protects people, not places ... the reach of that Amendment cannot turn upon the presence or absence of a physical intrusion into any given enclosure."Katz, 389 U.S. at 351, 353, Stewart, J. John Marshall Harlan II's concurring opinion used the phrase "a reasonable expectation of privacy" that came to be the new understanding of what the Fourth Amendment protected.Katz, 389 U.S. at 360, Harlan, J., concurring
Decision
The Court announced its decision in June 1968, near the end of the term. By a 6–3 vote, they affirmed the appeals court. Justice John Marshall Harlan II wrote for the majority that the union records had been improperly seized. Hugo Black, the only dissenter in Katz, wrote for himself and Potter Stewart that the majority had retreated from previous holdings for no clear constitutional reason. Byron White wrote a single-sentence dissent.
Majority
Harlan reiterated that the Court's opinion was based purely on the Fourth Amendment claim DeForte had made, the only one before them. There was no need to decide a Fifth Amendment question, nor whether Fourth Amendment rights were primarily personal, or whether he could have asserted them on the union's behalf as well as his own. The Court considered only whether DeForte had standing to challenge the search, and if so, whether it had been illegal.Mancusi v. DeForte, , 366–67, (1968), Harlan, J.
To establish that DeForte had standing, Harlan turned to previous cases. While the Fourth Amendment referred only to the right to be secure in houses, earlier Court decisions had extended that to include businesses as well. Other decisions, even before Jones, had held that that protection applied to even those individuals who did not hold legal title to a property. Finally, there was Katz, which "also makes it clear that capacity to claim the protection of the Amendment depends not upon a property right in the invaded place, but upon whether the area was one in which there was a reasonable expectation of freedom from governmental intrusion", Harlan wrote, echoing his concurrence in that case. "The crucial issue, therefore, is whether, in light of all the circumstances, DeForte's office was such a place."Mancusi, 392 U.S. at 367–68.
While the office had been a large room DeForte shared with his fellow officers, with none of it reserved for his personal use, the record did not show where the individual documents had been taken from. DeForte had been present in the office when the subpoena was served, and it was a stipulated fact of the case that he spent much of his time working from that office. Therefore, Harlan concluded, he had custody of the papers at the time they were seized, and could object to the search and seizure. The Court had held in many cases that the search of an office could be challenged as well as a house, and Jones had eliminated the possessory-interest requirement.Mancusi, 392 U.S. at 368–69.
If DeForte had had a private office, where he was unlikely to be disturbed at his desk except by those he had allowed in, Harlan continued, he would indisputably have had the standing to challenge the search. "It seems to us that the situation was not fundamentally changed because DeForte shared an office with other union officers," he said. "DeForte still could reasonably have expected that only those persons and their personal or business guests would enter the office, and that records would not be touched except with their permission or that of union higher-ups." It was irrelevant that other union officials might have consented to the search, since they had not been asked. He considered the situation analogous enough to that in Jones to require the same holding.Mancusi, 392 U.S. at 369–70.
With the standing question answered, Harlan turned to the reasonableness of the search. As a matter of state law, a subpoena duces tecum did not allow the prosecutors to seize the documents. The state had already admitted this. Nor was the subpoena constitutionally equivalent to a search warrant, under which the seizure would have been allowed, since it was issued by the district attorney's office and not subject to independent judicial review as the Fourth Amendment required. Harlan took note of the similarity between DeForte's case and Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States,Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States, . the case which had established the "fruit of the poisonous tree" rule excluding otherwise lawfully obtained evidence from use at trial if it was derived from unlawfully obtained evidence. In both cases, prosecutors in New York had responded to an organization's refusal to comply with a subpoena for documents by going to the premises and taking the documents themselves, an action that outraged Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes.Silverthorne, 251 U.S. at 391, Holmes, J. "[T]here can be no doubt that, under this Court's past decisions, the search of DeForte's office was 'unreasonable' within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment."Mancusi, 392 U.S. at 370–72.
Dissents
"In creating this new rule against the use of papers and documents which speak truthfully for themselves, the Court is putting up new hurdles and barriers bound to save many criminals from conviction," Black began. "I should not object to this new rule, however, if I thought it was or could be justified by the Fourth or any other constitutional amendment. But I do not think it can."Mancusi, 394 U.S. at 373, Black, J., dissenting.
Black did not see how any of the cases cited by Harlan touched on the standing question. Silverthorne did not consider the issue since the documents were accepted as belonging to the corporation or one of its officers, and the "legitimately on premises" rule from Jones was created to resolve the dilemma it posed with the Fifth Amendment. "I must point out that this sweeping dictum is taken somewhat out of context, and cannot possibly have the literal meaning attributed to it," commented Black. "It would be quite a hyperbole, I think, to say that the Jones opinion suggested that just any person who happened to be in a house against which an unreasonable search was perpetrated could ask to have all evidence obtained by that search excluded from evidence against him." He alluded to Henderson's hypothetical question about the janitor in his opinion.Mancusi, 394 U.S. at 374–75.
DeForte had indeed been legitimately on the premises, Black wrote, and had the majority left it at that its holding would have been sound despite his problems with Jones. But instead, by continuing, it had further highlighted the problems he had had with that decision. "This reasoning in terms of 'expectations,' however, requires conferring standing without regard to whether the agent happens to be present at the time of the search or not, a rather remarkable consequence of the statement in Jones". He speculated that the Court was planning to eventually "eliminate entirely the requirement for standing to raise a search and seizure question and to permit a search to be challenged at any time, at any place, and under all circumstances, regardless of the defendant's relationship to the person or place searched or to the things seized." Such a holding, he cautioned, would elevate the Fourth Amendment to an importance far above any other constitutional provisions.Mancusi, 394 U.S. at 375–76.
The facts of the case, to Black, argued against the majority holding. In addition to the open layout of the office, the search was directed not at DeForte but at the local. "The police had been investigating a large conspiracy perpetrated through the union, and, at the time, were primarily interested in getting more information about the operation of the union." Since the union had raised no objections to the subpoena, it had a duty to turn over the records demanded.Mancusi, 394 U.S. at 377.
Under the holding, the papers could have been returned to Local 266, and then the state could have found another, more constitutional way to obtain them and then retry the defendants. "A rule which encourages such circumvention as that is hardly the kind of principle to which this great Court should give birth." Black concluded. "I disclaim any responsibility whatever for the new rule."
White believed the majority had made too great a grant of privacy. "Although the Fourth Amendment perhaps protects the individual's private desk in a union office shared with other officers or employees," he wrote. "I dissent from the Court's extension of the protected area to the office door."Mancusi, 394 U.S. at 377, White, J., dissenting.
Disposition
De Grandis had also been denied his habeas petition, and appealed. His case was argued before the Second Circuit while DeForte's was pending before the Supreme Court, and the appeals court delayed its decision in his case until the Supreme Court made its decision. When it did, it reversed the district court since the circumstances of the case were identical. In 1970 the New York Court of Appeals granted both defendants' requests for a new trial.People v. De Grandis, 27 NY 2d 674 (NY Ct. of Appeals, 1970).
Subsequent jurisprudence
Mancusi would be the only time the Court granted a habeas petition through the application of the exclusionary rule.Stone v. Powell, ,481 note 15, (1976), Powell, J.  It upheld the general permissibility of such claims the following term in Kaufman v. United States,. But seven years after that, in 1976, Stone v. Powell held that state prisoners who had unsuccessfully argued the issue in state appeals would not be allowed to reargue it in federal habeas petitions beyond claims that the matter had not been fully and fairly adjudicated at the lower-court level.
The Court at first left most of the details of determining where in the workplace privacy existed to lower courts. Many were, as Mancusi had been, prosecutions where documents taken from offices were the primary evidence against employees, but the lower courts considered cases from other work environments as well. Two tests gradually emerged for determining an expectation of privacy in the workplace: the nexus test, specific to business premises and often preferred when the seized materials were work-related, and the totality test, which was best dispositive to claims of personal property at work.
Early lower-court interpretations
Since Mancusi had not gone into great detail about how DeForte had a reasonable expectation of privacy in a shared workspace, cases in lower courts resolved those issues. Personal, individual and secured spaces, such as a police officer's locker or school guidance counselor's desk drawers, were held during the 1970s to be protected by the Fourth Amendment.Both of those cases involved both public workplaces and a search for personal items unrelated to work, issues the Supreme Court had not yet considered. United States v. Speights, the case involving the police locker, also held that actual practice was more important than a stated policy in determining whether a privacy interest existed. It was more difficult to resolve cases where those factors were not present.See, generally, Morris, Michele; , 23 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 191, 227 (2001).
In 1975 the Fifth Circuit decided United States v. Britt, a case used extensively by later courts as a counterbalance to Mancusi. There, the court upheld the mail-fraud conviction of corporate officers based on documents seized from property the corporation rented for storage purposes at a location separate from its offices. Judge Thomas Gibbs Gee distinguished the case from both Mancusi and Henzel v. United States. "In both of these cases there was a demonstrated nexus between the area searched and the work space of the defendant. That nexus is absent here." A 1983 Kansas Supreme Court decision used the same logic in holding that a murder defendant had no standing to challenge a search of vacant upper stories at the warehouse where he worked which uncovered incriminating shell casings, since he did not routinely work there.State v. Worrell, 223 Kan. 968, 666 P.2d 703 (Kansas Supreme Court, 1983).
Later holdings narrowed the nexus test so that no one factor became absolutely dispositive. In 1979 the Fourth Circuit held in United States v. Torch that the mere fact of a defendant's occasional work-related use of a warehouse searched did not establish a privacy expectation. United States v. Judd, decided by the Fifth Circuit in 1989, upheld a district court ruling that a corporate official's role in preparing seized records did not establish a privacy interest if those documents were kept in a separate office.United States v. Judd, 687 F.Supp. 1052, (N.D.Miss., 1988 aff'd, 889 F.2d 1410 (5th Cir., 1988). The Second Circuit narrowed the nexus further when it upheld a conviction of a bank official in 1990. The defendant's co-ownership of the bank and the presence of the incriminating documents did not give rise to a reasonable privacy expectation, the court held, since they were kept in another employee's office and they would have been subject to routine review by federal regulators.Compare Chuang with United States v. Leary, 846 F.2d 592 (10th Cir. 1988), where a company's voluntary open-door policy was held to not defeat its officials' expectation of privacy in the workplace even though regulators visited frequently.
The other test emerged from a dictum in Lewis Powell's concurring opinion in the 1978 Supreme Court case, Rakas v. Illinois, that courts considering the reasonableness of a privacy expectation should consider "all the surrounding circumstances."Rakas v. Illinois, , 152 (1978), Powell, J., concurring. It was first applied by the First Circuit in a 1980 case, United States v. Brien. It affirmed a district court's upholding of a search in a securities fraud case that framed the issue with six questions: "(1) his [each defendant's] position in the firm; (2) did he have any ownership interest; (3) his responsibilities; (4) his power to exclude others from the area, if any; (5) did he work in the area; (6) was he present at the time of the search?" A later Ninth Circuit case referred to "the totality of the circumstances" and thus gave it its name.In that case the court found a more reasonable expectation of privacy against warrantless video surveillance of a federal agent in his office than he would have had against an actual search of the office.
In another First Circuit case, United States v. Mancini, the totality test's consideration of other factors resulted in a different outcome than the nexus test. Federal agents searching for evidence of mayoral corruption had found a box in the attic archive at city hall, clearly marked as belonging to the mayor, with an appointment calendar that became key to the conviction. Since the box was not only marked as the mayor's but stored in a disused area of the building, segregated from other items in that area, and the mayor allowed only his chief of staff to peruse the records, the court found a reasonable expectation of privacy even though he never worked in the attic.
Mancini also turned on the defendant's authority to exclude others from the searched space, a question which took on more importance in later cases. In a case with similar circumstances to Mancusi, the Ninth Circuit decided the case differently due to a negative answer to that question. A sweep of an Oregon produce factory by Immigration and Naturalization Service agents looking for illegal aliens was upheld since those detained not only lacked a possessory interest in the property and worked in a large shared space without any space set aside for their individual use, they could not keep anyone out of the building.
O'Connor v. Ortega
It would be almost two decades before the Court heard another case involving privacy rights at work. Like Mancusi, the search at issue in O'Connor v. Ortega involved documents taken from a desk. It presented some questions of first impression for the Supreme Court. Unlike the earlier case, the workplace in question was public rather than private, and the search was undertaken not by an external law enforcement agency but by the employee's own supervisors investigating a possible violation of workplace policy. It was further distinguished by some of the seized material being personal documents unrelated to work.
The case began in 1981 when administrators at a state-run psychiatric hospital in California, suspected that Magno Ortega, the head of the hospital's residency program, had coerced money from residents to pay for an office computer. While he was on vacation that summer, they placed him on administrative leave and had security remove items from his desk, ostensibly to sort Ortega's personal property from state property, and change the lock on his door. Some of the personal documents were used to impeach a witness who testified on his behalf at a later hearing before the state personnel board where he unsuccessfully appealed his subsequent dismissal.
He filed a Section 1983 civil suit against the administrators and the state in district court. The defendants were granted summary judgement, on the grounds that the intrusion into Ortega's office was for inventory purposes and not a search. On appeal, the Ninth Circuit found differently and reversed.
Following a certiorari grant, the Supreme Court heard the case and divided 5–4, with Sandra Day O'Connor writing for four justices in the plurality, Antonin Scalia concurring and Harry Blackmun writing the dissenting opinion.O'Connor v. Ortega, . All justices agreed that public employees had the same Fourth Amendment privacy expectations as their private-sector counterparts; they differed on whether the record established that those had been violated in Ortega's case.Three justices remained from the Mancusi Court; none of whom had played a substantial role in that opinion. Byron White joined Sandra Day O'Connor's plurality; William Brennan and Thurgood Marshall joined Harry Blackmun's dissent. On remand, it took the doctor 12 more years, two trials and two more appellate holdings to win a favorable verdict.
While its primary question was whether public employees enjoyed privacy protections, and the holding allowed public employees' supervisors needed merely reasonable suspicion to commence a valid investigatory search,Work-related searches, such as the retrieval of a document or tool from a desk or locker, were held constitutional. O'Connor added some clarifications to Mancusi that lower court justices found useful. Justice O'Connor defined the workplace as "includ[ing] those areas and items that are related to work and are generally within the employer's control."O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 715, O'Connor, J.
But there was, as there had not been in Mancusi, a distinction between personal and work-related items in the workplace, affecting the privacy expectations in context. "[A] photograph placed in a desk or a letter posted on an employee bulletin board," for instance, were personal items that nevertheless became part of the workplace context by virtue of that placement. But packed luggage for a weekend trip or a handbag did not come under a reduced privacy expectation by being brought to work, O'Connor concluded.O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 716.
Considerations of privacy must also take into account "operational realities" of the workplace in question, O'Connor said. "An office is seldom a private enclave free from entry by supervisors, other employees, and business and personal invitees. Instead, in many cases offices are continually entered by fellow employees and other visitors during the workday for conferences, consultations, and other work-related visits." As a result of their openness to the public, in fact, some workplaces might not allow any reasonable expectation of privacy.O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 717.
What, to O'Connor, distinguished public from private workplaces under the Fourth Amendment was the government's interest as an employer in running an efficient operation. She quoted the Court's holding in Connick v. Myers, a case involving the First Amendment rights of public employees, that "government offices could not function if every employment decision became a constitutional matter".Connick v. Myers, , 143, (1983), White, J. Cited at O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 722. Therefore, work-related searches were incident to the primary business of government and thus needed no justification; searches to investigate non-criminal employee misconduct need only meet the reasonable suspicion standardO'Connor, 480 U.S. at 724–25. outlined in Terry v. Ohio.Terry v. Ohio, .
Scalia, in his concurrence, attacked O'Connor for articulating an unclear standard and leaving its nuances to future courts. The difference between a public and private employer was dispositive only to the question of whether a search was reasonable, not whether the Fourth Amendment was violated. He would have held that any search reasonable for a private employer would be reasonable for a public employer as well.O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 729 et seq., Scalia, J., concurring. Blackmun's dissent found the search of Ortega's office to have been clearly investigatory and thus the Ninth Circuit should have been affirmed.O'Connor, 480 U.S. at 731 et seq., Blackmun, J., dissenting.
After O'Connor
O'Connor's clarifications preceded a period in which the boundaries between workspace and personal space became less distinct and in some cases began to overlap. In large part this was due to the increasing use of personal computers and the rise of the Internet. Two cases in the decades after O'Connor particularly reflected this.
The nexus and totality tests collided in a 1998 Tenth Circuit decision, United States v. Anderson. As part of an FBI child pornography sting operation, the defendant, James Anderson, had been sent what he had been led to believe were videotapes of children with sexually explicit content (they were actually blank). Agents had him under surveillance as he picked up the package, expecting him to take it to his home, for which they already had a search warrant. Instead, he took it to the offices of the company where he was an executive, which were otherwise deserted as it was the Saturday of a Fourth of July weekend.United States v. Anderson, 154 F.3d 1225, 1227–28 (10th Cir., 1998)
Concerned that he would realize law enforcement was involved when he discovered the tapes were blank and destroy other evidence that might be present, the agents decided exigent circumstances existed and forced their way into the building. They found Anderson in an unused room where he had drawn the blinds, placed a towel over them and closed the door, preparing to watch the videotape. After confessing and signing a statement that he was aware of his Miranda rights, he consented to a search of his office that produced other child pornography.
At his trial, the district court suppressed the confession and all evidence seized after the FBI entered the building. On appeal, the three judges divided. Mary Beck Briscoe wrote for herself and John Carbone Porfilio that the nexus test, under which, as Paul Kelly wrote in dissent, Anderson had no expectation of privacy, was not sufficient to decide this case. "[W]e do not believe the fact that a defendant does or does not work in a particular area should categorically control his ability to challenge a warrantless search of that area" she wrote. "Instead, the better approach is to examine all of the circumstances of the working environment and the relevant search", as she read the Supreme Court to have done in Mancusi.Anderson, 154 F.3d at 1230.
Briscoe considered it more relevant that Anderson had taken steps to maintain his privacy within the room and that the items were under his immediate control and of a personal, non-business-related nature.Anderson, 154 F.3d at 1231–33.The search was also held unconstitutional because the government had not met its burden of proof that exigent circumstances existed. Kelly argued in dissent that the majority's logic would have extended Anderson's expectation of privacy to the entire office suite he had chosen to isolate himself and watch his videos.Anderson, 154 F.3d at 1234–36. In footnotes, he and Briscoe disagreed about the relevance of Mancini.Anderson, 154 F.3d at 1230, note 2 and 1235, note 1.
Anderson had been tracked from his presence online, and the increasing use of the Internet at work, sometimes for personal matters, near the end of the century posed new issues. The Fourth Circuit found the remote search of an employee computer valid in another child-porn case, United States v. Simons, since the Internet use policy defeated any expectation of privacy. A more complicated case concerning privacy expectations around personal Internet use at work confronted the Ninth Circuit in United States v. Ziegler.
The case began in 2001 with a tip to the FBI from a Montana Internet Service Provider that someone at Frontline Processing, an online-payments processing company, had accessed child-porn websites from a company computer. An FBI agent, James Kennedy, followed up by contacting officials at the company's information technology (IT) department who verified the report, traced it to Brian Ziegler, the company's director of operations, and found further incriminating evidence in his computer's cache. A copy of the hard drive's contents was made, although it was disputed whether the IT employees did this on their own initiative or at Kennedy's behest. In order to do this two IT employees entered Ziegler's locked office after work hours. The copies made, and the original computer, were turned over to the FBI later.
At trial in 2004 Ziegler moved to have the evidence from his hard drive suppressed, arguing that the IT employees, despite their ability and duty to monitor other employees' Internet usage, could not consent and had not consented to do a physical search and seizure in his office on the government's behalf. It was denied, and he later pleaded guilty to a lesser charge as part of a plea bargain in 2005. He then appealed. Judge Diarmuid O'Scannlain upheld the district court, writing that due to both the monitoring and social norms regarding privacy expectations on an employer-owned computer, Ziegler had no privacy interest in the computer and thus could not contest the intrusion into his office based on information obtained remotely from that computer.Ziegler, 456 F.3d at 1139–40.
Ziegler petitioned for an en banc rehearing. In response, the original panel withdrew its first opinion and issued a newer, longer one, acknowledging as the first had not the "seminal" importance of Mancusi in establishing an employee's expectation of privacy at work. This time it held that Ziegler did indeed have a privacy interest in his office, but left undisturbed its holding that Frontline's consent overrode that.
Another circuit judge moved sua sponte for en banc. The motion failed to attract enough votes, but 11 judges dissented, arguing that office politics at Frontline and statements in the record made it unclear whether there was or could have been consent, and that even if there was that was not enough to overcome Ziegler's privacy rights. In a separate opinion, one dissenter, Chief Judge Alex Kozinski, accused the original panel of "plucking consent out of its judicial top hat ... Appellate review is not a magic wand and we undermine public confidence in the judicial process when we make it look like it is." The original panel in turn accused the dissenters of "post hoc revisionism" that adequately justified their original positions.United States v. Ziegler, 05-30177, (9th Cir., 2007)
Ontario v. Quon
In 2010, more than two decades after O'Connor, the Court decided to take another workplace-privacy case, again from an administrative investigation in a public-employment context and . Reflecting cases like Ziegler that had increasingly appeared on appellate dockets, Ontario v. Quon also involved modern personal telecommunications technology. It had worked its way up to the justices from the Ninth Circuit as Quon v. Arch Wireless, a case brought by police officers disciplined for sexually explicit text messages exchanged on department-issued pagers, and the recipients of those text messages.
A lieutenant had told the defendant officers, members of the department SWAT team who were routinely exceeding the monthly character limits on the pagers, that despite a department policy allowing only light personal use of the pagers he would not audit the pager messages as long as they reimbursed the department for its overage fees. The lieutenant and chief later wondered if the character limit was artificially low, and ordered an audit and transcripts from the pager provider, limited to those sent during work, which disclosed that most messages had been personal and sometimes explicit.
The Ninth Circuit had held the audit an unconstitutional search on the grounds that there were less intrusive ways of obtaining the same information. After a petition for en banc was denied, the Court granted certiorari. Since it was the first telecommunications privacy case to reach the nation's highest court, its possible holding was eagerly anticipated.
Ultimately, the Court set no new precedent, unanimously reversing the Ninth Circuit on the grounds that it had never held the "least intrusive means" test for searches valid. Anthony Kennedy wrote a lengthy majority opinion that concluded the audit of the pagers was reasonably work-related, and declined to establish any new standards for Internet privacy since the technology was still "in flux" and social expectations around it were insufficiently settled. He specifically cited the lag between Olmstead and Katz as an example to avoid repeating.
This reluctance was criticized by Antonin Scalia in a concurrence as "a feeble excuse for dereliction of duty". Editorials in major newspapers praised this restraint, but later The New York Times ran an article calling the decision "almost aggressively unhelpful" to lower courts. Eleventh Circuit judge Frank Hull similarly said Quon had "a marked lack of clarity" when withdrawing and reissuing a previous panel decision controversially holding that there was no reasonable expectation of privacy over the contents of e-mail.
Analysis and commentary
Michele Morris, an Akron, Ohio, employment lawyer, believes both the nexus and totality tests have proved deficient at protecting privacy at work, and in so doing undermined what the Court sought to accomplish in Mancusi. Instead, she argues, courts should look to the relationships among employees, and between employees and supervisors. "The nexus test ignores the realities of workplace delegation of duties", she writes.
The totality test also, in her opinion, fails because while it considers, as the nexus test does not, an employee's efforts to exclude others from a space instead of their ability or authority to do so. "An employee's right to exclude is a direct result of the employment relationship, whereas efforts to exclude may not be." If this mistaken emphasis continued, she fears, private-sector workers will be under the same reasonable-suspicion standard the Court put public employees under in O'Connor.Morris, 227–28.
Courts have already, Morris observes, given employment relationships some weight in assessing the validity of a search.She points (222 note 207) to two cases. In United States v. Reeves, 730 F.2d 1189 (8th Cir., 1984), the Eighth Circuit held that a deputy sheriff's "common authority" with the defendant sheriff over the sheriff's office validated the search, and  in United States v. Buettner-Janusch, 646 F.2d 759 (2nd Cir. 1981), the Second Circuit held that the defendant professor's graduate assistants had not only the same common authority but permission to use any aspect of the laboratory equipment gave them the right to consent to a search of it. "[T]he courts have
erroneously focused on the Supreme Court's Mancusi decision as standing for the principal that an office is a place in which privacy expectations exist, even where it is shared by others," Morris writes. "By focusing on that aspect of Mancusi, the courts have failed to apply its more significant recognition that the employment relationship creates a privacy expectation in relation to outsiders, not fellow employees who were entitled to access or persons given access by those employees."
The decreasing distinctions between work and home make the problems created by the two existing tests even more compelling. In 1998's Minnesota v. Carter, the Supreme Court had restored the convictions of two men originally observed bagging cocaine through a third man's apartment window, holding that they did not have the privacy expectation usually accorded guests since the sole purpose of their visit was to prepare the cocaine for sale, making their presence on the property purely commercial in nature.Minnesota v. Carter, . "It is not too far a reach to extend this rationale to deny Fourth Amendment rights to business guests in one's home for a dinner party or to guests at a Tupperware party". What privacy expectations, Morris wondered, would courts apply to people who work out of their homes? And could that result in a general lowering of privacy expectations in the home, where it has traditionally been most protected?Morris, 231.
Morris proposes that, in analyzing a privacy claim, courts first define what, in the specific instance, constituted the workplace, and then within that space delineating the public and private areas. After doing so, it could consider to which employees the item or items seized are related to through employment. "An employee who delegates work to another would no longer lose Fourth Amendment protection simply by failing to perform the task herself", she writes. "Likewise,
the person to whom the work is delegated is protected regardless of whether she has the authority to retain the materials in her possession." Where a personal item was concerned, the employee would have to demonstrate privacy efforts independent of the employer, such as efforts to exclude coworkers from the item.Morris, 232.
Peter Winn, a federal prosecutor in Washington and lecturer at the University of Washington School of Law, takes note in a history of the formulation of the reasonable expectation of privacy standard established in Katz that Mancusi was its first application to a later case.Winn, Peter; , 40 McGeorge L. Rev. 1, 7 note 31 (2009). He finds it interesting that while Harlan first articulated it in his Katz concurrency as a two-part test with a subjective and objective component, in Mancusi he, like other judges after him, refers only to the objective aspect. "Perhaps [in Katz], Justice Harlan felt the subjective component of the test was still needed to mirror the old trespass element that an intrusion lack
permission," he speculated.40 McGeorge L. Rev. at 12.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 392
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Warren Court
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:International Brotherhood of Teamsters
Category:Nassau County, New York
Category:Jukeboxes
Category:United States habeas corpus case law
"""

From "Mandoli v. Acheson" ==> """
Mandoli v. Acheson, 344 U.S. 133 (1952), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a person born in the United States, with both U.S. citizenship and a foreign citizenship obtained via an alien parent or parents, does not need to live in or return to the United States as an adult in order to retain U.S. citizenship.
The citizenship status of Joseph Mandoli, a man born in the U.S. to Italian parents who took him as a baby to live with them in Italy, was challenged on several grounds, including primarily the fact that he had remained in Italy as an adult and had not returned to live in the United States upon reaching adulthood. Lower courts had rejected Mandoli's claim to U.S. citizenship on the basis of a 1939 Supreme Court case, Perkins v. Elg, which had suggested that a person born in the U.S. with both U.S. and foreign citizenship needed to affirmatively choose U.S. citizenship (by returning to and establishing residence in the U.S.) as an adult, but the Court rejected this interpretation in the Mandoli case.
Mandoli's claim to U.S. citizenship was originally also challenged because he had served in the Italian armed forces and sworn an oath of allegiance to the Italian king while living in Italy. However, the government dropped these reasons on appeal, apparently because it was considered likely that Mandoli had not performed these actions voluntarily, as the conscription laws under the Benito Mussolini government in Italy would have made it effectively impossible for Mandoli to avoid military service.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Citizenship Clause case law
Category:1952 in United States case law
Category:Italy–United States relations
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "Manhattan Community Access Corp. v. Halleck" ==> """
Manhattan Community Access Corp. v. Halleck, No. 17-1702, 587 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case related to limitations on First Amendment-based free speech placed by private operators. The Court held that a public access station was not considered a state actor for purposes of evaluating free speech issues in a 5–4 ruling split along ideological lines. Prior to the Court's decision, analysts believed that the case had the potential to determine whether limitations on free speech on social media violate First Amendment rights. However, the Court's narrow holding avoided that issue. 
 Background 
 Alleged violation 
In the past, the Supreme Court has not directly ruled that public access televisions systems, which operate on leased channels provided by the government, are not considered public forums, as established by a split ruling in Denver Area Educ. Telecomms. Consortium, Inc. v. F.C.C..  In the 1970s, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) mandated that cable operators leave some channels for public use. However, in 1979, the Supreme Court case Federal Communications Commission v. Midwest Video Corporation ruled that the FCC did not have the authority to institute this order. In 1984, President Reagan signed the Cable Communications Policy allowing state governments to require cable operators to devote some channels for public access. Such television systems have generally been upheld as being private operators rather than a state actor, giving them the ability to limit free speech.
Manhattan Neighborhood Network (MNN) is a public access television network run by Manhattan Community Access Corp. that serves New York City. In 2012, DeeDee Halleck and Jesus Papoleto Melendez, employees of MNN at the time, went to a MNN Board meeting but were told the meeting was private. Halleck and Melendez then produced a program entitled The 1% Visit El Barrio that was critical of MNN. While their program was only aired once, further airings were cancelled and the two were denied further access to MNN's premises and channel.
 Procedural history 
Halleck and Melendez filed suit against MNN and the city, claiming that MNN was a public forum which had violated their First Amendment rights to free speech. In December 2016, The United States District Court for the Southern District of New York dismissed the case, following arguments from the city and MNN, and following the Supreme Court's own decision from Denver Area that declined to settle whether public access systems were considered state actors. The District Court found, "In short, there is no clear precedent governing whether public access channels are public fora. The issue is certainly a close call."
On appeal to the Second Circuit, two of the three judges ruled for Halleck and Melendez, citing Justice Anthony Kennedy's dissent in Denver Area which suggested that public access systems, which were mandated by the government, should be treated as state actors, and therefore could not regulate free speech. The Second Circuit did not find the City to be at fault.
MNN petitioned for writ of certiorari in June 2018, which the Supreme Court granted in October 2018. It was the first case accepted by the Court following the induction of Justice Brett Kavanaugh, replacing Kennedy on the bench.
 Speculation 
While the case was directly about public access television, several analysts believe that the Court would also review how companies that control social media on the Internet would be treated under similar considerations. This was predicated on the Court's prior decision in Packingham v. North Carolina,. where the Court held that social media was a "protected space" for lawful speech under the First Amendment. Ultimately, the decision was more limited, ruling on the status of MNN rather than whether the actions directly affecting free speech, thus the case is not expected to have a major impact on social media.
Holding
On February 25, 2019, the Supreme Court heard oral arguments. The Justices' questions centered around whether the city had a property interest in MNN's channel space and what precisely New York's "first come, first serve" rule meant practically. The Court delivered its 5–4 decision along ideological lines on June 17, 2019, which reversed the Second Circuit's decision and remanded the case to be reheard on its ruling.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Kavanaugh wrote the majority opinion, finding that MNN could not be considered a state actor in how it operates, and as such, was not bound to protect free speech rights as a state actor would be expected.. The Court stated that the MNN is immune to the First and Fourteenth amendments due to its status as a private company. The opinion based its holding on the fact that First and Fourteenth Amendments only apply to “governmental abridgment of speech” and not to “private abridgment of speech”.Denver Area Ed. Telecommunications Consortium, Inc. v. FCC, Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston, Inc., Hudgens v. NLRB, and Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo In order for an organization to be seen as governmental, private companies must be a state actor, meaning an organization that exercises “powers traditionally exclusive to the state”, defined from the case Jackson v. Metropolitan Edison Co. and the action must have been originally and solely performed by the government (Rendell-Baker v. Kohn, Evans v. Newton). In conclusion, the opinions states that even though the local government of New York City did give a contract for the MNN to operate these public access channels, since they have been operated by private cable companies from earlier times, the action of operating a public access channel does not meet the criteria of the function being originally and solely performed by the government. 
The opinion compares the facts of the case to prior court precedent such as Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc. v. Democratic National Committee, Moose Lodge No. 107 v. Irvis, and Trustees of Dartmouth College v. Woodward for broadcast licenses, liquor licenses, and corporate charters respectively. The opinion also stated that even if a private organization creates a public forum for speech, the fact that it is a private company means the First Amendment is not applicable. An example the opinion gives is that private organizations such as grocery stores and comedy clubs allow public forums such as bulletin boards or open mic sessions, but only topics that are relevant to these organizations are allowed to be expressed.
Halleck did not address the constitutionality of New York's regulation of public access television. However, an appended footnote in the opinion indicated that some members of the Court have interest in deciding "whether legislatures can constitutionally require cable operators to cede editorial control of the content of some of their channels in an effort to promote a more robust and inclusive public sphere."
Dissenting opinion
The dissenting opinion, written by Justice Sonia Sotomayor believed that MNN “stepped into the City's shoes and thus qualifies as a state actor, subject to the First Amendment like any other." Justice Sotomayor also argues that since New York City laws require that public-access channels be open to all, MNN also took responsibility for this law with the public-access channels. It did not matter whether the City or a private company runs this public forum since the City mandated that the channels be open to all.
 Notes 
 References 
External links
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:American public access television
Category:Mass media in New York City
"""

From "Manners v. Morosco" ==> """
Manners v. Morosco, 252 U.S. 317 (1920), was a United States Supreme Court case with two principal holdings. First, the copyright transfer contract in question was not limited to five years because the agreement dealt in minimum requirements. Secondly, the transfer of the copyright for the production of a play on stage did not grant the ability to make a motion picture based on the play. However, a grant of exclusivity implies a negative guarantee that the original creator will not do anything that may adversely affect that exclusivity, meaning the author forfeited their own ability to authorize a motion picture production. The Court enjoined both parties from making a film version.
The case concerned Peg o' My Heart by J. Hartley Manners. A film version of the play was created in 1919 directed by William C. deMille and starring Wanda Hawley, but it was never released due to the legal issues raised by this case. Manners did produce a 1922 version starring his wife Laurette Taylor, and a 1933 version emerged later.
Justices John Hessin Clarke and Mahlon Pitney dissented because they saw nothing in the original or revised contract indicating that either party expected the agreement to last longer than five years.
 References 
External links
Category:1920 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Manual Enterprises, Inc. v. Day" ==> """
MANual Enterprises, Inc. v. Day, 370 U.S. 478 (1962), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court which held that magazines consisting largely of photographs of nude or near-nude male models are not obscene within the meaning of . It was the first case in which the Court engaged in plenary review of a Post Office Department order holding obscene matter "nonmailable."MANual Enterprises, 370 U.S. at 495-496.
The case is notable for its ruling that photographs of nude men are not obscene, an implication which opened the U.S. mail to nude male pornographic magazines, especially those catering to gay men.Waugh, Hard to Imagine: Gay Male Eroticism in Photography and Film from Their Beginnings to Stonewall, 1996.
Background
H. Lynn Womack of Washington, D.C., was the publisher of several major physique magazines beginning in the late 1950s. Physique magazines, a genre which existed largely from the early 1950s until the mid 1960s, featured photos of nude or partially nude young men. They operated under the alibi of being for exercise enthusiasts or art students, but it was generally well understood that they were actually produced for and mostly read by gay men. Physique publishers and photographers frequently faced legal troubles, particularly from postal inspectors, who vigorously enforced the Comstock laws' prohibitions against transmitting obscene materials through the mail. Womack's case was the first involving the physique trade (or any sort of gay content) to reach the Supreme Court.
On March 25, 1960, the postmaster in Alexandria, Virginia, seized six parcels containing 405 copies of three physique magazines published by Womack: MANual, Trim, and Grecian Guild Pictorial. After an evidentiary hearing, the Judicial Officer of the Post Office Department found that the magazines were aimed at and primarily read by homosexual men, and that they would appeal to their "prurient interest" (but would not appeal to "sexually normal individuals"). These facts were largely accepted by both parties. The Judicial Officer concluded the magazines were obscene and therefore "nonmailable."
Womack sued in federal district court for injunctive relief.  However, the government moved for summary judgment. The district court granted the motion and sustained the administrative ruling.
At each step, the magazines were found to be nonmailable for two reasons: that they contained obscene content, and that they included advertisements that enabled customers to procure obscene materials. While Womack's magazines did not include frontal nudity, a postal inspector testified that by sending away to a photography studio advertised in the pages of one of the magazines, he received photographs that exposed the "pubic area" of nude men. Investigators also found photographs of nude men "engaged in homosexual activities" at such studios.
Womack appealed to United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.  On February 13, 1961, the court of appeals affirmed the district court's ruling.
Womack appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari on October 9, 1961..
Decision
The MANual Enterprises Court was significantly divided.  Since the 1957 decision in Roth v. United States, 354 U.S. 476 (1957), the Court had struggled to define and refine its approach to obscenity.  The widely divergent opinions in MANual Enterprises may reflect those divisions.
The majority opinion was written by Justice John Marshall Harlan II, and joined by Justice Potter Stewart.  Justice Hugo Black, who took an absolutist approach to First Amendment jurisprudence, concurred in the result but did not join the opinion. Justice Black did not issue an opinion of his own.
Justice William Brennan, joined by Chief Justice Earl Warren and Justice William O. Douglas, concurred but would have decided the case on much narrower technical rather than First Amendment grounds.
Only Justice Tom C. Clark dissented, stating "Since in my view the Postmaster General is required by § 1461 to reject nonmailable matter, I would affirm the judgment on the sole ground that the magazines contain information as to where obscene material can be obtained and thus are nonmailable."
Majority opinion
Writing for the majority, Justice Harlan crafted a revision of the Court's view of what constituted obscenity.  Both lower courts had argued that the intended audience of the magazines (homosexuals) rendered the material obscene.
Harlan focused on whether the materials were "so offensive on their face as to affront current community standards of decency — a quality that we shall hereafter refer to as 'patent offensiveness' or 'indecency.' "MANual Enterprises, 370 U.S. at 482. If the materials lacked that quality, Harlan reasoned that the Court need not consider the question of "audience."
Reaching back to the Hicklin test, Harlan argued that for materials to be obscene requires two distinct elements: patent offensiveness and an appeal to prurient interest.
Therefore, Harlan concluded, "The Court of Appeals was mistaken in considering that Roth made 'prurient interest' appeal the sole test of obscenity."MANual Enterprises, 370 U.S. at 486.
Harlan then approached the Roth standard which required a determination of the relevant "community." Harland concluded that since the law in question dealt with the national mail, the relevant community was national.MANual Enterprises, 370 U.S. at 488.
But Harlan struggled to define "prurient appeal."  In the end, Harlan merely asserted that the materials were constitutionally protected.  "[We] need go no further in the present case than to hold that the magazines in question, taken as a whole, cannot, under any permissible constitutional standard, be deemed to be beyond the pale of contemporary notions of rudimentary decency."MANual Enterprises, 370 U.S. at 489. In part, Harlan reached this conclusion because the majority believed that the government had overemphasized parts of the materials without taking them as a whole (a significant part of the Roth test).
But more importantly, the majority found that portrayal of the male nude (and, implicitly, portrayal of the homosexual male nude) "cannot fairly be regarded as more objectionable than many portrayals of the female nude that society tolerates."MANual Enterprises, 370 U.S. at 490.
Anticipating a series of cases yet to come,, , and . See Barron and Dienes, First Amendment Law, 1993, p. 88-89. Harlan addressed whether the materials had been rendered obscene by the way in which they were advertised.  Section 1461 said that advertising could render materials obscene, and Chief Justice Earl Warren (concurring in Roth) had agreed on constitutional grounds.  But Harlan, writing for the majority, concluded that the government had not argued that the advertising made the materials obscene. Section 1461, Harlan noted, did not require scienter, and to impose the requirement that publisher investigate every advertiser in their pages would impose an unconstitutional chilling effect on free speech.
Consequently, the majority reversed.
Concurrence
Justice Brennan concurred in the result.  Brennan's concurrence turned on narrow technical grounds, however.  Brennan noted that the Post Office Department General Counsel had initially refused to even hold a formal hearing, wishing to seize the materials without giving Womack a chance for rebuttal.  The Post Office Department reversed itself a short time later, and a formal hearing was held.
For Brennan, the Post Office Department's entire process raised significant constitutional questions.
We risk erosion of First Amendment liberties unless we train our vigilance upon the methods whereby obscenity is condemned no less than upon the standards whereby it is judged. Questions of procedural safeguards loom large in the wake of an order such as the one before us. Among them are: (a) whether Congress can close the mails to obscenity by any means other than prosecution of its sender; (b) whether Congress, if it can authorize exclusion of mail, can provide that obscenity be determined in the first instance in any forum except a court, and (c) whether, even if Congress could so authorize administrative censorship, it has in fact conferred upon postal authorities any power to exclude matter from the mails upon their determination of its obscene character.MANual Enterprises, 370 U.S. at 497-498 (Brennan, J., concurring).
For Brennan, this issue surpassed "even the important issue of the standards for judging this material's" obscenity in importance.MANual Enterprises, 370 U.S. at 498 (Brennan, J., concurring).
Brennan, however, found no provision in Section 1461 supporting the establishment of an administrative procedure to censor the mails. Brennan provided a lengthy analysis (including extensive quotations) of the section's legislative history. Based on that evidence, Brennan concluded that there were only two possible constructions of Section 1461:  That postmasters could remove matter which they thought, on the face of it, to be obscene, or that postmasters could remove matter only to turn it over to the appropriate authorities. The first construction was constitutionally infirm, Brennan argued.  The Post Office Department had not acted in accordance with the second construction.  Thus, either way, the Post Office Department's seizure of the magazines, its subsequent investigation of the advertisers, its discovery of allegedly obscene materials at each advertiser's place of business, and additional outcomes of its investigation did not withstand constitutional or statutory scrutiny.
Administrative censorship of the mail, Brennan concluded, was not in itself unconstitutional.  A variety of means were at the government's disposal, including recently enacted provisions to return the items, deny the use of postal banks, refund of monies collected, and more. None of these remedies seize the materials or make a judgment about their obscene nature.  "But the suggestion that Congress may constitutionally authorize any process other than a fully judicial one immediately raises the gravest doubts."MANual Enterprises, 370 U.S. at 519 (Brennan, J., concurring).
Dissent
Justice Clark dissented. Clark would have affirmed the judgment of the district court on the grounds that the magazines contained information about where obscene material could be obtained.  Therefore, they were nonmailable and constitutionally seized.
Clark rejected Brennan's analysis because the government's authority under Section 1461 was not presented or argued by either the plaintiff or respondent, and thus was not before the Court.  Nevertheless, Clark addressed the concurring opinion's analysis.  Clark, however, concluded that the legislative history of Section 1461 clearly permitted postmasters to refuse mailed materials which were known to be obscene.MANual Enterprises, 370 U.S. at 523 (Clark, J., dissenting). Since subsequent investigation by the Post Office Department had confirmed that the advertisers in the magazine sold obscene materials, the materials published by Womack could be seized.  For the dissent, the fact that postal regulations had been in existence since 1902 without challenge weighed heavily in favor of this interpretation of the legislative history.
Regarding the majority opinion, Clark concluded that Congress had addressed the issue of scienter in the statute.  In Section 1461, Congress made it clear that the act of mailing materials implied scienter:  "Whoever knowingly uses the mails for the mailing, carriage in the mails, or delivery of anything declared by this section to be nonmailable . . . shall be fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned not more than five years, or both . . . ."MANual Enterprises, 370 U.S. at 526 (Clark, J., dissenting).
For these reasons, Clark would have affirmed the judgment of the district court.
Note about Court composition
Justice Felix Frankfurter suffered a stroke several months after hearing oral argument in the case; he did not participate in the decision. Frankfurter resigned from the Court on August 28, 1962.
Justice Charles Evans Whittaker had suffered a nervous breakdown prior to oral argument in the case. By the time of the decision, he was no longer on the Court. His successor, Justice Byron White, was confirmed to the Court after oral argument in the case occurred; he did not participate in either its consideration or the decision.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 370
 One, Inc. v. Olesen
Notes
References
Barron, Jerome A. and Dienes, C. Thomas. First Amendment Law. St. Paul, Minn.: West Publishing Co., 1993. 
Johnson, David K., Buying Gay: How Physique Entrepreneurs Sparked a Movement. New York: Columbia University Press, 2019. 
Streitmatter, Rodger. Unspeakable: The Rise of the Gay and Lesbian Press in America. New York:  Faber & Faber, 1995. 
Streitmatter, Rodger and Watson, John C. "Herman Lynn Womack: Pornographer as First Amendment Pioneer." Journalism History. 28:56 (Summer 2002).
Waugh, Thomas. Hard to Imagine: Gay Male Eroticism in Photography and Film from Their Beginnings to Stonewall. New York: Columbia University Press, 1996. 
External links
Category:1962 in LGBT history
Category:1962 in United States case law
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Postal Service litigation
Category:History of Alexandria, Virginia
"""

From "Manuel v. Joliet" ==> """
Manuel v. Joliet, 580 U.S. ___ (2017), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that a criminal defendant may bring a claim under the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution to challenge pretrial confinement., slip. op. at 1. In a 6-2 majority opinion written by Justice Elena Kagan, the Court stated that "the Fourth Amendment governs a claim for unlawful pretrial detention even beyond the start of legal process".Manuel v. Joliet, slip op. at 11. This decision reversed and remanded the judgment of the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals.Manuel v. Joliet, slip op. at 15. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion.Manuel v. Joliet, slip op. at 1 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Justice Thomas also joined a dissenting opinion by Justice Samuel Alito.Manuel v. Joliet, slip op. at 1 (Alito, J., dissenting).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2017 in United States case law
"""

From "Maples v. Thomas" ==> """
Maples v. Thomas, 565 U.S. 266 (2012), is a United States Supreme Court ruling in which the Court ruled 7–2 that Cory R. Maples, who had been convicted of murdering two people and faced a possible death sentence, should get another opportunity in court because his lawyers at Sullivan & Cromwell had abandoned him.
Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas dissented from the Court's holding, arguing that the procedural default shouldn't be excused.
Facts
In 1997 Cory Maples was convicted of murder in Alabama and sentenced to death. Alabama does not provide death row inmates with lawyers to appeal their convictions and sentences so they must rely on pro bono lawyers to represent them.  Two lawyers from the New York law firm of Sullivan & Cromwell agreed to represent Maples free of charge. Those lawyers later quit the law firm and when the Alabama court sent copies of a ruling in Maples' case to the firm's mail room, the law firm returned the copies unopened. The law firm never notified the court or the mail room that new lawyers had taken over the case.  Because this information was never received the deadline for appeal was missed.
When Maples learned of the missed deadline, he had his step-mother contact the law firm. The lawyers now handling the case asked for permission to appeal despite missing the original deadline, but that request was denied.https://www.oyez.org/cases/2010-2019/2011/2011_10_63 
Background
The sixth amendment gives defendants the right to counsel. The Supreme Court ruled in 1976 (citing Brewer v. Williams, 430 U.S. 387 at 398) that a defendant's right to an attorney attaches "at or after the time that judicial proceedings have been initiated against him, whether by formal charge, preliminary hearing, indictment, information, or arraignment."http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/GPO-CONAN-2002/pdf/GPO-CONAN-2002-9-7.pdf 
Decision
On January 18, 2012, the Supreme Court decided in favor of Cory Maples because of the special circumstances of his case.  The unannounced and unauthorized abandonment of Maples' case by his lawyers proved significant enough to excuse the defendant from having failed to file an appeal in advance of the deadline.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg delivered the opinion of the Court. The Court reversed the findings of the circuit court and discussed Alabama’s practices in regard to post-conviction representation.  The Court held that because Maples' non-compliance with State rules were set in motion by external circumstance outside of his knowledge or control for which he could not be held responsible. Attorney negligence does not normally excuse the client from responsibility because the attorney is acting as an agent to the client and the client is therefore responsible and able to manage the actions of his attorney.  In Maples' case, however, he was abandoned, without notice, by his attorneys and this effectively severed the relationship.
Concurring opinion
Justice Samuel Alito wrote a concurring opinion.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion.  Scalia agreed that abandonment was a legitimate reason to sever the relationship but that Maples had not been abandoned.  He was, without interruption, represented by Sullivan and Cromwell and John Butler, an Alabama attorney.https://www.oyez.org/cases/2010-2019/2011/2011_10_63#mla 
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Alabama
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Mapp v. Ohio" ==> """
Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643 (1961), was a landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in which the Court ruled that the exclusionary rule, which prevents prosecutors from using evidence in court that was obtained by violating the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, applies not only to the federal government but also to the U.S. state governments. The Supreme Court accomplished this by use of a principle known as selective incorporation; in Mapp this involved the incorporation of the provisions, as interpreted by the Court, of the Fourth Amendment which is applicable only to actions of the federal government into the Fourteenth Amendment's due process clause which is applicable to actions of the states.
Legal background
The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution provides: "The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated ...."  Until the early 20th century, Americans' only legal remedy in cases where law enforcement officers violated the Fourth Amendment was a private lawsuit against the officers involved, either in trespass to recover damages or in replevin to recover their seized goods or property. This changed in 1914, when the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously ruled in Weeks v. United States that any evidence obtained by federal law enforcement officers in violation of the Fourth Amendment could not be used in federal criminal proceedings. In an opinion written by Justice William R. Day, the Court reasoned that the Supreme Court had a constitutional duty to ensure federal courts excluded illegally obtained evidence:
Over the next several decades, the Court generally held that this "exclusionary rule" only applied to cases in which federal law enforcement officers, not state officers, were involved in the illegal searches and seizures. In 1949, the Court confronted the issue of the exclusionary rule's application to states in the case of Wolf v. Colorado. The Wolf Court surveyed existing U.S. states and found that although 17 states had adopted the exclusionary rule of Weeks in their own state law, 30 others had rejected it. It therefore concluded that it was not a "departure from basic standards" of due process to allow states to introduce illegally obtained evidence in state trials. 
For the next 12 years, the Supreme Court only applied the exclusionary rule to evidence obtained by state officers for use in state court prosecutions when the state officers used coercion, violence, or brutality. For example, in the 1952 case Rochin v. California, the Court required a California state court to exclude evidence that state officers had illegally obtained, but only because the officers had used "conduct that shocks the conscience"specifically, they had a doctor give the suspect an emetic to force him to vomit up capsules he had swallowed., quoting Rochin v. California, 342 U.S. 165, 172 (1952).
Case history
Dollree "Dolly" Mapp was a young woman involved in the illegal gambling operations of mobster and racketeer Shondor Birns, who dominated organized crime in Cleveland, Ohio in the 1940s and 1950s. On May 23, 1957, Cleveland police received an anonymous tip that a man named Virgil Ogletree might be found at Mapp's house, along with illegal betting slips and equipment employed in a "numbers game" set up by Mapp's boyfriend.Zotti, Priscilla. Injustice for All (Peter Lang, 2005). Ogletree was involved in the Cleveland illegal betting world, centered on the city's Short Vincent. He was wanted for questioning in the bombing of rival gambling racketeer (and future boxing promoter) Don King's home three days earlier. Three policemen went to Mapp's home and asked for permission to enter, but Mapp, after consulting her lawyer by telephone, refused to admit them without a search warrant. Two officers left, and one remained, watching the house from across the street.
Three hours later, more police officers arrived and knocked on the door. When Mapp did not answer, they forced the door open. Mapp asked to see their search warrant and was shown a piece of paper which she snatched away from an officer, putting it inside her dress. The officers struggled with Mapp and recovered the piece of paper which was not seen by her or her lawyers again, and was not introduced as evidence in any of the ensuing court proceedings. As the search of Mapp's second-floor, two-bedroom apartment began, police handcuffed her for being belligerent. The police searched the house thoroughly and discovered Ogletree, who was subsequently cleared on the bombing charge, hiding in the apartment of the downstairs tenant. In the search of Mapp's apartment and in a footlocker in the basement of the house, the police found betting slips.. They also found a pistol and several pornographic books and pictures, which Mapp said a previous tenant had left behind. The police arrested Mapp and charged her with a misdemeanor count of possessing numbers-game paraphernalia, but she was acquitted.
Several months later, after Mapp refused to testify against Birns and his associates at their trial for the attempted shakedown of King, she was prosecuted for possession of the pornographic books. Mapp was found guilty at trial of "knowingly having had in her possession and under her control certain lewd and lascivious books, pictures, and photographs in violation of 2905.34 of Ohio's Revised Code", and sentenced to one to seven years in prison. Mapp was convicted even though prosecutors were unable to produce a valid search warrant. She appealed to the Supreme Court of Ohio, which affirmed her conviction because even though the search warrant's validity was doubtful and the police's search of her home was illegal, the police officers had not used brutal force against her, and so under the Supreme Court's precedents in Wolf and Rochin the exclusionary rule did not have to apply. Mapp then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which agreed to hear her case.
 Decision 
On June 19, 1961, the Supreme Court issued a 6–3 decision in favor of Mapp that overturned her conviction and held that the exclusionary rule applies to American states as well as the federal government.
Opinion of the Court 
thumb|upright=0.95|right|Justice Tom C. Clark, the author of the majority opinion in Mapp
Six justices formed the majority and joined an opinion written by justice Tom C. Clark. The Court observed that of the 30 U.S. states that had rejected the exclusionary rule at the time of Wolf v. Colorado in 1949, more than half had adopted at least a partial form of it in the intervening 12 years. Regarding its statements in Wolf that other preexisting remedies, like private lawsuits and good oversight of police forces, would be enough to enforce the Fourth Amendment, the Court said that experience had shown that "such remedies have been worthless and futile".Mapp, 367 U.S. at 652, quoted in .
The Court then overruled Wolf and ruled that "all evidence obtained by searches and seizures in violation of the Constitution is, by that same authority, inadmissible in a state court."Mapp, 367 U.S. at 655, quoted in . Justice Clark stated that without the exclusionary rule, the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures would be merely "a form of words" that would be "valueless and undeserving of mention in a perpetual charter of inestimable human liberties". And because prior cases had ruled that the Fourteenth Amendment incorporated the Fourth Amendment against the states, the Court held that this reasoning applied equally to federal and state criminal proceedings. In a frequently quoted passage, the Court wrote:
Clark concluded the Court's opinion by reiterating how the "ignoble shortcut" around the Fourth Amendment that Wolf had left open to state law enforcement officers had "tend[ed] to destroy the entire system of constitutional restraints on which the liberties of the people rest," and reversed the Supreme Court of Ohio's judgment against Dolly Mapp.
Concurrences
Justice Hugo Black joined the majority opinion, but also wrote a concurring opinion in which he stated that although he thought that the Fourth Amendment alone was not enough to justify the exclusionary rule, when the Fourth Amendment's protections were combined with the Fifth Amendment's protection against self-incrimination, a resulting "constitutional basis emerges which not only justifies but actually requires the exclusionary rule."Mapp, 367 U.S. at 662 (Black, J., concurring), quoted in .
Dissent
Three justices dissented from the Court's decision and joined an opinion written by Justice John Marshall Harlan II. Harlan wrote that the Court should not have reached the Fourth Amendment issues in the case because Mapp's conviction and the subsequent arguments at her appeals had focused on the legality of Ohio's anti-pornography laws, and not on the police officers' warrantless search of her home. Harlan wrote that the Court's decision in Wolf should be upheld per the principle of stare decisis, and that it did not require the entirety of the Fourth Amendment to be enforced against the states, but rather only the "principle of privacy which is at the core of the Fourth Amendment."Mapp, 367 U.S. at 679 (Harlan, J., dissenting), quoted in .
 See also 
 United States Bill of Rights
 Fruit of the poisonous tree
 References 
Citations
Works cited
 Further reading 
 External links 
 Archival source documents relating to the Mapp case at Cleveland Memory
 Dollree Mapp, Who Defied Police Search in Landmark Case, Is Dead - New York Times
 "Supreme Court Landmark Case Mapp v. Ohio" from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Cleveland Division of Police
Category:Cuyahoga County, Ohio
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Marbury v. Madison" ==> """
Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137 (1803), was a landmark U.S. Supreme Court case that established the principle of judicial review in the United States, meaning that American courts have the power to strike down laws and statutes that they find to violate the Constitution of the United States. Decided in 1803, Marbury is regarded as the single most important decision in American constitutional law. The Court's landmark decision established that the U.S. Constitution is actual law, not just a statement of political principles and ideals, and helped define the boundary between the constitutionally separate executive and judicial branches of the federal government.
The case originated in early 1801 as part of the political and ideological rivalry between outgoing President John Adams and incoming President Thomas Jefferson. Adams had lost the U.S. presidential election of 1800 to Jefferson. In March 1801, just two days before his term as president ended, Adams appointed several dozen Federalist Party supporters to new circuit judge and justice of the peace positions in an attempt to frustrate Jefferson and his supporters in the Democratic-Republican Party. The U.S. Senate quickly confirmed Adams's appointments. But outgoing Secretary of State John Marshall was unable to deliver all of the new judges' commissions before Adams's departure and Jefferson's inauguration. Jefferson believed the undelivered commissions were void and instructed his Secretary of State, James Madison, not to deliver them. One of the undelivered commissions belonged to William Marbury, a Maryland businessman who had been a strong supporter of Adams and the Federalists. In late 1801, after Madison had repeatedly refused to deliver his commission, Marbury filed a lawsuit in the Supreme Court asking the Court to issue a writ of mandamus forcing Madison to deliver his commission.
In an opinion written by John Marshall, the former Secretary of State who by then had been appointed Chief Justice of the United States, the Supreme Court held firstly that Madison's refusal to deliver Marbury's commission was illegal, and secondly that it was normally proper for a court in such situations to order the government official in question to deliver the commission. But in Marbury's case, the Court did not order Madison to comply. Examining the law Congress had passed to define the Supreme Court jurisdiction over types of cases like Marbury's—Section 13 of the Judiciary Act of 1789—the Court found that the Act had expanded the definition of the Supreme Court's jurisdiction beyond what was originally set forth in the U.S. Constitution. The Court then struck down Section 13 of the Act, announcing that American courts have the power to invalidate laws that they find to violate the Constitution—a power now known as "judicial review". Because striking down the law removed any jurisdiction the Court might have had over the case, the Court could not issue the writ that Marbury had requested.
Background
In the fiercely contested U.S. presidential election of 1800, the three main candidates were Thomas Jefferson, Aaron Burr, and the incumbent president, John Adams. Adams espoused the pro-business and pro-national-government politics of the Federalist Party and its leader Alexander Hamilton. Jefferson and Burr were leaders of the opposing Democratic-Republican Party, which favored agriculture and decentralization. American public opinion had gradually turned against the Federalists in the months leading up to the election, mainly due to the Federalists' use of the controversial Alien and Sedition Acts, as well as growing tensions with Great Britain, with whom the Federalists favored close ties. Jefferson easily won the election's popular vote but only narrowly defeated Adams in the Electoral College.
As the results of the election became clear, Adams and the Federalists became determined to exercise their remaining influence before Jefferson took office, and they did everything they could to fill federal offices with "anti-Jeffersonians" who were loyal to the Federalists. On March2, 1801, just two days before his presidential term ended, Adams nominated nearly 60 Federalist supporters to new circuit judge and justice of the peace positions the Federalist-controlled Congress had recently created. These last-minute nomineeswhom Jefferson's supporters derisively called the "Midnight Judges"included William Marbury, a prosperous businessman from Maryland. An ardent Federalist, Marbury was active in Maryland politics and had been a vigorous supporter of the Adams presidency.
The following day, March 3, the Senate approved Adams's nominations en masse. The appointees' commissions were immediately written out, then signed by Adams and sealed by Secretary of State John Marshall, who had been named the new Chief Justice of the Supreme Court in January but agreed to continue serving as Secretary of State for the remaining weeks of Adams's presidency. Marshall then dispatched his younger brother James Markham Marshall to deliver the commissions to the appointees. With only one day left before Jefferson's inauguration, James Marshall was able to deliver most of the commissions, but a fewincluding Marbury'swere not delivered.
The day after, March 4, 1801, Jefferson was sworn in and became the third President of the United States. Jefferson instructed his new Secretary of State, James Madison, to withhold the undelivered commissions. In Jefferson's opinion, the commissions were void because they had not been delivered before Adams left office. Without the commissions, the appointees were unable to assume the offices and duties to which they had been appointed.
Over the next several months, Madison continually refused to deliver Marbury's commission to him. Finally, in December 1801, Marbury filed a lawsuit against Madison in the U.S. Supreme Court, asking the Court to force Madison to deliver his commission. This lawsuit resulted in the case of Marbury v. Madison.
Decision
thumb|An 1808 engraving of Chief Justice John Marshall by French portrait painter Charles Balthazar Julien Févret de Saint-Mémin
On February 24, 1803, the Supreme Court issued a unanimous 4–0 decision against Marbury. The Court's opinion was written by Chief Justice John Marshall, who structured the Court's opinion around a series of three questions it answered in turn:
 First, did Marbury have a right to his commission?
 Second, if Marbury had a right to his commission, was there a legal remedy for him to obtain it?
 Third, if there was such a remedy, could the Supreme Court legally issue it?
Marbury's right to his commission
The Court began by determining that Marbury had a legal right to his commission. Marshall reasoned that all appropriate procedures were followed: the commission had been properly signed and sealed. Madison had argued that the commissions were void if not delivered, but the Court disagreed, saying that the delivery of the commission was merely a custom, not an essential element of the commission itself.
The Court said that because Marbury's commission was valid, Madison's withholding it was "violative of a vested legal right" on Marbury's part.
Marbury's legal remedy
Turning to the second question, the Court said that the law provided Marbury a remedy for Madison's unlawful withholding of his commission. Marshall wrote that "it is a general and indisputable rule, that where there is a legal right, there is also a legal remedy by suit or action at law, whenever that right is invaded." This rule derives from the ancient Roman legal maxim  ("where there is a legal right, there is a legal remedy"), which was well established in the English common law. In what the American legal scholar Akhil Amar called "one of the most important and inspiring passages" of the opinion, Marshall wrote:
The Court then confirmed that a writ of mandamusa type of court order that commands a government official to perform an act their official duties legally require them to performwas the proper remedy for Marbury's situation. But this raised the issue of whether the Court, which was part of the judicial branch of the government, had the power to command Madison, who as secretary of state was part of the executive branch of the government. The Court held that so long as the remedy involved a mandatory duty to a specific person, and not a political matter left to discretion, the courts could provide the legal remedy. Borrowing a phrase John Adams had drafted in 1779 for the Massachusetts State Constitution, Marshall wrote: "The government of the United States has been emphatically termed a government of laws, and not of men.", quoting Marbury, 5 U.S. at 163.
The Supreme Court's jurisdiction
thumb|right|upright=1.25|The U.S. Capitol (painting ), home of the U.S. Congress and also where the U.S. Supreme Court convened from 1801 until the Supreme Court Building's completion in 1935.
This brought Marshall to the third question: did the Supreme Court have proper jurisdiction over the case that would allow it to legally issue the writ of mandamus? The answer depended entirely on how the Court interpreted the text of the Judiciary Act of 1789. Congress had passed the Judiciary Act to establish the American federal court system, since the U.S. Constitution only mandates a Supreme Court and leaves the rest of the U.S. federal judicial power to reside in "such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish." Section 13 of the Judiciary Act sets out the Supreme Court's original and appellate jurisdictions.
Marbury had argued that the language of Section 13 of the Judiciary Act gave the Supreme Court the authority to issue writs of mandamus when hearing cases under original jurisdiction, not just appellate jurisdiction. As Marshall explains in the opinion,  gives a court the power to be the first to hear and decide a case;  gives a court the power to hear an appeal from a lower court's decision and to "revise and correct" the previous decision. Although the language on the power to issue writs of mandamus appears after Section 13's sentence on appellate jurisdiction, rather than with the earlier sentences on original jurisdiction, a semicolon separates it from the clause on appellate jurisdiction. The section does not make clear whether the mandamus clause was intended to be read as part of the appellate clause or on its own—in the opinion, Marshall quoted only the end of the section—and the law's wording can plausibly be read either way. In the end, the Court agreed with Marbury and interpreted section 13 of the Judiciary Act to have authorized the Court to exercise original jurisdiction over cases involving disputes over writs of mandamus.
But as Marshall pointed out, this meant that the Judiciary Act contradicted Article III of the U.S. Constitution, which establishes the judicial branch of the U.S. government. Article III defines the Supreme Court's jurisdiction as follows:
Article III says that the Supreme Court only has original jurisdiction over cases where a U.S. state is a party to a lawsuit or where a lawsuit involves foreign dignitaries. Neither of these categories covered Marbury's lawsuit, which was a dispute over a writ of mandamus for his justice of the peace commission. So, according to the Constitution, the Court did not have original jurisdiction over a case like Marbury's.
But the Court had interpreted the Judiciary Act to have given it original jurisdiction over lawsuits for writs of mandamus. This meant that the Judiciary Act had taken the Constitution's initial scope for the Supreme Court's original jurisdiction, which did not cover cases involving writs of mandamus, and expanded it to include them. The Court ruled that Congress cannot increase the Supreme Court's original jurisdiction as it was set down in the Constitution, and it therefore held that the relevant portion of Section 13 of the Judiciary Act violated Article III of the Constitution.
Judicial review and striking down the law
thumb|upright=1.6|Inscription on the wall of the Supreme Court Building from Marbury v. Madison, in which Chief Justice John Marshall (statue, foreground) outlined the concept of judicial review.
After ruling that it conflicted with the Constitution, the Court struck down Section 13 of the Judiciary Act in the U.S. Supreme Court's first ever declaration of the power of judicial review. The Court ruled that American federal courts have the power to refuse to give any effect to congressional legislation that is inconsistent with their interpretation of the Constitutiona move colloquially known as "striking down" laws.
The U.S. Constitution does not explicitly give the American federal judiciary the power of judicial review. Nevertheless, the Court's opinion gives many reasons in support of the judiciary's possession of the power. First, Marshall reasoned that the written nature of the Constitution inherently established judicial review. Borrowing from Alexander Hamilton's essay Federalist No. 78, Marshall wrote:
Second, the Court declared that deciding the constitutionality of the laws it applies is an inherent part of the American judiciary's role. In what has become the most famous and frequently quoted line of the opinion, Marshall wrote:
Marshall reasoned that the Constitution places limits on the American government's powers, and that those limits would be meaningless unless they were subject to judicial review and enforcement. He reasoned that the Constitution's provisions limiting Congress's powersuch as the export tax clause or the prohibitions on bills of attainder and ex post facto lawsmeant that in some cases judges would be forced to choose between enforcing the Constitution or following Congress. Marshall held "virtually as a matter of iron logic" that in the event of conflict between the Constitution and statutory laws passed by Congress, the constitutional law must be supreme.
Third, the Court said that denying the supremacy of the Constitution over Congress's acts would mean that "courts must close their eyes on the constitution, and see only the law.", quoting Marbury, 5 U.S. at 178. This, Marshall wrote, would make Congress omnipotent, since none of the laws it passed would ever be invalid.
Marshall then gave several other reasons in favor of judicial review. He reasoned that the authorization in Article III of the Constitution that the Court can decide cases arising "under this Constitution" implied that the Court had the power to strike down laws conflicting with the Constitution. This, Marshall wrote, meant that the Founders were willing to have the American judiciary use and interpret the Constitution when judging cases. He also said that federal judges' oaths of office—in which they swear to discharge their duties impartially and "agreeably to the Constitution and laws of the United States"—requires them to support the Constitution. Lastly, Marshall reasoned that judicial review is implied in the Supremacy Clause of Article VI of the U.S. Constitution, since it declares that the supreme law of the United States is the Constitution and laws made "in Pursuance thereof", rather than the Constitution and all federal laws generally.
Having given his list of reasons, Marshall concluded the Court's opinion by reaffirming the Court's ruling on the invalidity of Section 13 of the Judiciary Act and, therefore, the Court's inability to issue Marbury's writ of mandamus.
Analysis
Political dilemma
thumb|right|upright=0.9|Chief justice John Marshall, as painted by Henry Inman in 1832, after having presided over the American federal judiciary for over 30 years
Besides its legal issues, the case of Marbury v. Madison also created a difficult political dilemma for John Marshall and the Supreme Court. If the Court had ruled in Marbury's favor and issued a writ of mandamus ordering Madison to deliver Marbury's commission, Jefferson and Madison would probably have simply ignored the writ, which would have made the Court look impotent and emphasized the "shakiness" of the judiciary. On the other hand, a simple ruling against Marbury would have given Jefferson and the Democratic-Republicans a clear political victory over the Federalists.
Marshall solved both problems. First, he had the Court rule that Madison's withholding of Marbury's commission was illegal, which pleased the Federalists. Second, however, the opinion he wrote also held that the Court could not grant Marbury his requested writ of mandamus, which gave Jefferson and the Democratic-Republicans the result they desired. But finally, in what the American legal scholar Laurence Tribe calls "an oft-told tale ... [that] remains awe-inspiring", Marshall had the Court rule against Marbury in a way that maneuvered Marbury's simple petition for a writ of mandamus into a case that presented a question that went to the heart of American constitutional law itself. The American political historian Robert G. McCloskey described:
Marshall had been looking for a case suitable for introducing judicial review and was eager to use the situation in Marbury to establish his claim. He introduced judicial reviewa move Jefferson decriedbut used it to strike down a provision of a law that he read to have expanded the Supreme Court's powers, and thereby produced Jefferson's hoped-for result of Marbury losing his case. Marshall "seized the occasion to uphold the institution of judicial review, but he did so in the course of reaching a judgment that his political opponents could neither defy nor protest." Though Jefferson criticized the Court's decision, he accepted it, and Marshall's opinion in Marbury "articulate[d] a role for the federal courts that survives to this day." The American legal scholar Erwin Chemerinsky concludes: "The brilliance of Marshall's opinion cannot be overstated."
Legal criticism
Marshall's historic opinion in Marbury v. Madison continues to be the subject of critical analysis and inquiry. In a 1955 Harvard Law Review article, U.S. Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter emphasized that one can criticize Marshall's opinion in Marbury without demeaning it: "The courage of Marbury v. Madison is not minimized by suggesting that its reasoning is not impeccable and its conclusion, however wise, not inevitable."
Criticisms of Marshall's opinion in Marbury usually fall into two general categories. First, some criticize the way Marshall "strove" to reach the conclusion that the U.S. Supreme Court has constitutional authority over the other branches of the U.S. government. Today, American courts generally follow the principle of "constitutional avoidance": if a certain interpretation of a law raises constitutional problems, they prefer to use alternative interpretations that avoid these problems, so long as the alternative interpretations are still plausible. In Marbury, Marshall could have avoided the constitutional questions through different legal rulings. If he had ruled that Marbury did not have a right to his commission until it was delivered, or if he had ruled that refusals to honor political appointments could only be remedied through the political process and not the judicial process, it would have ended the case immediately and the Court would not have reached the case's constitutional issues. Marshall did not do so, and many legal scholars have criticized him for it. Some scholars have responded that the "constitutional avoidance" principle did not exist in 1803, and in any case is "only a general guide for Court action", not an "ironclad rule". Alternatively, it has also been argued that the claim that Marshall "strove" to create a controversy largely vanishes when the case is viewed from the legal perspective of the late 18th century, when American colonies' and states' supreme courts were largely modeled on England's Court of King's Bench, which inherently possessed mandamus powers.
Second, Marshall's arguments for the Court's authority are sometimes said to be mere "series of assertions", rather than substantive reasons logically laid out to support his position. Scholars generally agree that Marshall's series of assertions regarding the U.S. Constitution and the actions of the other branches of government do not "inexorably lead to the conclusion that Marshall draws from them." Marshall's assertion of the American judiciary's authority to review executive branch actions was the most controversial issue when Marbury was first decided, and several subsequent U.S. presidents have tried to dispute it, to varying degrees. 
Additionally, it is questionable whether Marshall should have participated in the Marbury case because of his participating role in the dispute. Marshall was still the acting secretary of state when the nominations were made, and he had signed Marbury and the other men's commissions and had been responsible for their delivery. This potential conflict of interest raises strong grounds for Marshall to have recused himself from the case. In hindsight, the fact that Marshall did not recuse himself from Marbury is likely indicative of his eagerness to hear the case and use it to establish judicial review.
Legacy
Marbury v. Madison is regarded as the single most important decision in American constitutional law.  It established U.S. federal judges' authority to review the constitutionality of Congress's legislative acts, and to this day the Supreme Court's power to review the constitutionality of American laws at both the federal and state level "is generally rested upon the epic decision of Marbury v. Madison."
thumb|upright=1.25|The subpoena duces tecum (order to bring items as evidence) issued to President Richard Nixon that was the center of the dispute in the 1974 judicial review case United States v. Nixon
Although the Court's opinion in Marbury established judicial review in American federal law, it did not invent or create it. Some 18th-century British jurists had argued that English courts had the power to circumscribe Parliament. The idea became widely accepted in Colonial Americaespecially in Marshall, Jefferson, and Madison's native Virginiaunder the rationale that in America only the people were sovereign, rather than the government, and so the courts should only implement legitimate laws. By the time of the Constitutional Convention in 1787, American courts' "independent power and duty to interpret the law" was well established, and Hamilton had defended the concept in Federalist No. 78. In addition, the 1796 Supreme Court case Hylton v. United States considered whether a tax on carriages was constitutional, though the Court ruled that the statute in question was in fact constitutional and did not actually exercise the power. Nevertheless, Marshall's opinion in Marbury was the power's first announcement and exercise by the Supreme Court. It made the practice more routine, rather than exceptional, and prepared the way for the Court's opinion in the 1819 case McCulloch v. Maryland, in which Marshall implied that the Supreme Court was the supreme interpreter of the U.S. Constitution.
Marbury also established that the power of judicial review covers actions by the executive branch—the President and his cabinet members.  However, American courts' power of judicial review over executive branch actions only extends to matters in which the executive has a legal duty to act or refrain from acting, and does not extend to matters that are entirely within the President's discretion, such as whether to veto a bill or whom to appoint to an office. This power has been the basis of many subsequent important Supreme Court decisions in American history, such as the 1974 decision United States v. Nixon, in which the Court held that President Richard Nixon had to comply with a subpoena to provide tapes of his conversations for use in a criminal trial related to the Watergate scandal, and which ultimately led to Nixon's resignation.
Although it is a potent check on the other branches of the U.S. government, federal courts rarely exercised the power of judicial review in early American history. After deciding Marbury in 1803, the Supreme Court did not strike down another federal law until 1857, when the Court struck down the Missouri Compromise in its now-infamous decision Dred Scott v. Sandford, a ruling that contributed to the outbreak of the American Civil War.
See also
 Australian Communist Party v Commonwealth
 Calder v. Bull
 Hylton v. United States
 Martin v. Hunter's Lessee
References
Notes
Citations
Works cited
Further reading
  (one introduction to the case)
  (Claims that it is a mistake to read the case as claiming a judicial power to tell the President or Congress what they can or cannot do under the Constitution.)
 James M. O'Fallon, The Case of Benjamin More: A Lost Episode in the Struggle over Repeal of the 1801 Judiciary Act, 11  43 (1993).
External links
 Primary Documents in American History: Marbury v. Madison from the Library of Congress
 "John Marshall, Marbury v. Madison, and Judicial Review—How the Court Became Supreme" Lesson plan for grades 9–12 from National Endowment for the Humanities
 The 200th Anniversary of Marbury v. Madison: The Reasons We Should Still Care About the Decision, and The Lingering Questions It Left Behind
 The Establishment of Judicial Review
 The 200th Anniversary of Marbury v. Madison: The Supreme Court's First Great Case
 Case Brief for Marbury v. Madison at Lawnix.com
 "Supreme Court Landmark Case Marbury v. Madison" from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
Category:1803 in United States case law
Category:6th United States Congress
Category:19th-century American trials
Category:Legal history of the District of Columbia
Category:Presidency of Thomas Jefferson
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States constitutional case law
Category:United States political question doctrine case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
"""

From "Marcus v. Search Warrant" ==> """
Marcus v. Search Warrant, 367 U.S. 717 (1961), full title Marcus v. Search Warrant of Property at 104 East Tenth Street, Kansas City, Missouri, is an in rem case decided by the United States Supreme Court on the seizure of obscene materials. The Court unanimously overturned a Missouri Supreme Court decision upholding the forfeiture of hundreds of magazines confiscated from a Kansas City wholesaler. It held that both Missouri's procedures for the seizure of allegedly obscene material and the execution of the warrant itself violated the Fourth and Fourteenth amendments' prohibitions on search and seizure without due process. Those violations, in turn, threatened the rights protected by the First Amendment.
The case had begun in 1957, when the Kansas City Police Department vice squad raided the warehouse of a local news distributor and five newsstands. Officers seized dozens of publications, far beyond those which had started the investigation, since the search warrants were not specific. Less than half of the seized titles were ultimately found obscene and ordered to be burnt.
Justice William Brennan wrote for the Court. He found the officers' conduct similar to that which had inspired the Founding Fathers to write the Fourth Amendment. He added that the Missouri Supreme Court had incorrectly applied an earlier Court holding in sustaining the forfeiture. The result was a system that operated as an effective prior restraint. Hugo Black, in a concurring opinion, joined by William O. Douglas restated his conviction that the Fourteenth Amendment applies all the rights protected by the Constitution to the states.
Marcus broke ground in holding that First Amendment interests required an additional layer of procedure than other instances of seizure. It would figure prominently in later obscenity cases involving seizures, including one called Quantity of Books v. Kansas, that explicitly tried to take its holding into account. After the Court settled on a definition of obscenity in the early 1970s, it continued to hear other cases on the issues first addressed in Marcus.
Background of the case
For most of American history, literary and artistic works depicting or even alluding to sexual acts and topics, or using profane language, had been banned from publication or distribution, often by both confiscation of the works themselves and criminal prosecution of all individuals involved, following the traditions of English common law on obscenity and statutes at the state and federal levels. At the same time, demand for such materials continued, and the laws were often widely flouted. No defendant or claimant in such an action had ever persuaded a court to entertain the argument that the First Amendment's guarantees of free speech and free expression barred them.
That began to change during the 20th century, in response to social and cultural trends of greater tolerance for literature and art that depicted such proscribed material. In the landmark 1933 case United States v. One Book Called Ulysses, Judge John M. Woolsey of the Southern District of New York ruled that James Joyce's novel Ulysses, chapters of which had been held obscene over a decade earlier when published in a literary review, could not be barred from the United States purely on the basis of its language and content without considering its literary merit.United States v. One Book Called Ulysses, 5 F.Supp. 182 (S.D.N.Y., 1933). Second Circuit judges Learned Hand and Augustus Hand upheld Woolsey on appeal,United States v. One Book Entitled Ulysses, by James Joyce, 72 F.2d 705 (2nd Cir., 1934) and the book, considered a masterpiece of modernist literature, could be freely published and sold.
Censorship battles continued in the next decades over other works of literature and art, such as Lady Chatterley's Lover, expanding to include films. In 1957, the Supreme Court finally considered a case arising from an obscenity prosecution, Roth v. United States.Roth v. United States, . William Brennan wrote for a 6–3 majority that upheld the criminal conviction but abandoned the century-old Hicklin test in favor of a narrower definition of obscenity. However, it did not settle the issue, and the Warren Court had to hear more cases arising from subsequent prosecutions in the next decade, during which the Sexual Revolution began a more direct challenge to social mores on the issue.
Criminal trials for obscenity were becoming more frequent and more of a risk for local prosecutors. Civil libertarians rallied around the defendants, creating negative publicity and increasing the chance of acquittals. Convictions were struck down on appeal. Some local authorities decided to combat obscenity through the use of civil forfeiture of obscene material. In civil cases, they had a lower burden of proof, needing to show only by a preponderance of evidence that the material was obscene, with no actual person as a defendant.
Underlying dispute
In October 1957, a Lt. Coughlin of the Kansas City Police Department's (KCPD) vice squad was investigating the distribution of magazines which might have met the state's definition of obscenity. As part of that investigation, he visited the office of Kansas City News Distributors, a wholesaler which sold all types of printed material to newsstands all over the city and its metropolitan area. He showed Homer Smay, the manager, a list of a possibly obscene magazine titles and asked if he distributed any of them; Smay confirmed that the wholesaler distributed all but one.Marcus v. Search Warrant, , 721–23 (1961), Brennan, J.
Coughlin visited five of the newsstands the wholesaler sold to and bought a copy of one of the listed magazines. He then filed affidavits for the newsstands and the main office of Kansas City News Distributors with a Jackson County circuit court judge, who issued search warrants that merely repeated the definition of obscenity in the Missouri statutes and did not list any specific titles nor specify in detail the types of materials to be seized. Two days later, Coughlin and other KCPD officers, with some help from the county sheriff's office, executed the warrants.
At the wholesalers' main office, the officers confiscated not only copies of the titles on Coughlin's list but anything else that at least one thought might be obscene. After three hours of searching through stock including a million copies of magazines, they took 11,000 copies representing 280 separate titles, as well as some books and still photographs.The seized material was later described as "so-called 'girlie' magazines, nudist magazines, treatises and manuals on sex, photography magazines, cartoon and joke books, and still photographs." (Marcus, 367 U.S. at 723, note 8). The seized material was transported to the 15th floor of the county courthouse. No arrests were made.
A week later, per statute, the judge held a hearing at which the claimants were allowed to challenge the obscenity findings of the material involved. They made motions to quash the warrant and search as unconstitutional, since there had been no prior hearing and since the officers executing the search had been allowed to seize almost anything. As a result of this argument, the case became an in rem action with the search warrant itself as the defendant, since no unlawful conduct could be argued on the part of the officers or even the state of Missouri itself. Two months later, the judge held the search valid but ordered 180 of the magazine titles returned, as they were not obscene. Copies of the other hundred were ordered to be burned publicly as required by the statute.
An appeal was made to the Missouri Supreme Court. It relied on the recent U.S. Supreme Court decision in Kingsley Books Inc. v. Brown,Kingsley Books Inc. v. Brown, . where a New York statute permitting authorities to obtain an injunction against the sale of any obscene material was upheld, and the Missouri Supreme Court held that the search and seizure was constitutional.Marcus, 367 U.S. at 734. The appellants then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari in the fall 1960 term.
Decision
The Court heard oral arguments in March 1961. Sidney Glazer argued for the claimants. Fred Howard, a Missouri assistant attorney general, argued for the state. His superior, Missouri Attorney General Thomas Eagleton, was credited as a coauthor of the state's brief.
In late June, near the end of the term, the Court announced its decision. Unanimously, it had held for the claimants that the search and seizure was unconstitutional. William Brennan wrote a majority opinion. Hugo Black wrote a short concurrence which was joined by William O. Douglas.
Opinions
"The use by government of the power of search and seizure as an adjunct to a system for the suppression of objectionable publications is not new", Brennan began. "Historically, the struggle for freedom of speech and press in England was bound up with the issue of the scope of the search and seizure power." Citing histories of the former, he traced the beginning of that struggle to the Royal Charter granted the Stationers' Company in the middle of the 16th century, which gave it the power to search printers at pleasure and seize any material that might violate any law or royal proclamation.Marcus, 367 U.S. at 725–27.
This authority continued in various forms, through various bodies, until it was condemned by judicial warrants in the cases brought by the Crown against John Wilkes, publisher of The North Briton, during the 1760s. Those cases culminated in the landmark Entick v Carrington,Entick v Carrington, [1765] EWHC KB J98, (1765) 19 Howell's State Trials 1030; 95 ER 807; [1765] EWHC KB J98. which the Court itself had called, in Boyd v. United States, "one of the landmarks of English liberty".Boyd v. United States, , 626 (1886), Bradley, J. "This history was, of course, part of the intellectual matrix within which our own constitutional fabric was shaped", Brennan wrote. "The Bill of Rights was fashioned against the background of knowledge that unrestricted power of search and seizure could also be an instrument for stifling liberty of expression."Marcus, 367 U.S. at 729.
Having concluded his review of the background history, Brennan turned to the present. "The question here is whether the use by Missouri in this case of the search and seizure power to suppress obscene publications involved abuses inimical to protected expression." While Brennan had held for the Court in Roth that obscenity did not come under the First Amendment's protections, it was a complex issue, since not all material dealing with sex and sexuality was inherently obscene.Roth, 354 U.S. at 385–87, Brennan, J. Thus, the process of suppressing it was necessarily limited by the concern for possibly protected expression, as it had recognized in overturning the criminal conviction of a Los Angeles bookseller under a strict liability standard in Smith v. California.Smith v. California, .Marcus, 367 U.S. at 730.
The Missouri Supreme Court had refused to distinguish between the seizure of obscene material and the seizure of other contraband, such as illegal drugs or gambling implements, also required by law to be destroyed. This Brennan held to be erroneous:
Nothing better demonstrated that adequate constitutional safeguards were lacking, Brennan noted, than the circuit court's eventual ruling that less than half of the seized magazines were obscene. "Procedures which sweep so broadly and with so little discrimination are obviously deficient in techniques required by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to prevent erosion of the constitutional guarantees."Marcus, 367 U.S. at 730–33.
Brennan described the lower court's reliance on Kingsley Books as "misplaced". The New York statute had required that a court actually review the material alleged to be obscene and that the injunction be limited to the distribution of the reviewed material. It also mandated a hearing within a day of the injunction and a verdict within two days of the hearing, whereas Missouri's statute imposed no time limit. Nor did the case "support the proposition that the State may impose the extensive restraints imposed here on the distribution of these publications prior to an adversary proceeding on the issue of obscenity, irrespective of whether or not the material is legally obscene" since it had merely allowed the issuance of an injunction against sale of the book, not the seizure and possible destruction of the book.Marcus, 367 U.S. at 734–37.
"[T]he restraint on the circulation of publications [here] was far more thoroughgoing and drastic than any restraint upheld by this Court in Kingsley Books," Brennan concluded. "Mass seizure in the fashion of this case was thus effected without any safeguards to protect legitimate expression. The judgment of the Missouri Supreme Court sustaining the condemnation of the 100 publications therefore cannot be sustained."Marcus, 367 U.S. at 737–38.
Black's short concurrence emphasized the Fourteenth Amendment aspect of the holding, making the provisions of the Fourth Amendment fully applicable to the states as well as the federal government. He expressed that view again, citing dissents to that effect he had either written or joined.Specifically, he referred to Adamson v. California, , 68, (1947), Black, J., dissenting; Frank v. Maryland, , 374, (1959), Douglas, J., dissenting. He also felt the Court's then-recent holding in Mapp v. Ohio extending the exclusionary rule to state prosecutions strengthened this view.Mapp v. Ohio, . In Stanford v. Texas, , the Court formally held as such.
Subsequent jurisprudence
Marcus became the first of a line of cases mandating procedural safeguards where allegedly obscene material was seized. Shortly after it was handed down, William M. Ferguson, Attorney General of neighboring Kansas, tried to adapt that state's procedures to the decision. Later, in 1961, lawyers with his office filed informations with some county circuit courts naming specific titles and requesting that the judges in the case actually review copies of the material named. Both went beyond the requirements of Kansas law.Quantity of Books v. Kansas, , 207–210, (1964), Brennan, J.
On the basis of those determinations, search warrants were issued. In Junction City, officers seized almost 2,000 copies of the named books from one local distributor. As its Missouri counterpart had, the distributor challenged the obscenity finding in court, which ruled in favor of the state. After an appeal to the Kansas Supreme Court failed, the U.S. Supreme Court heard Quantity of Books v. Kansas in 1963.
Brennan again wrote for a 7–2 majority that reaffirmed and expanded the Marcus holding. The Kansas seizure was unconstitutional as well, the Court said, since it did not provide for an adversary hearing where the distributor could challenge the obscenity allegation prior to seizure. Black, joined by Justice Douglas, in his concurrence reiterated both justices' firm opposition to any government regulation of obscenity; and Justice Potter Stewart concurred separately, finding that the books at issue did not constitute hardcore pornography, the only material he felt was beyond First Amendment protections. In dissent, Justice John Marshall Harlan II wrote for himself and Justice Tom Clark and found the case and procedure more similar to Kingsley Books than Marcus, saying that the Missouri Supreme Court should have been affirmed.Quantity of Books, 378 U.S. at 210 et seq.
The following year, Brennan again relied on his holdings in both Marcus and Quantity of Books when striking down Maryland's film-licensing system, since it was a purely executive-branch function. "[O]nly a procedure requiring a judicial determination suffices to impose a valid final restraint", he wrote in Freedman v. Maryland.Freedman v. Maryland, , 58, (1965) Brennan, J. In two later cases similar to Marcus, the Court reaffirmed it as applying to the seizure of allegedly obscene films as well. Lee Art Theatre, Inc. v. Virginia, a 1968 per curiam opinion, did not reach the issue of whether a judicial officer needed to review a film as well as a book but reversed the conviction on the same grounds as Marcus — that the judge simply relied on the investigation officer's affidavit in issuing the warrant.Lee Art Theatre, Inc. v. Virginia, , per curiam. Five years later, Roaden v. Kentucky, similarly built on Marcus to reverse a conviction based on a warrantless seizure of the film while it was being shown, which the Court held did not constitute exigent circumstances.Roaden v. Kentucky, , 506, (1973), Burger, C.J.
The Court reached the limits of Marcus in 1985, when it upheld the warrantless arrest and later conviction of a retail store clerk in Macon v. Maryland, since the obscene material was seized incident to a lawful arrest. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor distinguished the case from Marcus and its successors by noting that the arresting officers had obtained the material by purchasing it from racks open to the public, where no reasonable expectation of privacy existed, thus legally no search had occurred.Macon v. Maryland, , 468, (9185), O'Connor, J. Brennan, in dissent, found the police actions no less intrusive than he had in Marcus and called the holding "an end run around constitutional requirements carefully crafted to guard our liberty of expression."Macon, 472 U.S. at 476, Brennan, J., dissenting.
Outside of the Court's obscenity cases, Brennan also rested his majority holding in NAACP v. Button, reversing the Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals' ruling that the civil rights organization could not solicit litigants, on the dangers to First Amendment rights posed by overbroad statutes recognized by Marcus.NAACP v. Button, , 433, (1963), Brennan, J. Justice Stewart found it more directly applicable when holding for the Court in Stanford v. Texas that allegedly pro-Communist subversive material could not be seized on such a vaguely worded warrant. "No less a standard could be faithful to First Amendment freedoms", he wrote. "The constitutional impossibility of leaving the protection of those freedoms to the whim of the officers charged with executing the warrant is dramatically underscored by what the officers saw fit to seize under the warrant in this case."Stanford v. Texas, , 485 (1965), Stewart, J.
Appellate courts
Even a considerable amount of time since the case was handed down, a few appellate decisions have ventured to expand or clarify Marcus. In a 1981 case, United States v. Espinoza, the Fourth Circuit rejected a defense claim that the holding required judicial review of all material alleged to be obscene.United States v. Espinoza, 641 F.2d 153, 163 (4th Cir., 1981). After the Eighth Circuit affirmed Marcus's First Amendment protections extended to searches intended to find indicia of membership in an organization in 1983,United States v. Apker, 705 F.2d 293, 301 (8th Cir., 1983) the Fifth Circuit held 12 years later that it did not apply to seizures of material with First Amendment implications when that material was sought not for its possible content but to corroborate a witness's testimony.United States v. Layne, 43 F.3d 127, 133 (5th Cir., 1995).In that case, one of the daughters of a defendant facing child molestation charges had told investigators of a large stash of child pornography which he showed them while molesting them.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 367
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Warren Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
Notes
References
External links
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:United States civil forfeiture case law
Category:United States in rem cases
Category:History of Kansas City, Missouri
"""

From "Marino v. Ortiz" ==> """
Marino v. Ortiz, 484 U.S. 301 (1988), was a United States Supreme Court case which resulted from a lawsuit filed by 350 New York City police officers that pitted the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment against Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
The case originated with a lawsuit filed by African American and Hispanic advocacy groups (including the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund) alleging that a police sergeant's examination had a disparate impact because the percentage of African Americans and Hispanics that passed the examination was disproportionate to overall percentage. A proposed settlement was reached between the plaintiffs and the city of New York; all of the officers eligible for promotion based on their score would be promoted as well as enough additional minorities to achieve a proportional outcome. The settlement was approved by the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York as a "consent decree" on an interim basis pending a hearing on its fairness and adequacy.
After the ruling but before the hearing, 350 police officers filed suit in the same court alleging that the settlement had deprived them of equal protection of the laws under the Fourteenth Amendment. These officers were not eligible for promotion based on their scores, but they scored at least as high as the lowest scoring minority promoted under the terms of the consent decree. However, they did not seek to become party to the lawsuit that originated the settlement. The consent decree was ultimately approved, and as a result the police officers' lawsuit was dismissed. They appealed both the dismissal of their lawsuit and the consent decree itself.
When oral arguments for the case were held in the fall of 1987, the Court had only eight members. Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr. had retired from the court earlier in the year, the Senate had rejected Robert Bork's confirmation two months prior, and Anthony Kennedy would not be confirmed until after the decision was announced. This resulted in a gridlock 4-4 tie vote in the matter of whether the officers were correct to file a separate suit challenging the settlement. This being the case, the lower court ruling dismissing the suit was affirmed, but no precedent was set. The next case on the point, Martin v. Wilkes, Justice Kennedy voted that intervention was permissive (F.R.C.P. 24), not mandatory (F.R.C.P. 19) and that it was not an invalid collateral attack on the existing settlement in a similar case. Thereafter Congress amended the rules making intervention in such Title VII cases mandatory.
The Court unanimously agreed that the officers could not appeal the consent decree directly, because "only parties to a lawsuit, or those that properly become parties, may appeal an adverse judgment."
Though the Court's ruling did not directly address the constitutional issues raised, it foreshadowed a legal battle to come. Sonia Sotomayor, a future Supreme Court appointee by Barack Obama, promoted the minority officers' cause while at the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund and would later rule against white plaintiffs in a similar case, Ricci v. DeStefano, in a decision that the Supreme Court would overturn by a 5–4 vote.
References
External links
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:New York City Police Department
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:City of New York litigation
"""

From "Markman v. Westview Instruments, Inc." ==> """
Markman v. Westview Instruments, Inc., 517 U.S. 370 (1996), is a United States Supreme Court case on whether the interpretation of patent claims is a matter of law or a question of fact..  An issue designated as a matter of law is resolved by the judge, and an issue construed as a question of fact is determined by the jury. 
 Background 
Herbert Markman patented a system to track clothes through the dry cleaning process using barcode to generate receipts and track inventory.
The 7th Amendment guarantees the right to a jury trial in patent infringement cases. The 7th Amendment preserves the right to a jury trial as it existed in 1791. There is no dispute that infringement cases today must be tried by a jury as their predecessors were in 1791. However, the court held that the construction of the patent, including the terms of art within its claim, is exclusively within the court's province.  
In general, the effectiveness of a particular patent depends on its potential to block competitors. The key for a patent holder is getting the proper definition of words used in the patent to allow blocking of the particular troublesome competitive product. Before this decision, juries were responsible for deciding the meaning of the words used in patent claims. Opposing results in cases with similar facts were common, and a perception arose that the outcome of such trials was somewhat arbitrary. In Markman, the Court held that judges, not juries, would evaluate and decide the meaning of the words used in patent claims. Judges were to look at four sources for definitions, in order of priority: 
 the written description accompanying the patent claims is most relevant; 
 the documentation of the history of the patent as it went through the application;
 standard dictionaries of English; 
 finally, if all else fails, expert testimony from experts "skilled in the art" at issue.
This case has had a significant impact on the patent litigation process in the United States. Many jurisdictions now hold Markman hearings to construe patent claims before the actual trial. Patent infringement suits now often settle after this stage of the litigation process.
Supreme Court decision
In a unanimous ruling written by Justice David Souter, the court affirmed the judgment of the circuit court, holding that:
 The construction of a patent, including terms of art within its claim, is exclusively within the province of the court.
 Law firms involved 
Markman was represented in the original trial by the law firm of Duane Morris,Represented clients in Markman v. Westview Instruments, Inc., Duane Morris and by the law firm of Eckert Seamans on appeal. Defendants were represented by the law firm of Gollatz, Griffin, Ewing & McCarthy (now Flaster Greenberg) on appeal.Summary of Federal Circuit case and decision, April 5, 1995
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 517
 Markman hearing
References
External links
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Seventh Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:Barcodes
Category:Dry cleaning
"""

From "Marks v. United States" ==> """
Marks v. United States, 430 U.S. 188 (1977), is a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that explained how the holding of a case should be viewed where there is no majority supporting the rationale of any opinion.
Background
Petitioners were charged with several counts of transporting obscene materials in interstate commerce, and conspiracy to transport such materials. The conduct that gave rise to the charges covered a period through February 27, 1973, but the trial did not begin until the following October. In the interim, on June 21, 1973, the Supreme Court decided Miller v. California which announced new standards for isolating "hard core" pornography from expression protected by the First Amendment, the third test of which was "whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value".. Petitioners argued in the District Court that they were entitled to jury instructions not under Miller, but under the more favorable formulation of Memoirs v. Massachusetts that expressive material is constitutionally protected unless it is "utterly without redeeming social value.".
The Court noted that the Constitution's Ex Post Facto Clause is a limitation upon the powers of the Legislature, and does not of its own force apply to the Judicial Branch of government. But the principle on which the clause is based—the notion that persons have a right to fair warning of that conduct which will give rise to criminal penalties—is fundamental to our concept of constitutional liberty.
Petitioners asserted that Miller unforeseeably expanded the reach of the federal obscenity statutes beyond what was punishable under Memoirs. The Court of Appeals rejected this argument, noting that the Memoirs standards never commanded the assent of more than three Justices at any one time, and apparently concluded from this fact that Memoirs never became the law, and therefore the "contemporary community standards" test from the 1957 Roth v. United States applied, which was arguably at least as strict than the Memoirs test.
Opinion of the Court
The Court rejected the Petitioners' line of reasoning, stating that when a fragmented Court decides a case and no single rationale explaining the result enjoys the assent of five Justices, "the holding of the Court may be viewed as that position taken by those members who concurred in the judgments on the narrowest grounds . . . ."Gregg v. Georgia,  (opinion of Stewart, Powell and Stevens). Three Justices joined in the controlling opinion in Memoirs. Two others, Justice Black and Justice Douglas, concurred on broader grounds in reversing the judgment below. They reiterated their well-known position that the First Amendment provides an absolute shield against governmental action aimed at suppressing obscenity. Justice Stewart also concurred in the judgment, based on his view that only "hardcore pornography" may be suppressed. The view of the Memoirs plurality therefore constituted the holding of the Court and provided the governing standards at the time the alleged crimes were committed. Miller marked a significant departure from Memoirs and there can be little doubt that the third test announced in Miller expanded criminal liability. Since the petitioners were indicted for conduct occurring prior to the Court's decision in Miller, the Court found they are entitled to jury instructions requiring the jury to acquit unless it finds that the materials involved are "utterly without redeeming social value.".
See also
Plurality opinion
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:United States obscenity case law
"""

From "Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Service Corp." ==> """
Marquette Nat. Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Service Corp., 439 U.S. 299 (1978), is a unanimous U.S. Supreme Court decision holding that state anti-usury laws regulating interest rates cannot be enforced against nationally chartered banks based in other states. Justice William Brennan wrote that it was clearly the intent of Congress when it passed the National Banking Act that nationally chartered banks would be subject only to federal regulation by the Comptroller of Currency and the laws of the state in which they were chartered, and that only Congress or the appropriate state legislature could pass the laws regulating them.
The case has been called one of the most important of the late 20th century, since it freed nationally chartered banks to offer credit cards to anyone in the U.S. they deemed qualified, and more specifically because it allowed them to export credit card interest rates to states with stricter regulations, opening up a race between states in an effort to attract lending institutions to set up shop in their states and offer a wider variety of consumer credit products. Over the next decade, the states accelerated a process that had already begun of repealing or loosening their anti-usury laws, allowing state-chartered banks to compete more equally with national ones. As a result, the use of credit cards has vastly increased, and the mortgage industry soon followed suit.
Background of the case
U.S. banking system and anti-usury laws
During the Civil War, Congress enacted the National Bank Act, which allowed for nationally chartered banks as well as state-chartered ones and encouraged many existing banks to become national ones. It led to the standardization of U.S. currency and created a dual banking system that has existed ever since.
National banks were subject to regulation by the Comptroller of Currency but had to follow the laws of the states in which they were located. Among these statutes were anti-usury laws, which capped the rates at which banks were allowed to lend money, usually between 10 and 20 percent.
In the late 1970s, these created problems for some banks as the high inflation of that period resulted in them borrowing money at higher rates than they could lend it. In response to this asset–liability mismatch, libertarians and free-market advocates called for interest rate caps to be increased or repealed entirely as an unreasonable restriction on market forces. Bills to do so were introduced in Congress and some state legislatures. Some succeeded in the former goal, but those that sought to eliminate interest rate caps entirely failed.
Credit cards
The term "credit card" had been used and proposed by utopian author Edward Bellamy in his 1887 book Looking Backward. The first realizations of this model came during the Depression with Chargaplate, meant to encourage customers to spend money by introducing an alternative to cash and checks. Diners Club evolved in the early 50s as the first credit card company; what it provided, however, was a charge card, intended to be paid in full every month, rather than a credit card, designed to entail longer-term lending.
In 1958, Bank of America had introduced BankAmeriCard (today's Visa), the first credit card on a revolving credit model, in which cardholders did not have to pay the full balance each month but merely a minimum payment if they so chose. It, like other banks in those days, tried to promote use of them by mailing cards, unsolicited, to multiple, sometimes randomly chosen, customers in a particular area.
Fisher v. First of Omaha Service Corp.
In 1969, one of these unsolicited cards, First National Bank of Omaha, came to Iowa resident Fred Fisher. He filed suit in the Southern District of Iowa against the Omaha bank on September 3, 1971, for exporting Nebraska's higher interest rates to his state. He alleged  that since that state's legislature had fixed the usury ceiling at nine percent, First National was breaking the law by charging him twice that for an advance of up to $500.
On February 22, 1972, the court ordered the Fisher case be transferred to the U.S. District Court of Nebraska because the Omaha bank had "not waived its privilege of being sued in the district where it was established."  In an opinion filed on June 24, 1975, the Nebraska court ruled that the interest rate which First National may legally charge in Iowa is governed by the usury laws of the state "where the extension of credit occurs" and that since the credit was extended in Omaha where the 18 percent interest rate was not usurious, it was entirely within the legal bounds in Iowa as well.
On November 1, 1974, the Iowa attorney general, Richard C. Turner, filed a petition with the District Court, requesting a permanent injunction enjoining the Omaha bank and a Des Moines bank from assessing or collecting a finance charge in excess of the amount permitted by the Iowa Consumer Credit Code.  The court ruled in favor of the defendants. In 1977, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit affirmed the judgment of the District Court in the Fisher case, saying that First National's card program should not be restrained or restricted in any way because it "promotes and facilitates, rather than limits or inhibits, interstate trade and commerce.
In Iowa, on August 30, 1978, the Iowa Supreme Court threw out the lower court decisions and ruled in favor of both Fisher and the attorney general.  As a result, First National filed an appeal with the U.S. Supreme Court on September 11 and hired Robert H. Bork to argue its Minnesota case before the justices.
Marquette Bank
At the same time, some residents of Minnesota were being offered cards by First National of Omaha, at similar terms. Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis, which was chartered in the state and also offering credit cards, confronted First National Bank of Omaha and informed them that what they were doing with the interest rate was illegal, since Minnesota's capped interest rates at 12 percent (without specifying what kind of debt). Marquette threatened to take the Omaha bank to the U.S. Supreme Court if necessary if their practice continued.
Marquette began to lobby for the passage of a state law designed to put a 12 percent ceiling on all bank credit card outstandings.  In May 1976, about one month after that measure was signed into law, Marquette filed a suit in Hennepin County court to enjoin First Omaha from offering credit cards at the higher interest rate in Minnesota. It was first removed to federal court, where the judge sent it back to state court, which ruled in favor of Marquette. The Minnesota Supreme Court overturned that ruling on appeal.Marquette Nat. Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Service Corp., 
Before the Court
During oral argument, Justice Thurgood Marshall gave his analysis of the case.  He asked the Marquette attorney if he was correct in stating that the citizens of Minnesota can go to their bank and get a credit card at 12 percent.  The attorney agreed.  Justice Marshall again asked the Marquette attorney if he was correct in stating that First National Bank of Omaha is sending mailing solicitations into his territory and signing up a large number of citizens.  The attorney agreed.  Finally, Justice Marshall asked the Marquette attorney, "You're claiming that the Omaha bank is taking customers away from Marquette?"  The attorney agreed.  Justice Marshall concluded that the bank does not have a legal problem, but that they have a marketing problem.
Decision
On December 18, 1978, the high court, fully agreeing with Marshall's analysis, ruled unanimously in First National Bank's favor. The decision maintained that the 115-year-old National Bank Act takes precedence over usury statutes in individual states. Justice William Brennan  wrote that the 1863 law permitted a national bank to charge interest at the rate allowed by the regulations of the state in which the lending institution is located.Marquette Nat. Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Service Corp., .
Brennan rejected Marquette National's argument that just because First National was soliciting credit card customers in Minnesota, it was "located" in that state for purposes of the credit card program. "Minnesota residents were always free to visit Nebraska and receive loans in that state." It hadn't been suggested that Minnesota's laws would apply in that instance, he added. Therefore, they shouldn't be applied just because "the convenience of modern mail" allowed Minnesotans to get credit without having to visit Nebraska.439 U.S. at 311–312 He dismissed another of the plaintiffs' arguments, that the National Banking Act had also intended to preserve "competitive equality", between state and national banks by citing language from the original adoption of the statute and supporting documents to demonstrate that it was always Congress's intent to create a national banking system. The Court itself had taken notice of interstate lending as early as 1839, and the 1863 Congress, Brennan said, was equally aware of such transactions and did not wish to discourage them.439 U.S. at 313–319.
In the closing paragraph, he conceded one of the plaintiffs' arguments, that a ruling in First of Omaha's favor would make it difficult or impossible for states to enforce their anti-usury laws. But, he said, that had been the case since the National Banking Act was passed. "This impairment may in fact be accentuated by the ease with which interstate credit is available by mail through the use of modern credit cards," he allowed. "But the protection of state usury laws is an issue of legislative policy, and any plea to alter [the law] to further that end is better addressed to the wisdom of Congress than to the judgment of this Court."439 U.S. at 318–319.
On July 25, 1979, the Iowa Supreme Court overturned their decision that was made on August 30, 1978.All of this information was obtained from the book "The First National Bank Story", written by Dr. Stephen Szmrecsanyi, which was published in 1996.
Aftermath
The decision attracted little notice at the time. Two years later, the possibilities it opened up became clearer when Citibank, squeezed by interest rate caps, decided to move its credit-card operations out of New York City. The company persuaded Bill Janklow, then governor of South Dakota, whose agricultural economy was struggling at the time due to high fuel prices, to persuade that state's legislature to formally invite the bank there, as required by federal law before a national bank can do business from a state. He then successfully lobbied the legislators to pass a bill drafted by the bank that repealed the state's cap on interest rates, something a small group of legislators were already trying to do. Citibank quickly moved the 300 white-collar jobs in its credit-card division to Sioux Falls, where it has been ever since.
South Dakota lured a few more large credit operators, such as Wells Fargo, before corporation-friendly Delaware repealed its anti-usury laws as well. Several other states also repealed their interest-rate caps, more lenders entered the credit-card field and introduced newer products and by 1990 the amount of credit cards in use in the U.S. had more than doubled. Credit cards, once a loss leader for the banks that issued them, became a major profit center as banks aggressively marketed them to "revolvers", customers who carried large balances but rarely paid more than the monthly minimum, resulting in large interest payments to the bank.
In the 1990s, Citibank's South Dakota operations would figure in a related Supreme Court case, Smiley v. Citibank.. This time state regulations on the late fees charged by credit-card issuers were challenged, and again the court ruled unanimously that they were also pre-empted by the National Banking Act, as interpreted by the Comptroller of Currency.
Criticism
Critics and defenders of the credit-card industry have agreed that Marquette Bank opened the door for vast changes in how it does business. The former have often criticized the Court's ruling in the process.
"[W]e effectively engaged in the single biggest policy change in the credit area, the whole consumer credit area, through an obscure Supreme Court decision interpreting some ambiguous language," Massachusetts senator and former Harvard Law professor Elizabeth Warren, a frequent critic of the consumer-credit industry. "In terms of changing our lives", says Chicago labor lawyer Thomas Geoghegan, "it may be the biggest case of our lifetimes."
"The effect was to gut every state law on usury", he says. The 1863 Congress, Geoghegan complains, couldn't have imagined credit cards when it passed the National Banking Act. He conceded that Brennan's opinion is technically right, but speculates that the justice thought Congress would step into the gap afterwards and enact a national credit-card rate cap, although that was politically unlikely at the time. In 1991 New York Senator Al D'Amato, a harsh critic of the credit-card industry, introduced a bill that would have capped credit card interest rates at 14% in response to a suggestion by President George H. W. Bush. His colleagues passed it overwhelmingly after half an hour of debate; the stock market fell, though the cause is disputed. It was never voted on in the House, and soon Congress focused on studying the industry's lending practices rather than capping interest rates.
Defenders of Marquette Bank point to increased competition in the credit card market as a positive result. "Contrary to the conventional wisdom, Marquette did not lay a foundation for runaway bank profits and consumer suffering," says George Mason University School of Law professor Todd Zywicki. "Rather, by eliminating archaic and largely ineffective usury restrictions, Marquette increased efficiency and competition in the credit card industry, made the market more responsive to consumer demand, and provided large benefits to consumers."Zywicki, op. cit., 94–5. Specifically, he cites the shift from retailer-issued credit to third-party bank credit as the biggest component of this change made possible.Zywicki, op. cit., 115.
On May 22, 2009, the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009 (the Credit CARD Act), which limited the ways that banks could charge credit card customers, was signed into law.
References
External links
Category:United States banking case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:Credit cards in the United States
Category:Interest rates
"""

From "Marquez v. Screen Actors Guild Inc." ==> """
Marquez v. Screen Actors Guild Inc., 525 U.S. 33 (1998), was a United States Supreme Court decision involving the validity of a union shop contract..
 Background 
The petitioner Naomi Marquez is a part-time actress who successfully auditioned for a one-line role in Medicine Ball, a television series produced by Lakeside Productions. Pursuant to the union agreement Lakeside Productions had with the Screen Actors Guild (SAG), Lakeside contacted the SAG to verify that Marquez met the requirements of the union security clause.
It turns out that Marquez had previously worked in the motion picture industry for more than 30 days, thus the union security clause was triggered and Marquez was required to pay union fees before she could work at Lakeside.
The petitioner tried to negotiate with the SAG which would allow her to pay the union fees after she completed her work with Lakeside. The negotiations did not result in any compromise. On the day the part was supposed to be filmed, Marquez still had not paid her union dues and fees. Lakeside hired a different actress to fill in the part. At some point afterwards, the SAG faxed a letter to Lakeside that it had no objections to the petitioner working in the production, but it was too late for filming had already started on schedule with the replacement actress.
The petitioner filed a suit against the SAG and Lakeside claiming that they had breached its duty of fair representation by negotiating and enforcing a union security clause that used language from NLRA § 8(a)(3) but did not include the Court's rulings and explanation of rights in the terms of the agreement to intentionally mislead the workers within the union.
At issue was whether a union breaches its duty of fair representation by negotiating a union security clause that uses statutory language without articulating the Court's interpretation of that language.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court unanimously denied Marquez's claim.https://www.oyez.org/cases/1990-1999/1998/1998_97_1056 
The Court said that the statutory language incorporates all the refinements associated with the language, is a shorthand description of the worker's legal rights. The Court explained that if the petitioner's logic was used, there would be no stopping point because all contracts would have to spell out every intricacy of every term in the contract. Contracts would thus become massive, and yet there would be no real benefit from the increase in mass. The Court decided that it was perfectly reasonable for the union to use terms of art in a contract.
NLRB v. General Motors Corp.: An employee can satisfy NLRA § 8(a)(3) "membership" condition merely by paying to the union an amount equal to its initiation fees and dues.
Communications Workers of America v. Beck: NLRA § 8(a)(3) does not permit unions to exact fees or dues over the objection of nonmembers for activities that are not germane to collective bargaining, grievance adjustment, or contract administration.
 References 
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Screen Actors Guild
Category:Labor relations in the United States
Category:1998 in United States case law
"""

From "Marrama v. Citizens Bank of Massachusetts" ==> """
Marrama v. Citizens Bank of Massachusetts, 549 U.S. 365 (2007), is a United States Supreme Court case about bad faith in bankruptcy..
Facts
On March 11, 2003, Robert Marrama filed a voluntary bankruptcy petition under Chapter 7, thereby creating an estate consisting of all his property “wherever located and by whomever held.”.  Respondent Citizens Bank of Massachusetts was the principal creditor.
In his petition, Marrama made a number of statements about his house in Maine that were misleading or inaccurate.  While he disclosed that he was the sole beneficiary of the trust that owned the property, he listed its value as zero.  He also denied that he had transferred any property other than in the ordinary course of business during the year preceding the filing of his petition.  Neither statement was true. In fact, the Maine property had substantial value, and Marrama had transferred it into the newly created trust for no consideration seven months prior to filing his Chapter 13 petition. Marrama later admitted that the purpose of the transfer was to protect the property from his creditors.
Procedural history
At the hearing, Marrama explained that his misstatements about the Maine property were attributable to a “scrivener’s error” and claimed an absolute right to convert his claim from Chapter 7 to Chapter 13.  The Bankruptcy Judge rejected these arguments.  Marrama appealed to the Bankruptcy Appellate Panel for the First Circuit, which affirmed the lower court's ruling.  On appeal from the panel, the full First Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed, rejecting the argument that §706(a) gives a Chapter 7 debtor an absolute right to convert to Chapter 13.  Marrama appealed again to the Supreme Court.  Because other circuit courts had issued contrary opinions, the Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the difference..
Decision
Issue
Does a debtor who acts in bad faith before, or in the course of, filing a Chapter 13 petition by, for example, fraudulently concealing significant assets, thereby forfeit his right to obtain Chapter 13 relief?
Parties' arguments
Marrama’s argument was that he had an absolute right to convert his case from Chapter 7 to Chapter 13 under the plain language of §706(a) of the Code..
Citizens Bank argued that the statute uses the word “may” rather than “shall,” leaving room for the courts, in their discretion, to construe a "bad faith" exception to the general rule.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Stevens wrote the opinion for the Court.  Agreeing with the First Circuit's opinion, the Court held that there is a bad faith exception to the right to convert from Chapter 7 to Chapter 11.  According to the Court, "a Chapter 13 proceeding may be either dismissed or converted to a Chapter 7 proceeding 'for cause' and includes a nonexclusive list of 10 causes justifying that relief. None of the specified causes mentions prepetition bad-faith conduct.... Bankruptcy courts nevertheless routinely treat dismissal for prepetition bad-faith conduct as implicitly authorized by the words 'for cause.'"Marrama, 549 U.S. at 373.
Dissent
Justice Alito dissented from the opinion of the Court, and was joined by three other Justices.  Alito found that the imposition of the bad-faith exception "is inconsistent with the Bankruptcy Code."  His opinion follows the plain language of the statute, specifically the passage that indicates that a "debtor may convert a case under this chapter to a case under chapter 11, 12, or 13 of this title at any time, if the case has not been converted under section 1112, 1208, or 1307 of this title."  He finds that to read an implied bad-faith exception would violate the actual wording of the statute, and that the statute functions well without need of such an interpretation.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:Fraud in the United States
Category:Finance fraud
Category:NatWest Group litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Marsh v. Alabama" ==> """
Marsh v. Alabama, 326 U.S. 501 (1946), was a case decided by the US Supreme Court, which ruled that a state trespassing statute could not be used to prevent the distribution of religious materials on a town's sidewalk even though the sidewalk was part of a privately-owned company town. The Court based its ruling on the provisions of the First Amendment and Fourteenth Amendment.
Background
The town of Chickasaw, Alabama, was predominantly a Gulf Shipbuilding Corporation company town near Mobile, Alabama, and was owned and operated by the Gulf Shipbuilding Corporation ("Gulf"). The town exhibited the general characteristics of a more traditional settlement. Its policeman was a deputy from the Mobile County Sheriff's Department who was paid by Gulf. The town was surrounded by a number of adjacent neighborhoods that were not on Gulf property.
The Supreme Court noted that the residents of the non-Gulf neighborhoods were freely allowed to use the company-owned streets and sidewalks to access the town's businesses and facilities.
The appellant, Grace Marsh, a Jehovah's Witness, stood near the post office one day and began distributing religious literature. Marsh was warned that she needed a permit to do so and that none would be issued to her. When she was asked to leave, she refused on the grounds that the company rules against distribution of such materials could not be constitutionally applied to her.
The deputy sheriff arrested her and she was charged with the Alabama criminal code's trespassing equivalent.
During her trial, Marsh contended that the statute could not be constitutionally applied to her, as it would necessarily violate her rights under the First Amendment and the Fourteenth Amendment. That contention was rejected, and Marsh was convicted.
The Alabama Court of Appeals affirmed the conviction by holding that the statute as applied was constitutional because the title to the sidewalk was in the corporation's name. It held that the public use of the sidewalk had not been such as to give rise to a presumption under Alabama law of its irrevocable dedication to the public.
The Alabama Supreme Court denied certiorari, and Marsh then appealed her case to the United States Supreme Court.
Decision
The Court ruled 5–3 in favor of Marsh. The plurality opinion, joined by three justices, was authored by Justice Hugo Black, with Justice Felix Frankfurter writing a concurring opinion and Justice Stanley Forman Reed writing a dissent.
The Court initially noted that it would be an easy case if the town were a more traditional, publicly administered municipality. Then, there would be a clear violation of the right to free speech for the government to bar the sidewalk distribution of such material. The question became, therefore, whether or not constitutional freedom of speech protections could be denied simply because a single company held title to the town.
The state had attempted to analogize the town's rights to the rights of homeowners to regulate the conduct of guests in their home. The Court rejected that contention by noting that ownership "does not always mean absolute dominion". The court pointed out that the more an owner opens his property up to the public in general, the more his rights are circumscribed by the statutory and constitutional rights of those who are invited in.
In its conclusion, the Court stated that it was essentially weighing the rights of property owners against the rights of citizens to enjoy freedom of press and religion. The Court noted that the rights of citizens under the Bill of Rights occupy a preferred position. Accordingly, the Court held that the property rights of a private entity are not sufficient to justify the restriction of a community of citizens' fundamental rights and liberties.
Justice Frankfurter concurred in the Court's opinion with one exception. The majority opinion briefly mentioned the Commerce Clause as possibly being analogous to the case's circumstances. Frankfurter expressed his opinion that it was unnecessary to look to the Commerce Clause for guidance on a First Amendment issue.
Justice Reed started his dissent by noting that constitutional protections for religion, speech, and press are not absolute or unlimited in respect to the manner or the place of their exercise. Furthermore, Reed asserted that property rights, which are also protected by the Constitution, "are not outweighed by the interests of the trespasser, even though he trespasses in behalf of religion or free speech."
Subsequent history
The Marsh holding at first appears somewhat narrow and inapplicable today because of the disappearance of company towns from the United States, but it was raised in a somewhat high-profile 1996 cyberlaw case, Cyber Promotions v. America Online, 948 F. Supp. 436, 442 (E.D. Pa. 1996).Link to Cyber Promotions opinion (.pdf download) Cyber Promotions wished to send out "mass email advertisements" to AOL customers. AOL installed software to block those emails. Cyber Promotions sued on free speech grounds and cited the Marsh case as authority for the proposition that even though AOL's servers were private property, AOL had opened them to the public to such a degree that constitutional free speech protections could be applied. The federal district court disagreed, thereby paving the way for spam filters at the Internet service provider level.
In Lloyd Corp. v. Tanner, the Supreme Court distinguished a private shopping mall from the company town in Marsh and held that the mall had not been sufficiently dedicated to public use for First Amendment free speech rights to apply within it.
The case has been highlighted as a potential precedent to treat online communication media like Facebook as a public space to prevent it from censoring speech. In Manhattan Community Access Corp. v. Halleck the Supreme Court found that private companies only count as state actors for First Amendment purposes if they exercise “powers traditionally exclusive to the state". However, the Court's narrow holding avoided the Facebook issue.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 326
References
External links
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:1946 in Alabama
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:Mobile County, Alabama
Category:Company towns in Alabama
Category:1946 in religion
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Marsh v. Buck" ==> """
Marsh v. Buck, 313 U.S. 406 (1941), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held General statements that the law will be enforced if enacted are not threats against entities subject to the law.
 References 
External links
Category:1941 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Marsh v. Chambers" ==> """
Marsh v. Chambers, 463 U.S. 783 (1983), was a landmark court case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that government funding for chaplains was constitutional because of the "unique history" of the United States.. Three days before the ratification of the First Amendment in 1791, containing the Establishment clause, the federal legislature authorized hiring a chaplain for opening sessions with prayer.
Background
Nebraska state senator Ernie Chambers sued in federal court claiming that the legislature's practice of opening sessions with a prayer offered by a state-supported chaplain was in violation of the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.  The district court held that the prayer did not violate the Constitution, but that state support for the chaplain did.  The 8th Circuit Court of Appeals held that both practices violated the Constitution.
Question before the Court
Does paying a chaplain for religious services using taxpayer dollars violate the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment?
Decision of the Court
In a 6–3 decision in favor of Marsh, Chief Justice Burger wrote the opinion for the majority. The Chief Justice noted that the position of chaplain has been closely tied to the work of state and federal legislatures. "This unique history leads us to accept the interpretation of the First Amendment draftsmen who saw no real threat to the Establishment Clause arising from a practice of prayer similar to that now challenged."
Dissenting opinions
Justice Brennan, joined by Justice Marshall, wrote in a dissenting opinion,
The Court makes no pretense of subjecting Nebraska's practice of legislative prayer to any of the formal "tests" that have traditionally structured our inquiry under the Establishment Clause. That it fails to do so is, in a sense, a good thing, for it simply confirms that the Court is carving out an exception to the Establishment Clause, rather than reshaping Establishment Clause doctrine to accommodate legislative prayer. For my purposes, however, I must begin by demonstrating what should be obvious: that, if the Court were to judge legislative prayer through the unsentimental eye of our settled doctrine, it would have to strike it down as a clear violation of the Establishment Clause.Marsh, 463 U.S. at 796 (Brennan, J., dissenting).
Citing Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971), Justice Brennan points out that the circumstances in the present case clearly do not meet the three-point Lemon test:
Every analysis in this area must begin with consideration of the cumulative criteria developed by the Court over many years. Three such tests may be gleaned from our cases. First, the statute [at issue] must have a secular legislative purpose; second, its principal or primary effect must be one that neither advances nor inhibits religion; finally, the statute must not foster "an excessive government entanglement with religion."Marsh, 463 U.S. at 797 (Brennan, J., dissenting, quoting ).
Justice Stevens also wrote a dissenting opinion, where he essentially argues that religious minorities of any particular region will be disenfranchised by the majority ruling, stating:
Prayers may be said by a Catholic priest in the Massachusetts Legislature and by a Presbyterian minister in the Nebraska Legislature, but I would not expect to find a Jehovah's Witness or a disciple of Mary Baker Eddy or the Reverend Moon serving as the official chaplain in any state legislature. Regardless of the motivation of the majority that exercises the power to appoint the chaplain, it seems plain to me that the designation of a member of one religious faith to serve as the sole official chaplain of a state legislature for a period of 16 years constitutes the preference of one faith over another in violation of the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment."Marsh, 463 U.S. at 823 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
Subsequent history
In Town of Greece v. Galloway (2014) the Court held that the Establishment Clause is not violated when a town board begins their sessions with a sectarian prayer, so long as the town does not discriminate against minority faiths in determining who may offer a prayer..
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 463
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Establishment Clause case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:1983 in religion
Category:Nebraska Legislature
Category:American chaplains
