"""

From "United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind" ==> """
United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind, 261 U.S. 204 (1923), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States decided that Bhagat Singh Thind, an Indian Sikh man who identified himself as an Aryan, was ineligible for naturalized citizenship in the United States..  In 1919, Thind filed a petition for naturalization under the Naturalization Act of 1906 which allowed only "free white persons" and "aliens of African nativity and persons of African descent" to become United States citizens by naturalization.
After his petition was granted, government attorneys initiated a proceeding to cancel Thind's naturalization and a trial followed in which the government presented evidence of Thind's political activities as a founding member of the Ghadar Party, an Indian independence movement headquartered in San Francisco. Thind did not challenge the constitutionality of the racial restrictions. Instead, he attempted to be classified as a "free white person" within the meaning of the Naturalization Act based on the fact that Indians and Europeans share common descent from Proto-Indo-Europeans.
Thind was represented by a fellow Indian American, Sakharam Ganesh Pandit, a California attorney. 
The Court unanimously rejected Thind's argument, adding that Thind did not meet a "common sense" definition of white, ruling that Thind could not become a naturalized citizen. The Court concluded that "the term 'Aryan' has to do with linguistic, and not at all with physical characteristics, and it would seem reasonably clear that mere resemblance in language, indicating a common linguistic root buried in remotely ancient soil, is altogether inadequate to prove common racial origin."Chi, S. & Robinson, E.M. (2012). Voices of the Asian American and Pacific Islander Experience (vol. 1). pp. 341. USA: Greenwood. 
Background
Bhagat Singh Thind had come to the United States in 1913 for higher studies after obtaining a bachelor's degree in India. He enlisted in the United States Army, became a Sergeant and served in the First World War. He was discharged honorably with his character designated as "excellent". Thind was granted citizenship in the state of Washington in July 1918 but his citizenship was rescinded in just four days. He received his citizenship for the second time in the state of Oregon in November 1920 after the Bureau of Naturalization was unsuccessful in its efforts to stall it in Oregon court. The case then reached the Supreme Court, where Sakharam Ganesh Pandit, a California attorney and fellow immigrant, represented Thind.
Argument
Thind argued that Indo-Aryan languages are indigenous to the Aryan part of India in the same way that Aryan languages are indigenous to Europe, highlighting the linguistic ties between Indo-Aryan speakers and Europeans, as most European languages including English are similar to Indo-Aryan languages such as Hindi.
Since the Ozawa v. United States court case had just decided that the meaning of white people for the purposes of the Court were people who were members of the Caucasian race, Thind argued that he was a white person by arguing that he was a member of the Caucasian race.Warnke, G. (2007). After Identity: Rethinking Race, Sex, and Gender. Cambridge University Press: New York.  Thind argued using "a number of anthropological texts"  that people in Punjab and other Northwestern Indian states belonged to the "Aryan race", and Thind cited scientific authorities such as Johann Friedrich Blumenbach as classifying Aryans as belonging to the Caucasian race. Thind argued that, although some racial mixing did indeed occur between the Indian castes, the caste system had largely succeeded in India at preventing race-mixing. Thind argued that by being a "high-caste, of full Indian blood" he was a "Caucasian" according to the anthropological definitions of his day.
Thind's lawyers argued that Thind had a revulsion to marrying an Indian woman of the "lower races" when they said, "The high-caste Hindu regards the aboriginal Indian Mongoloid in the same manner as the American regards the Negro, speaking from a matrimonial standpoint."Bigsby, C. (2006). The Cambridge companion to modern American culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  Thind's lawyers argued that Thind had a revulsion to marrying a woman of the Mongoloid race. This would characterize Thind as being both white and someone who would be sympathetic to the existing anti-miscegenation laws in the United States.
Verdict
Associate Justice George Sutherland said that authorities on the subject of race were in disagreement over which people were included in the scientific definition of the Caucasian race, so Sutherland instead chose to rely on the common understanding of race rather than the scientific understanding of race. Sutherland found that, while Thind may claim to have "purity of Aryan blood" due to being "born in Village Taragarh Talawa near Jandiala Guru, Amritsar, Punjab", he was not Caucasian in the "common understanding", so he could not be included in the "statutory category as white persons".
The Court reiterated its holding in Ozawa v. United States, explaining that the words "free white person" in the naturalization act were "synonymous with the word 'Caucasian' only as that word is popularly understood," pointing out that the statutory language was to be interpreted as "words of common speech and not of scientific origin, ... written in the common speech, for common understanding, by unscientific men." Justice Sutherland wrote in his summary:United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind, Certificate From The Circuit Court Of Appeals For The Ninth Circuit., No. 202. Argued January 11, 12, 1923.—Decided February 19, 1923, United States Reports, v. 261, The Supreme Court, October Term, 1922, 204–215.
The 1910 Encyclopædia Britannica entry on "Hinduism" that Justice Sutherland cites as his sole source for this history contradicts his conclusion about the Aryans of Thind's birthplace in the Punjab and explicitly refers to the Aryans of India as part of "the white race."
The Court nonetheless also concluded that "the term 'Aryan' has to do with linguistic, and not at all with physical, characteristics, and it would seem reasonably clear that mere resemblance in language, indicating a common linguistic root buried in remotely ancient soil, is altogether inadequate to prove common racial origin."Chi, S. & Robinson, E.M. (2012). Voices of the Asian American and Pacific Islander Experience (vol. 1). pp. 341. USA: Greenwood. 
The Court argued that the exclusion of non-whites was based on the idea of racial difference rather than the idea that one race is superior or inferior to another race. The Court argued that the racial difference between Indians and whites was so great that the "great body of our people" would reject assimilation with Indians.
In conclusion, the Court also noted that "Congress, by the Act of February 5, 1917, 39 Stat. 874, c. 29, § 3, has now excluded from admission into this country all natives of Asia within designated limits of latitude and longitude, including the whole of India," suggesting its intention that natives of India also be excluded from eligibility for naturalized citizenship.
Aftermath
As a result of the U.S. Supreme Court decision finding that no person of Indian origin could become a naturalized American, the first person from the Indian subcontinent to become an American citizen, A. K. Mozumdar, had his citizenship revoked. A decision on his appeal to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld that revocation.
Not only were new applicants from India denied the privilege of naturalization, but the new racial classification suggested that the retroactive revocation of naturalization certificates granted to Asian Indians, of which there were many, might be supported by the Court's decision, a point that some courts upheld when United States attorneys petitioned to cancel the naturalization certificates previously granted to many Asian Indians. Up to fifty Indian-Americans had their citizenship revoked between 1923 and 1927 as a consequence of the Thind ruling. Even Thind's own lawyer, Sakharam Ganesh Pandit, was targeted for denaturalization. However, Pandit successfully argued before the Ninth Circuit that revoking his citizenship would do him and his wife unfair harm under the equitable estoppel doctrine. His citizenship was upheld, and the Bureau of Naturalization subsequently cancelled its pending denaturalization cases against Indian-Americans.
Some of the consequences of revoked naturalized status are illustrated by the example of some Asian Indian landowners living in California who found themselves under the jurisdiction of the California Alien Land Law of 1913. Specifically, Attorney General Ulysses S. Webb was very active in revoking Indian land purchases; in a bid to strengthen the Asiatic Exclusion League, he promised to prevent Indians from buying or leasing land. Under intense pressure, and with Immigration Act of 1917 preventing fresh immigration to strengthen the fledgling Indian-American community, many Indians left the United States, leaving only half their original American population, 2,405, by 1940.
Thind petitioned for naturalization a third time in 1935 after the Congress passed the Nye-Lea Act, which made World War I veterans eligible for naturalization regardless of race. Based on his status as a veteran of the United States military during World War I, he was finally granted United States citizenship nearly two decades after he first petitioned for naturalization. 
As public support for Asian Indians grew throughout World War II, and as India's independence came closer to reality, Indians argued for an end to their legislative discrimination. The repeal of Chinese exclusion laws in 1943 and the granting of naturalization privileges to Chinese encouraged Asian Indians to hope for similar gains. Hurdling over many members of Congress and the American Federation of Labor, which vehemently opposed removing legislative measures barricading Indian immigration and naturalization, the Asian Indian community finally succeeded in gaining support among several prominent congressmen, as well as President Franklin D. Roosevelt. The support culminated in the signing into law by President Truman on July 2, 1946, of the Luce–Celler Act. This Act reversed the Thind decision by explicitly extending racial eligibility for naturalization to natives of India, and set a token quota for their immigration at 100 per year.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 261
 Racial classification of Indian Americans
 Dred Scott v. Sandford
 United States v. Wong Kim Ark
References
External links
 Bhagat Singh Thind materials in the South Asian American Digital Archive (SAADA)
 https://www.pbs.org/rootsinthesand/i_bhagat2.html
 http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/SSEAL/echoes/chapter10/chapter10.html
 Caucasian but not White: Article on Court Case at GMU
Category:1923 in United States case law
Category:United States civil rights case law
Category:Indian-American history
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Race-related case law in the United States
Category:Anti-Indian sentiment in the United States
Category:Sikhism in the United States
Category:History of Portland, Oregon
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:Deportation from the United States
"""

From "United States v. Booker" ==> """
United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220 (2005), is a United States Supreme Court decision on criminal sentencing. The Court ruled that the Sixth Amendment right to jury trial requires that other than a prior conviction, only facts admitted by a defendant or proved beyond a reasonable doubt to a jury may be used to calculate a sentence exceeding the prescribed statutory maximum sentence, whether the defendant has pleaded guilty or been convicted at trial. The maximum sentence that a judge may impose is based upon the facts admitted by the defendant or proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt.
In its majority decision, the Court struck down the provision of the federal sentencing statute that required federal district judges to impose a sentence within the United States Federal Sentencing Guidelines range, along with the provision that deprived federal appeals courts of the power to review sentences imposed outside the range. The Court instructed federal district judges to impose a sentence with reference to a wider range of sentencing factors set forth in the federal sentencing statute, and it directed federal appeals courts to review criminal sentences for "reasonableness," which the Court left undefined.
The ruling was the direct consequence of the Court's ruling six months earlier in Blakely v. Washington, in which the Court had imposed the same requirement on a guidelines sentencing scheme employed in Washington state. Blakely arose out of Apprendi v. New Jersey in which the Court held that except for a prior conviction, any fact that increases the defendant's punishment above the statutory maximum punishment must be submitted to a jury and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
Background
Booker
In 2003, Freddie Joe Booker was arrested after police officers found 92.5 grams of crack cocaine in his duffel bag. He later gave a written statement to the police that admitted to selling an additional 566 grams of crack cocaine. In 2003, a jury in the United States District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin found Booker guilty of possessing with intent to distribute at least 50 grams of cocaine base. Federal law provided for a statutory sentence of ten years to life in prison..
At sentencing, the judge found by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant (1) distributed 566 grams over and above the 100 grams that the jury had to have found and (2) had obstructed justice. Under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, that increased the defendant's base offense level from 32 to 36 (U.S.S.G. §§ 2D1.1(c)(2),(4)). The enhancement for the drug possession and obstruction of justice (U.S.S.G. § 3C1.1) made Booker's sentencing range of 30 years to life; the judge sentenced Booker to the minimum.
Booker appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, claiming the sentencing guidelines violated his Sixth Amendment rights since the judge was able to find facts absent the findings of the jury, other than his criminal history, to determine his sentencing range. The Seventh Circuit affirmed Booker's conviction but found the application of the Guidelines violated the Sixth Amendment, as interpreted in Blakely, and so reversed Booker's sentence. The Government appealed the Seventh Circuit's ruling to the Supreme Court.
Fanfan
Narcotics agents discovered 2.5 kilograms of cocaine and 281.6 grams of cocaine base in Ducan Fanfan's vehicle and arrested him. A jury in the US District Court for the District of Maine found that Fanfan had conspired to distribute and to possess with the intent to distribute at least 500 grams of cocaine, in violation of ,  and 841(b)(1)(B)(ii). The maximum sentence for Fanfan under the Federal Guidelines, without any additional findings, was 78 months in prison.
At sentencing, the judge, by a preponderance of the evidence, determined that Fanfan was responsible for 2.5 kilograms of cocaine powder and 261.6 grams of crack and was an organizer, leader, manager, or supervisor in the criminal activity. That would have resulted 188 to 235 months sentence under the Guidelines, which was a 10-year increase in the sentencing range from what the jury had found. The Supreme Court had issued Blakely four days before the judge imposed Fanfan's sentence. The sentencing judge, believing that Blakely had implications on federal judges increasing sentences on facts not found by juries, imposed the maximum sentence, 78 months, based on the jury's verdict. The government asked the judge to correct Fanfan's sentence, which was denied.
Consolidation
The Government filed a notice of appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit and a petition for a writ of certiorari before judgment in the Supreme Court in the Fanfan case. Because of the importance of the case, the Supreme Court granted the petition, as well as a similar petition for certiorari filed by the government in Booker's case, following the Seventh Circuit's ruling in favor of Booker. The Government asked the Court to determine whether Apprendi applied to the Sentencing Guidelines and which of the Guidelines were constitutional.
Decision
The decision of the Supreme Court was announced by two different groups of Justices.  Justice Stevens wrote the majority opinion answering the question of whether the application of the Guidelines in these two cases violated the Sixth Amendment as articulated in the Apprendi line of cases.  Justice Breyer wrote the majority opinion answering the question of how to remedy the Sixth Amendment violation identified by the Court.
Constitutional holding
As applied to modern sentencing schemes, the Sixth Amendment demands that, other than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the defendant's punishment above the statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.  The "statutory maximum" is the greatest sentence the judge can impose based solely on the jury's fact finding.  In a guidelines sentencing scheme that requires judges to impose a sentence within the guideline range, the jury-trial and reasonable-doubt requirements apply to the determination of any fact that exposes the defendant to punishment above the guideline range.
The Federal Sentencing Guidelines, like the Washington sentencing guidelines discussed in Blakely, were mandatory; sentencing judges were required to impose sentences within the range dictated by the Guidelines.  In this sense, the decision in Blakely dictated the constitutional holding that the rule of Apprendi, as construed in Blakely, applies to the Federal Sentencing Guidelines.
The Government made three principal arguments against applying Blakely to the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, all of which the Court rejected.
 Commission vs. Legislature 
The Federal Sentencing Guidelines were promulgated by a sentencing commission; the Washington sentencing guidelines at issue in Blakely, by contrast, were enacted by that state's legislature.  That distinction, the Court said, "lacked constitutional significance," because regardless of the body that set the rules, the rules required sentencing judges to increase sentences on the basis of particular facts not submitted to the jury and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.  "Regardless of whether the legal basis of the accusation [against the defendant] is in a statute or in guidelines promulgated by an independent commission, the principles behind the jury trial right are equally applicable" to each.
 Stare decisis 
The Government identified four recent cases that, it argued, precluded the Court from applying Blakely to the Guidelines under the principles of stare decisis.  First, United States v. Dunnigan, , held that the Guidelines provision that provided for an enhanced sentence if the defendant committed perjury during the trial did not violate the defendant's Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination.  In Dunnigan, the Court had no occasion to consider whether the jury-trial right applied to that particular provision.  Furthermore, although a sentence based on such an enhancement had the potential to exceed the statutory maximum, this did not mean that the judge had to impose such a sentence.  "Thus, while the reach of Dunnigan may be limited, we need not overrule it."
Next, Witte v. United States, , in which the Court held conduct that supported an enhancement in a prior case did not prevent a separate criminal prosecution for the same conduct, did not prevent applying Blakely to the Guidelines.  This was so because, ultimately, the conduct in the two respective cases was subject to two different burdens of proof.  The Court considered the converse of the Witte rule in United States v. Watts, , where it held that conduct of which the defendant had been acquitted could nevertheless support a sentence enhancement under the Guidelines.  In neither case had the Court considered whether the sentence enhancements in question were subject to the jury-trial requirement.  "The issue we confront today simply was not presented."
Finally, Edwards v. United States, , in which the Court allowed a sentence for a drug conspiracy involving both powder and crack cocaine to rest on both drugs in the face of a general verdict not specifying whether the jury believed the conspiracy involved either powder cocaine or crack cocaine or both, did not prevent the Court from applying Blakely to the Guidelines.  In Edwards, the defendants could not have argued that the powder and crack cocaine were not part of the same overall conspiracy; hence, the Court's ruling in that case was not inconsistent with applying Blakely to the Guidelines.
 Separation of Powers 
The Government argued that applying the jury-trial requirement to sentencing enhancements promulgated by a commission would transform those enhancements into a criminal code, resulting in an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power to the judicial branch.  In Mistretta v. United States, the Court had upheld the delegation of such legislative power to a body in the judicial branch, reasoning that the judicial branch had the power to exercise other quasi-legislative functions such as proposing rules of evidence and civil procedure for use in the federal courts.  The United States Sentencing Commission was not performing an adjudicatory function; rather, it was exercising a policy-making power appropriate for judicial officers and uniquely within their expertise.  This reasoning did not preclude applying Blakely to the Guidelines.
Thus, the Court ruled that the holding in Blakely applied to the Federal Sentencing Guidelines.
Remedial holding
The Court next confronted the question of a remedy for the constitutional violation.  A different majority of the Court concluded that 18 U.S.C. § 3553(b) — the provision of the federal sentencing statute that required district courts to impose a sentence within the Guidelines range — was "incompatible" with the constitutional holding and therefore had to be "severed and excised" from the statute.  Likewise, 18 U.S.C. § 3742(e), the provision that governed the handling of appeals from sentences, also had to be severed and excised, because that provision was inextricably linked with the provision that made the Guidelines mandatory.  The result of severing and excising these two provisions was to make the Guidelines "effectively advisory," such that district courts could, after considering the Guidelines range, tailor a sentence that reflected the broader range of concerns set forth in the federal sentencing statute.
The Court evaluated two possible remedies in light of Congress's intent in enacting the Guidelines system.  The first option, and the one preferred by the Justices who dissented from the remedial holding, "would engraft onto the existing system today's Sixth Amendment 'jury trial' requirement."  The second, the one the Court ultimately adopted, made the Guidelines advisory while at the same time "maintaining a strong connection between the sentence imposed and the offender's real conduct — a connection important to the increased uniformity of sentencing that Congress intended its Guidelines system to achieve."  Although both remedies would "significantly alter the system that Congress designed," the remedial majority observed that it was not possible to "maintain the judicial factfinding that Congress thought would underpin the mandatory Guidelines system" in light of the jury factfinding requirement the constitutional majority had applied to that system.
 Why the Jury Factfinding Requirement Is Not Compatible with the Guidelines Scheme 
Several considerations persuaded the Court that Congress would not have enacted the Guidelines system and made it mandatory for federal district judges to apply if it had known that a jury factfinding requirement would apply to it.  First, the text of the sentencing statute required "the court" to consider "the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics of the defendant" when imposing sentence.  In context, this meant "the judge sitting alone" instead of "the judge together with the jury."  When it was debating the Guidelines, Congress had intended for the judge to weigh the factors bearing on a defendant's sentence by himself.
Second, "Congress's basic statutory goal — a system that diminishes sentencing disparity — depends for its success upon judicial efforts to determine, and to base punishment upon, the real conduct that underlies the crime of conviction."  Many federal crimes are defined so broadly as to encompass a vast array of underlying conduct.  And other federal crimes, like robbery, can be committed in a variety of different ways.  Judges typically relied on presentence reports, which set forth the relevant conduct and offender characteristics, to assist them in determining what an appropriate sentence was.  Congress anticipated that, under the Guidelines, this practice would continue, and this expectation supported the Court's holdings in Witte and Watts.  By contrast, imposing the jury factfinding requirement onto the Guidelines would "destroy the system" by "prevent[ing] a judge from relying on a presentence report for factual information, relevant to sentencing, uncovered after the trial," because such facts would necessarily not have been submitted to the jury during the course of the trial.  This, in turn, would "weaken the tie between a sentence and an offender's real conduct."
Imagine that both Smith and Jones violate the Hobbs Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1951(a), which forbids obstructing, delaying, or affecting commerce or the movement of any article or commodity in commerce by extortion.  Smith threatens to injure a co-worker if the co-worker does not advance him a few dollars from the interstate company's till.  Jones threatens to injure a co-worker unless the co-worker advances him a few thousand dollars from the company's accounts, and reinforces this threat by "making certain that the co-worker's family is aware of the threat, by arranging deliveries of various dead animals to the co-worker's home to show that he is serious, and so forth."  Both Smith and Jones, although they violated the same statute, created different harms as a result of their actions.  Under the Guidelines, their sentences would be different.  If the jury factfinding requirement were merely grafted onto the Guidelines scheme, unless prosecutors "decide to charge more than the elements of the crime," the judge would have to impose similar punishments.
Imagine next that two former felons, Johnson and Jackson, each threatened a bank teller with a gun, made off with $50,000, and injured an innocent bystander while fleeing the bank.  Suppose Johnson was charged with illegal possession of a firearm under 18 U.S.C. § 922(g), and Jackson was charged with bank robbery under 18 U.S.C. § 2113(a).  The Guidelines would have allowed a judge to impose similar sentences on both Johnson and Jackson, despite their being charged with different crimes.  Requiring the sentence-enhancing facts to be submitted to a jury undermines the ability of the Guidelines to achieve their goal of sentence uniformity, meaning uniformity of sentences imposed for the same real conduct, not for violations of the same statute.
Furthermore, imposing the jury-factfinding requirement onto the Guidelines would prove more complex than Congress could have intended.  Would the sentence enhancements have to be charged in the indictment?  How could a defendant defend against specific enhancements, such as that he used a gun during the crime, while simultaneously denying his guilt entirely?  The fact that the vast majority of criminal cases are resolved through plea bargains would not simplify things.  Instead, it would complicate them by increasing the likelihood that any agreed-upon sentence reflects more the skill of defense counsel and the prosecutor's policies than the real conduct underlying the offense.
Such a system "would have particularly troubling consequences with respect to prosecutorial power."  Because a prosecutor would control not only the charge to bring against the defendant but also the sentence enhancement, he would necessarily have the "power to decide, based on relevant information about the offense and the offender, which defendants merit heavier punishments."
Congress also would not have intended to craft a system that makes it more difficult to ratchet sentences upward than downward.  Yet imposing the jury-factfinding requirement on the Guidelines would have precisely that effect.  For all these reasons, the Court concluded that Congress would not have enacted the Guidelines as it did if it had known that many of the various sentence-enhancing factors would be subject to a jury-trial requirement.
 Which Parts of the Statute Should Be Excised? 
In order to eliminate the constitutional violation the Court had identified and at the same time tailor the federal sentencing statutes more closely to Congressional intent, the Court struck out 18 U.S.C. § 3553(b)(1), the provision of the sentencing statute that made it mandatory for district courts to impose sentences according to the Guidelines.  The rest of the sentencing statute "functioned independently."  It required district judges to "consider" the Guidelines sentencing range established for the applicable category of offense committed by the applicable category of defendant in order to impose a sentence that reflects the seriousness of the offense, promotes respect for the law, provides for adequate deterrence, protects the public, and provides the defendant with needed educational or vocational training or medical care.
Because the Court had struck out § 3553(b)(1), it also had to strike out 18 U.S.C. § 3742(e), the provision governing the standard for reviewing sentences on appeal.  This did not impose an unnecessary obstacle for handling appeals of sentences, for "a statute that does not explicitly set forth a standard of review may do so implicitly."  Before the Court's decision in Booker, § 3742(e) had instructed appellate courts to determine whether a sentence was "unreasonable" with respect to the Guidelines range.  After Booker, the Court read the remaining provisions of the sentencing appeal statute to instruct appellate courts to determine whether sentences were "unreasonable" with respect to all the factors set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) — the statute spelling out which factors district courts were required to consider in fashioning a sentence in the first instance.  Though the Justices who dissented from the remedial holding called this standard unworkable, the Court reasoned that a standard of "reasonableness" was familiar from other areas of the law.  Together with the Sentencing Commission, which would still collect data about criminal sentencing, the courts of appeals together are able to maintain uniformity of criminal sentences.  Furthermore, if Congress was unsatisfied with this arrangement, it was free to amend the sentencing laws.
Dissenting opinions
Stevens's opinion
Justice Stevens pointed out that it was possible to avoid the Sixth Amendment violation in Booker's case without making any changes to the Guidelines at all.Baron-Evans, Amy, "Booker Rules" (2012) University of Pennsylvania Law Review, vol. 160, 1631,  <<https://ssrn.com/abstract=1987041>> Solely on the statute of conviction, the maximum Guidelines sentence Booker could have received was 262 months.  If the prosecution had submitted the quantity of drugs to the jury, the range would have increased to between 324 and 405 months.  Booker ultimately received a sentence of 360 months, one within the increased sentencing range and one which the sentencing judge could have imposed after evaluating Booker's criminal history and whether he had obstructed justice.  "Because the Guidelines as written possess the virtue of combining a mandatory determination of sentencing ranges and discretionary decisions within those ranges, they allow ample latitude for judicial factfinding that does not even arguably raise any Sixth Amendment issue."
But Stevens's principal objection was that the Court had crafted a new kind of severability analysis.  He started with the premise that all legislative enactments are presumed to be valid, and may only be struck down in their entirety if the law is unconstitutional in "all or nearly all of its applications," or if the invalid provision cannot be severed from the remainder of the statute.  Neither of those conditions applied to the federal sentencing laws, Stevens observed, and so there was no need to adopt a third method of curing constitutional violations.  After all, according to the Sentencing Commission, 45% of criminal sentences involve no enhancements whatsoever, and not all of the rest would actually implicate a defendant's Sixth Amendment rights.  Furthermore, defendants may waive their jury-trial rights, and so it follows that they may also waive their Blakely rights in appropriate situations.
These two observations led Stevens to the conclusion that only a "tiny portion" of criminal sentences imposed under the mandatory Guidelines scheme would actually implicate the Blakely rule.  In those cases, prosecutors, defense attorneys, and judges could cope.  Indeed, after Blakely was decided, the Department of Justice instructed prosecutors to include drug quantity allegations in the indictment.  Also, in many cases, Guidelines ranges overlap, and there would be no Blakely problem if the judge imposed a sentence within that overlapping range and based that sentence solely on judicial factfinding.  In light of these valid applications of mandatory Guidelines (constrained by Blakely), Stevens saw no plausible way to say that the sentencing statute was unconstitutional in nearly all of its applications.
Stevens further envisioned no difficulty in applying Blakely to the Guidelines.  The word "court" could just as easily refer to the judge and jury together as it could to the judge alone.  Congress must presumably legislate within constitutional limitations, after all, and it was not plain from the language of the statute that this alternative interpretation was incompatible.  Stevens disputed that applying Blakely to the Guidelines would frustrate the goal of achieving uniformity in sentences based on real conduct, because judges retained discretion to impose sentences within prescribed ranges; if defendants pleaded guilty and waived their Blakely rights, the range within which the judge could exercise his discretion would necessarily increase.  Given the fact-based nature of certain sentence enhancements under the Guidelines — drug quantity, firearm enhancements, and extent of injury or loss to the victim — there was no reason juries could not make those determinations.  In complicated cases, prosecutors, defense attorneys, and judges together could be trusted to craft workable solutions.  To the extent prosecutors overstep their charging authority, judges retain the ability to reject unsatisfactory plea agreements.  In light of these objections, Stevens disputed that Congress would have preferred the majority's remedy to a solution of its own devising.
Breyer's opinion
Justice Breyer reiterated his disagreement with the Apprendi rule, and then identified specific reasons not to apply the Blakely holding to the Federal Sentencing Guidelines.  The facts used to determine a defendant's sentence had historically been solely within a judge's purview, and the Federal Sentencing Guidelines should be treated no differently.  Creating a system that frustrated the goal of increased sentencing uniformity hardly seemed fair to defendants or to the public at large.  The fact that the Guidelines were administrative rules rather than statutes also was significant to Breyer.  And to the extent that the Guidelines did not adequately take into account an aggravating or mitigating circumstance, a judge was free to depart from the Guidelines range.  Thus, the defendant had every expectation that, despite the Guidelines, he might receive a sentence at or near the statutory maximum rather than at the top end of the Guidelines range.
Scalia's opinion
Justice Scalia took issue with the Court's inferring a "reasonableness" standard of appellate review of sentences from the remainder of a statute from which it had excised the express statement that sentences should be reviewed for "reasonableness."  Traditionally, sentencing discretion was not reviewable on appeal.  When the Guidelines were enacted, appellate review was limited to discrete cases delineated by statute; appellate review was not plenary.  According to the text of the statute, the "power to review a sentence for reasonableness arises only when the sentencing court has departed from the applicable guideline range."  The situation here was not that the statute did not explicitly set forth a standard of review, but rather that the statute did explicitly set forth such a standard, but then excised from the statute the provision that established the standard.  Was it proper for the Court to "look for some congressional 'implication' of a different standard of review in the remnants of the statute that the Court has left standing?  Only in Wonderland."
Furthermore, it was not as easy for the courts to apply the "reasonableness" standard in the context of appellate review of sentences as the majority would have liked.  First, there was no history of applying that standard under the Guidelines regime.  Second, under the majority's holding that standard would apply across the board to all sentence appeals, including those that involved no legal error.  "The worst feature of the scheme is that no one knows — and perhaps no one is meant to know — how advisory Guidelines and 'unreasonableness' review will function in practice."
Resentencings in light of ruling
Booker
The lower courts had to revisit Booker's sentencing in light of the Supreme Court decision. He was resentenced by the same judge to the same 30-year sentence (longer than the 21-year sentence the judge could have imposed if the guidelines not been made advisory); however, retroactive changes in crack cocaine guidelines meant that Booker's sentence has been reduced slightly by a federal judge (from 30 to 27 years). He was released from federal prison on 1 November 2019.
Fanfan
Fanfan was resentenced by the US District judge from 78 months to 210 months in prison. The new sentence was upheld on appeal by the US Court of Appeals.United States v. Fanfan,  His sentence was later reduced by the new federal sentencing guidelines for crack cocaine offenses.United States v. Fanfan,  He was released from federal prison on 12 June 2015.
Criticism
The decision has been criticized for fear that defendants and prosecutors will suffer from greater uncertainty and that some plea agreements will be entered into or rejected because of mistaken beliefs on the sentences that the judge will impose if the case is taken to trial or settled with a guilty plea.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 543
List of United States Supreme Court cases
 United States v. Binion (8th Cir. 2005)
References
External links
  Report on the impact of Booker by the United States Sentencing Commission
  Brief of the United States as Respondent
  Brief of the New York Council of Defense Lawyers as amicus curiae
  Sentencing Law and Policy blog, by Prof. Douglas Berman of the Ohio State University Moritz College of Law
 Guidelines Are Effectively Advisory, Not Mandatory; Appeals Should Follow the Standard of Unreasonableness
Category:Drug control law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2005 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment sentencing case law
Category:United States Federal Sentencing Guidelines case law
Category:Cocaine in the United States
"""

From "United States v. Bormes" ==> """
United States v. Bormes, 568 U.S. 6 (2012), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States holding that the Little Tucker Act, which provides jurisdiction to federal courts for certain claims brought against the federal government, does not apply to lawsuits brought under the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA)..
The Court characterized the Little Tucker Act as merely "gap-filling" and, therefore, superseded when a statute authorizing a claim for damages set forth its own specific enforcement procedures, as did the FCRA. Otherwise, the Court believed, the Little Tucker Act would broadly impose a waiver of sovereign immunity under detailed statutes that did not provide for it. The Court directed the lower court to address on remand whether the FCRA itself authorized a claim for damages against the government for violating its provisions.
 Background 
The issue came before the Court in the context of a lawsuit brought against the U.S. federal government by an attorney, James X. Bormes, who alleged that, after he paid a federal court filing fee online, he received a receipt that violated a provision of the FCRA by including more of his credit card information than was permitted.The FCRA provides, in part, that "no person that accepts credit cards or debit cards for the transaction of business shall print more than the last 5 digits of the card number or the expiration date upon any receipt provided to the cardholder at the point of the sale or transaction." . The definition of person, at §1681a(b), includes a "government or governmental subdivision or agency." Bormes filed a putative class action in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, claiming jurisdiction under both the FCRA and the Little Tucker Act.United States v. Bormes, slip op. at 2.
The district court dismissed the suit, holding that the FCRA did not waive the federal government's sovereign immunity so as to permit it to be sued under that statute.Bormes v. United States, 638 F. Supp. 2d 958 (N.D. Ill. 2009). Bormes appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, claiming jurisdiction under the Little Tucker Act; the federal government moved to transfer the suit to the Seventh Circuit on the basis that the Little Tucker Act did not apply.The Federal Circuit has exclusive jurisdiction "of an appeal from a final decision of a district court of the United States...if the jurisdiction of that court was based, in whole or in part, on" the Little Tucker Act. . The Federal Circuit denied the government's motion and vacated the district court's decision, ruling that the Little Tucker Act constituted a waiver of sovereign immunity that was applicable to a claim for damages under the FCRA.Bormes v. United States, 626 F. 3d 574, 578 (Fed. Cir. 2010).
 Opinion of the Court 
In a unanimous opinion by Justice Antonin Scalia, the Court vacated the Federal Circuit's decision and ruled that the Little Tucker Act had no applicability to claims brought under the FCRA. Reviewing the history of the Little Tucker Act and its mid-19th century predecessor, and the history of the Court of Claims, the Court observed that the purpose of the Little Tucker Act was to provide judicial remedies for claims against the federal government that were authorized by statute but did not provide a method for enforcement.United States v. Bormes, slip op. at 5-7. As such, it is purely a "gap-filling" statute.United States v. Bormes, slip op. at 5.
The Court, therefore, ruled that the Little Tucker Act's general provisions do not apply when another statute itself sets forth the specific conditions by which that statute is to be enforced, as the FCRA does. The Court wrote that "[t]o hold otherwise—to permit plaintiffs to remedy the absence of a waiver of sovereign immunity in specific, detailed statutes by pleading general Tucker Act jurisdiction—would transform the sovereign-immunity landscape."United States v. Bormes, slip op. at 9. Whether a suit for damages could be brought against the federal government under the FCRA was a question that only the FCRA itself could answer, and the Court left that for the Seventh Circuit to address on remand.United States v. Bormes, slip op. at 10-11.
References
Further reading
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
See also
 2012 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States
 2012 term United States Supreme Court opinions of Antonin Scalia
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States federal sovereign immunity case law
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "United States v. Briggs (2020)" ==> """
United States v. Briggs, 592 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case involving whether the United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces (CAAF) erred in ruling that the Uniform Code of Military Justice allows prosecution of a rape committed between 1986 and 2006 only if it was discovered and charged within five years. The Court, with the exception of Justice Amy Coney Barrett who did not participate on the case, ruled unanimously that under the Uniform Code, such crimes that are "punishable by death" under the Code do not have a statute of limitations unlike similar civilian crimes.
This case was considered notable due to its implications on the issue of sexual assault in the United States military and the military's ability to address these types of cases. The case was consolidated with another, similar case called United States v. Collins (No. 19-184).
 Background 
 Legal environment 
Under United States federal law, there is a separation between military and civilian law. Congress enacted the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) to create a separate, parallel legal system for the military, which is enforced by its own judicial system. In general, under the UCMJ crimes prosecuted under military law must be charged within five years due to the statute of limitations, with the primary exception being the crime of desertion or being absent without leave during a time of war. In 1986, Congress passed a law to exempt certain capital offenses (those punishable by the death penalty) from the statute of limitations as well. At the time of the 1986 amendment, capital offenses included rape. However, in 1977, the Supreme Court ruled in Coker v. Georgia that imposing the death penalty for rape violated the Eighth Amendment. Congress subsequently amended the UCMJ again to clarify that there was no statute of limitations for rape under the National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2006. This created an ambiguity in the law as it relates to rape and sexual assault cases that took place between 1986 (when Congress initially removed the statute of limitations for all capital offenses) and 2006 (when Congress clarified that the statute of limitations did not apply to rape even though rape was no longer a capital offense). This was resolved by the Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces in their 2018 ruling United States v. Mangahas (No. 17-0434). In Mangahas, the Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces ruled that, because rape was not a capital offense since 1977 due to Coker v. Georgia and because Congress did not pass a law separately excluding rape from the general statute of limitations, the general 5-year statute of limitations would apply to all rape cases stemming from incidents that took place before 2006. As a result of this ruling, several pending rape investigations were suspended and cases that were on appeal were dismissed.
 Case history 
In 2005, Briggs, a lieutenant colonel in the United States Air Force, raped a fellow airman who was assigned to the life support equipment section. At the time, the victim did not report the rape to law enforcement but did tell people she knew about it. In 2013, the victim reported the incident to law enforcement. Working with the Air Force criminal investigators, she contacted Briggs to discuss the assault and recorded him explicitly confessing to the rape. Briggs was tried before a military judge at Spangdahlem Air Base and, in August 2014, he was convicted and sentenced to five months of confinement as well as a discharge from the Air Force and letter of reprimand.
 In lower courts 
Briggs appealed his conviction and sentence to the United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals (AFCCA) in 2015. In his appeal, he raised several potential issues, including the statute of limitations for rape. However, the AFCCA rejected his appeal in June 2016, in part due to the fact that he failed to raise the statute of limitations issue during his trial. Briggs then appealed again, this time to the United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces (CAAF). In an opinion published in 2019 (No. 16-0711), CAAF ruled in favor of Briggs, dismissing the case against him. They cited the Mangahas decision, ruling that the 5-year statute of limitations applied to Briggs' case since the incident took place in 2005 (before Congress enacted the amendments removing the statute of limitations). According to the court, the statute of limitations expired in 2010 and thus the 2013 prosecution was not valid. This time, the government appealed the decision to the Supreme Court.
Supreme Court
The Supreme Court granted the government's petition for a writ of certiorari on November 15, 2019, and consolidated the Briggs case with two other, similar cases for one hour of oral argument scheduled for March 2020. However, this case was one of several that were pushed into the 2020–21 term due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and oral hearings were held instead on October 13, 2020; this was prior to Justice Amy Coney Barrett's confirmation to the Court to replace Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and thus Barrett took no part in this matter.
The Supreme Court issued its decision on December 10, 2020, reversing the Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces' decision in the trials of the three men and remanding the case.United States v. Briggs, . The unanimous opinion of the Court was written by Justice Samuel Alito. Alito wrote that in the interpretation of the law, where for crimes "punishable by death", the government's argument that this applicated to the Uniform Code was more pervasive than Briggs' assertion this was the application to civilian law. Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote a concurring opinion, and argued the Supreme Court did not have jurisdiction over cases from the CAAF.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:United States military case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:21st-century history of the United States Air Force
Category:Sexual assault in the United States military
Category:Statutes of limitations
"""

From "United States v. Brignoni-Ponce" ==> """
United States v. Brignoni-Ponce, 422 U.S. 873 (1975), was the case in which the Supreme Court determined it was a violation of the Fourth Amendment for a roving patrol car to stop a vehicle solely on the basis of the driver appearing to be of Mexican descent. JSTOR A roving patrol car must have articulable facts that allow for an officer to have a reasonable suspicion that the person is carrying illegal aliens beyond their ethnicity. The Court handed down a 9–0 decision that affirmed the Circuit Court's ruling in the case.United States v. Brignoni-Ponce, 422 US 873 – Supreme Court 1975
Background
As part of normal procedure for the United States Border Patrol in Southern California there was a permanent traffic checkpoint set up Interstate 5 just outside San Clemente, California. On March 11, 1973, the checkpoint had been closed because of inclement weather so the officers sat on the side of the highway in their vehicle with their headlights facing northbound traffic. They pursued a vehicle with three occupants in it, stating later that their only reason for pursuing the vehicle was because of the occupant's apparent Mexican ethnicity.
The officers questioned Felix Humberto Brignoni-Ponce and his two passengers about their citizenship and discovered that Brignoni-Ponce's two passengers had entered the country illegally. The officers proceeded to arrest the three individuals. The driver was charged with two counts of knowingly transporting illegal immigrants, a violation of § 274 (a) (2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, 66 Stat. 228 and the two passengers were arrested for entering the country illegally.
At the trial for the defendant, he argued that the two passengers should not have to testify because their statements were the result of an illegal seizure, but his motion was denied. The two passengers testified and the defendant was found guilty of both counts. The defendant then appealed the decision saying that because the stop was based solely on the basis of his ethnicity, it was a violation of his Fourth Amendment rights. The Fourth Amendment protects a person from unreasonable search and seizures.
Border Patrol's argument
The Border Patrol derived its power to stop the individuals from two separate laws. The first was Section 287 (a) (1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, 8 U. S. C. § 1357 (a) (1), authorizes any officer or employee of the Immigration and Naturalization Service without a warrant, "to interrogate any alien or person believed to be an alien as to his right to be or to remain in the United States." The second was Section 287 (a) (3) of the Act, 8 U. S. C. § 1357 (a) (3), which authorizes agents, without a warrant, to search cars traveling near the border that are suspected to have or are transporting persons trying to enter the country illegally. From this, they believe that their actions were lawful even if an act of Congress cannot supersede the Constitution.
Court's decision
The Court held a search and seizure based solely on the "appearance of Mexican ancestry" violates the Fourth Amendment. Without a reasonable suspicion generated by articulable facts, a police search is illegal.
According to the precedent set in Terry v. Ohio and Adams v. Williams, under appropriate circumstances, a roving patrol may perform a limited search and seizure without having probable cause to arrest the person. These circumstances include information that the person may have drugs or weapons, a visual scan of the person's vehicle reveals something suspicious or as in this case a visual reason to believe that the person is carrying illegal aliens into the country.
Valid examples of what constitutes as suspicion of carrying illegal aliens include driving a station wagon with fold down seats or spare tires removed to conceal aliens, having a low riding vehicle, having an overly packed vehicle, or driving erratically. Also, the officer's knowledge of the area, experience, and training in dealing with illegal aliens dictates the decision to pursue a search. Thus, an officer must have one of these articulable facts in order stop someone and question their citizenship.
However, in this case the defendants were stopped for one reason: solely on the basis of their appeared Mexican ancestry. The court concluded that this reason alone made the stop unreasonable. The lack of articulable facts to generate suspicion that the car was carrying illegal aliens meant that this search was illegal.Northwestern University. "Search and Seizure." The Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 66.4 (1975): 439. JSTOR. Web. 8 Oct. 2011 There are millions of people living in the area around San Diego that are naturalized and native-born of Mexico and "even in the border area, a small proportion of them are aliens." It is unreasonable to assume that any person who appears Mexican is an illegal alien or could be transporting illegal aliens. To allow such unrestricted roving patrol stops would be to subject all residents of the border area to unreasonable searches and seizures just because of their ethnicity, therefore the stop of the defendant was a violation of the Fourth Amendment and the charges were dropped.
History of Felix Humberto Brignoni-Ponce
Despite being freed from the charges in this case,  Brignoni-Ponce was arrested for carrying illegal aliens five times in fifteen years, spending over three years in jail for his crimes. His last-known arrest was on February 25, 1981, six years after his Supreme Court case was decided, at a San Clemente checkpoint, for smuggling thirteen illegal aliens. Ironically, Brignoni-Ponce was born in Puerto Rico, not of Mexican descent as suspected in his initial stop by the Border Patrol, and is an American citizen. This case's effects on Border Patrol agents have been compared to the effects the Miranda decision had on attorneys and prosecutors.
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:Border guards
Category:Mexico–United States relations
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Mexican American
"""

From "United States v. Burr" ==> """
REDIRECT Burr conspiracy
Category:Compulsory Process Clause case law
Category:Treason Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
"""

From "United States v. Butler" ==> """
United States v. Butler, 297 U.S. 1 (1936), is a U.S. Supreme Court case that held that the U.S. Congress has not only the power to lay taxes to the level necessary to carry out its other powers enumerated in Article I of the U.S. Constitution, but also a broad authority to tax and spend for the "general welfare" of the United States. The decision itself concerned whether the processing taxes instituted by the 1933 Agricultural Adjustment Act were constitutional..
Tax for impermissible regulatory purpose
The main issue of the case was whether certain provisions of the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933 conflicted with the U.S. Constitution. The Act imposed a tax on processors of farm products, the proceeds of which to be paid to farmers who would reduce their area under cultivation and consequently their crops yields. The Act was intended to increase the prices of certain farm products by decreasing the supply of quantities produced. This increased the cotton price paid for Hoosac Mills in North Adams, Massachusetts who brought the case.
The Court held that the so-called tax was not a true tax since the payments to farmers were coupled with unlawful and oppressively-coercive contracts, and the proceeds were earmarked for the benefit of farmers complying with the prescribed conditions. The Court also held that making the payment of a government subsidy to a farmer conditional on the reduction of the planned crops went beyond the powers of the national government.
Specifically, Justice Roberts said:
The act invades the reserved rights of the states. It is a statutory plan to regulate and control agricultural production, a matter beyond the powers delegated to the federal government. The tax, the appropriation of the funds raised, and the direction for their disbursement, are but parts of the plan. They are but means to an unconstitutional end.
Taxing and spending for general welfare
The Court struck down the Act but dealt positively with taxation and the expenditure of funds to advance the general welfare as specified in Article 1, Section 8, of the Constitution. The Court stated that the issue "presents the great and the controlling question in the case." After comparing expansive and restrictive interpretations of the Spending Clause, the Court adopted this philosophy:
The clause confers a power separate and distinct from those later enumerated[,] is not restricted in meaning by the grant of them, and Congress consequently has a substantive power to tax and to appropriate, limited only by the requirement that it shall be exercised to provide for the general welfare of the United States.... It results that the power of Congress to authorize expenditure of public moneys for public purposes is not limited by the direct grants of legislative power found in the Constitution.
The fact that the Court struck down the Act despite an expansive interpretation of the Spending Clause reflected the turmoil in the Court at the critical time.  It was accepted that Chief Justice Hughes did not agree with the majority opinion's argument that the law's government subsidy regulations went beyond the powers of national government and was about to write a separate opinion to uphold the Act's subsidy provision and to strike down the Act's tax provision on the grounds that it was a coercive regulation, rather than a tax measure, until Roberts convinced Hughes that he would side with him and the court's three liberal justices in future cases on agriculture that involved the Constitution's General Welfare Clause if he agreed to join his opinion.
An indication that turmoil and the fact that Butler was a turning point in the Court's thinking is that in later jurisprudence, the case has been referenced to support expansion of authority under the Spending Clause (such as Steward Machine Company v. Davis, , and Helvering v. Davis ) and to dissent from such expansion (such as in South Dakota v. Dole, ), O’Connor dissenting. In her dissent, Justice O’Connor noted that Butler had been the last case in which the Supreme Court struck down an Act of Congress as an overextension of its spending power. That was part of a series of cases decided by the conservative Supreme Court of the time, which struck down as unconstitutional parts of U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal legislation.
See also
Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States (1935)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 297
References
Footnotes
Works cited
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:Taxing and Spending Clause case law
Category:New Deal in Massachusetts
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1936 in United States case law
Category:Cotton industry in the United States
Category:North Adams, Massachusetts
Category:History of the textile industry in the United States
Category:United States agricultural policy
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
"""

From "United States v. Carmack" ==> """
United States v. Carmack, 329 U.S. 230 (1946), was a unanimous decision of the Supreme Court of the United States which held that the United States federal government was empowered by Condemnation Act of August 1, 1888; the Public Buildings Act of 1926; and the United States Constitution to exercise its right of eminent domain over land containing buildings owned by a state or local government.Dimitrakopoulos, Dionyssis G. Individual Rights and Liberties Under the U.S. Constitution: The Case Law of the U.S. Supreme Court. Boston: M. Nijhoff, 2007, p. 820.
Background
The Carmack family owned substantial tracts of land in which would eventually become the city of Cape Girardeau, Missouri. In 1807, the Carmack family conveyed, in trust, title to a plot of land to the City of Cape Girardeau with the restriction that the land only be used for public purposes.. An adjacent plot of land was also conveyed in trust in 1820, with an identical restriction.
In the late 1930s, pursuant to their authority under the Condemnation Act of 1888 and the Public Buildings Act of 1926, the site was selected by the Federal Works Agency and the United States Postmaster General as the site for a future federal courthouse and a federal post office.Carmack, 329 U.S. at 232. In 1941, the United States sought permission to condemn that land and exercise its right of eminent domain from a United States district court.Carmack, 329 U.S. at 233. After judicial proceedings, the condemnation was approved. Iska W. Carmack, an heir of the Carmack family; the City of Cape Girardeau; and the state of Missouri contested the decision, but the district court held that Carmack had no right to contest the proceedings.  All three parties appealed.  The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the decision of the district court and ordered the district court to reconsider the case and to include Carmack as a respondent.Carmack v. United States, 135 F.2d 196 (1943).
In 1944, the district court held a second set of condemnation proceedings, and this time concluded that the United States had arbitrarily and capriciously selected the site in disregard for federal law and regulation.United States v. Certain Land, Etc., 55 F.Supp. 555 (1944). The United States appealed. The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the judgment of the district court, but on different grounds.  The appellate court said that the Federal Works Agency and the Postmaster General did not have the statutory authority to begin condemnation proceedings.United States v. Carmack, 151 F.2d 881 (8th Cir. 1945).
The United States appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
Decision
Majority opinion
In an opinion by Associate Justice Harold Hitz Burton, the unanimous Court reaffirmed the concept of eminent domain, recognizing the power of the government to seize land according to the Condemnation Act and Public Buildings Act. Burton asserted that the Court, far removed from the date of enactment of these laws, must be slow to read into them any limitation on public officials not expressly provided for by the acts.Carmack, 329 U.S. at 236. The majority also held as settled the concept (enunciated in Kohl v. United States, 91 U.S. 367 (1875)) that the federal government need not seek to enforce its eminent domain rights solely in state courts.Carmack, 329 U.S. at 237.
It made little difference whether the federal government sought to condemn private or public land, Burton concluded.Carmack, 329 U.S. at 238-239. Nor did it matter that the land was held by the state in trust, for the federal government had notified all title holders of its decision to condemn the land.Carmack, 329 U.S. at 239. Burton reviewed the constitutional grants of power which gave the United States the power of eminent domain and concluded that this power was supreme:Carmack, 329 U.S. at 240-243.
The considerations that made it appropriate for the Constitution to declare that the Constitution of the United States, and the laws of the United States made in pursuance thereof, shall be the supreme law of the land make it appropriate to recognize that the power of eminent domain, when exercised by Congress within its constitutional powers, be equally supreme.Carmack, 329 U.S. at 240.
Unwilling to read into the Condemnation Act or the Public Buildings Act limitations which were not there, Burton analyzed the process by which federal officials had chosen the site in question, and concluded that it represented a rational and reasonable exercise of the government's powers.Carmack, 329 U.S. at 243-248.
Concurrence
Associate Justice William O. Douglas concurred in the result and the opinion of the Court, but reserved judgment "as to the circumstances under which authority to condemn land owned by a city or a state should be inferred from a general condemnation statute if the local government challenged the taking."Carmack, 329 U.S. at 248 (Douglas, J., concurring).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 329
References
External links
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Takings Clause case law
"""

From "United States v. Carolene Products Co." ==> """
United States v. Carolene Products Company, 304 U.S. 144 (1938), was a case of the United States Supreme Court that upheld the federal government's power to prohibit filled milk from being shipped in interstate commerce. In his majority opinion for the Court, Associate Justice Harlan F. Stone wrote that economic regulations were "presumptively constitutional" under a deferential standard of review known as the "rational basis test". 
The case is most notable for Footnote Four, in which Stone wrote that the Court would exercise a stricter standard of review when a law appears on its face to violate a provision of the United States Constitution, restricts the political process in a way that could impede the repeal of an undesirable law, or discriminates against "discrete and insular" minorities. Footnote Four would influence later Supreme Court decisions, and the higher standard of review is now known as "strict scrutiny".
 Background 
The case dealt with a federal law that prohibited filled milk (skimmed milk compounded with any fat or oil other than milk fat to resemble milk or cream) from being shipped in interstate commerce. The defendant, a company that traded in a form of filled milk consisting of condensed skim milk and coconut oil (which the company labeled "Milnot" or "Milnut"), argued that the law was unconstitutional because of both the Commerce Clause and the Due Process Clause.
In its previous term, the Court had dramatically increased the number of activities considered to be in or to affect interstate commerce. It had also altered its settled jurisprudence in the area of substantive due process, the doctrine dealing with rights not specifically enumerated in the Constitution. The changes meant that many New Deal programs that the Court would previously have struck down as unconstitutional would now be found constitutional.
The defendant company, charged with breaking the law, at trial filed a motion to dismiss on the grounds that the law was unconstitutional. The United States District Court for the Southern District of Illinois granted the defendant's motion, and the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the District Court's ruling.
Decision
Justice Harlan Stone, writing for the Court, held that the law was "presumptively constitutional" properly within legislative discretion. It was not for the courts to overrule because it was supported by substantial public-health evidence and was not arbitrary or irrational. In other words, the Court applied a "rational basis" test.
Footnote Four
Carolene Products is best known for its Footnote Four, which is considered to be "the most famous footnote in constitutional law." Although the Court had applied minimal scrutiny (rational basis review) to the economic regulation in this case, Footnote Four reserved for other types of cases other, stricter standards of review.
Stone said that legislation aimed at "discrete and insular minorities" without the normal protections of the political process would be one exception to the presumption of constitutionality and justify a heightened standard of judicial review. The idea has greatly influenced jurisprudence on the Equal Protection Clause jurisprudence and judicial review. It recapitulated common law jurisprudence by which evidence of fraud or other significant legal defects in the transaction, such as self-dealing or other impropriety, may justify overturning a rule.
Louis Lusky, Stone's law clerk during the 1937 term, helped draft Footnote Four. The constitutional law scholar John Hart Ely based his major work, Democracy and Distrust, on Footnote Four's second and third paragraphs, which correspond to the "Democracy" and "Distrust" of his title.
Text
Significance
In keeping with the New Deal Revolution, Carolene Products applies the "rational basis test" to economic legislation. An extremely low standard of judicial review, there is a presumption that the legislation in question is constitutional and the challenging party must show that the law fails the test. Most legislation enacted by Congress or state legislatures that deals with economic regulation falls under rational basis review and, therefore, must only be rationally related to a legitimate state interest. However, Carolene Products is most famous for Footnote Four. 
Footnote Four describes certain legislative acts that might give rise to a higher level of scrutiny. If a law: 
 appears on its face to violate a provision of the US Constitution, especially in the Bill of Rights,
 restricts the political process that could repeal an undesirable law, such as restricting voting rights, organizing, disseminating information etc., or
 discriminates against "discrete and insular" minorities, especially racial, religious, and national minorities and particularly those who lack sufficient numbers or power to seek redress through the political process.
This higher level of scrutiny, now called "strict scrutiny", was applied to strike down an inmate forced sterilization law in Skinner v. Oklahoma (1942) and in Justice Black's infamous opinion in Korematsu v. U.S. (1944) in which Japanese internment was upheld despite being subject to heightened scrutiny. Under strict scrutiny, a law will be struck down unless it serves a compelling governmental interest and is necessary to achieve that end, which means that less restrictive alternatives to the law must be considered by the government even if there is a compelling interest. Therefore, the law must be narrowly tailored to serve the governmental interest and employ the least restrictive alternative. 
Intermediate scrutiny, which is often applied in gender discrimination cases, did not arise until decades later. When applied, the law must serve an important governmental interest and be substantially related to that end. 
Some argue that the "most famous footnote" was in fact written by not Stone but his law clerk, Louis Lusky. In fact, the cited work above, while quite useful on the origin and growth of the footnote, does not claim that the law clerk was the author, and it implies the opposite, based on letters between the justices.  In his later work, Our Nine Tribunes: The Supreme Court in Modern America, however, Lusky includes facsimiles of the original drafts of the footnote, the first of which is in his own hand. Stone edited the second, typed draft, and at the behest of the Chief Justice, he added certain passages.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 304
Nebbia v. New York (1934)
Obiter dictum
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1938 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States constitutional case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Dairy farming in the United States
Category:Constitutional challenges to the New Deal
"""

From "United States v. Causby" ==> """
United States v. Causby, 328 U.S. 256 (1946), was a landmark United States Supreme Court decision related to ownership of airspace above private property. The United States government claimed a public right to fly over Thomas Lee Causby's farm located near an airport in Greensboro, North Carolina. Causby argued that the government's low-altitude flights entitled him to just compensation under the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment.Huebert, Jacob H. (2011-04-18) Who Owns the Sky?, Mises Institute 
The Court held that a taking had occurred and nullified the common law doctrine that ownership of property extended indefinitely upward. The court also affirmed that navigable airspace was public domain and held that flights which are so low and frequent as to be a direct and immediate interference with the enjoyment and use of real property constitute a taking. Much of the holding has been superseded by more recent cases and changes in the regulations relied upon. 
Background
Thomas Lee Causby was a land owner less than a half mile from the end of the runway of Lindley Field, an airstrip in Greensboro, North Carolina.Nagy, John A. "Airport Noise Issue Not New: Chicken Farm Case Set Legal Precedent in 1946 Court Ruling". Greensboro News and Record (Greensboro, North Carolina). October 10, 1998. During World War II, the United States military flew planes into the airstrip and as low as  above Causby's Farm
thereby interfering with the productive use of the Causby farm.  Vibrations and sounds caused by the aircraft prevented use of property as a chicken farm, killing more than 150 chickens.  
The Court of Claims ruled that a land owner's domain includes the airspace above it, and ruled that Causby was entitled to just compensation for the government having 'Taken' his property by conducting overflights through the airspace above his property.
The United States appealed this ruling against them, and the Supreme Court agreed to review the case, regarding the contradiction between the common laws of property ownership (without any height limit) against the assertion of a federal claim that flights are made within the navigable airspace without any physical invasion of the property of the landowners, there has been no taking of property.
Holding
The Court recognized that a claim of property ownership indefinitely upward "has no place in the modern world." effectively nullifying the common law ad coelum doctrine. 
The Court affirmed the right to of transit through navigable airspace: 
However, the Court held that the flights occurred outside of navigable airspace:
Ultimately the Court agreed with the Court of Claims and held that a taking had occurred because flight occurred outside of navigable airspace :
This meant that the government conducting such low-level flights constituted a "taking" of Causby's property, and under the Constitution's takings clause, he was owed compensation.
On remand, the Court of Claims was tasked with defining the value of the "property interests" that had been taken from Causby by flyovers. Because the lowest plane flew at , the tallest object on Causby's land was  tall, and flights  above the tallest terrain were considered within the public easement declared by Congress, the Court needed to determine the value owed the farmer for public use of his airspace between . The Court of Claims did not need to compensate the farmer for use below , because the planes did not fly below that height.
Compensation was owed based on the occupancy of the property, and not damage to chickens.
Dissent
Justice Black, joined by Justice Burton, dissented with the decision.
Black wrote that the majority opinion created:
... “an opening wedge for an unwarranted judicial interference with the power of Congress to develop solutions for new and vital national problems.”
The minority opinion was predicated on interference with private property being resolved at the State Court level through tort law, rather than in a federal court with constitutional jurisdiction. However, the U.S. government filed its appeal based upon an assertion of ownership to low altitude airspace, which the court roundly rejected, and as a case filed by the federal government it automatically became a federal court issue.
The dissenting opinion would have forced the issue of compensation into State court. The principle on which the dissent was based was later rejected in a 1962 ruling
that established that all federal “takings” claims need to be litigated in a federal court with jurisdiction over U.S. Constitutional issues.
 Changes to reliance and precedent 
In determining that the flights had occurred outside of "navigable airspace", the Court relied on the definition of navigable airspace to reach a decision. At the time, this was defined as "airspace above the minimum safe altitudes of flight prescribed by the Civil Aeronautics Authority." However, shortly after this decision, Congress redefined navigable airspace to include "airspace needed to ensure safety in the takeoff and landing of aircraft." Currently, some aircraft, such as helicopters, balloons, and ultralights have no minimum safe altitudes. 
The question of whether takings can occur within navigable airspace has been addressed in later cases, most notably in Griggs v. County of Allegheny and Branning v. United States. The former case held that aircraft noise from operations within navigable airspace did amount to a taking.
See also
 Air rights
 Cuius est solum, eius est usque ad coelum et ad inferos
 Energy law
 List of notable United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 328
 Property law
 Takings clause
References
External links
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:Aviation law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Guilford County, North Carolina
"""

From "United States v. Chadwick" ==> """
United States v. Chadwick, 433 U.S. 1 (1977), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that, absent exigency, the warrantless search of double-locked luggage just placed in the trunk of a parked vehicle is a violation of the Fourth Amendment and not justified under the automobile exception. The Court reasoned that while luggage is movable like an automobile, it does not have the lesser expectation of privacy associated with an automobile..
Chadwick was later abrogated on other grounds by California v. Acevedo (1991),. in which the Court overruled Chadwick's holding with respect to containers within a vehicle, holding that police may search a container within a vehicle without a warrant if they have probable cause to believe that the container itself holds contraband or evidence.
The holding in Chadwick that a search incident to arrest must not be too remote in time or place is still good law.
Case
Respondents had recently stepped off a train and were putting a suitcase into the trunk of a car when they were stopped by federal agents. Federal agents had probable cause to arrest the respondents and to believe that the suitcase contained narcotics. The respondents were arrested. About an hour and a half after the arrest, the agents opened and searched the suitcase without a warrant.
 Holding 
In order to search a locked container that is in the exclusive possession of law enforcement officials, those law enforcement officials must get a warrant (unless an exception applies). In this case, an exception did not apply.
 Subsequent Jurisprudence 
After California v. Acevedo (1991), this protection no longer applied to people in automobiles because people in automobiles have a diminished expectation of privacy. However, it still applies to people walking on the street.
Applications
People v. Diaz, 51 Cal. 4th 84, 244 P.3d 501, 119 Cal. Rptr. 3d 105 (2011)
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 433
Carroll v. United States, 
Arkansas v. Sanders, 
United States v. Ross, 
California v. Greenwood, 
References
External links
 }
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1977 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Classic" ==> """
United States v. Classic, 313 U.S. 299 (1941), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that the United States Constitution empowered Congress to regulate primary elections and political party nominations procedures, and that the constitutional "right of participation" extended to primary elections "is protected just as is the right to vote at the election, where the primary is by law made an integral part of the election machinery, whether the voter exercises his right in a party primary which invariably, sometimes or never determines the ultimate choice of the representative.".
The case centered on a 1940 Democratic primary election in Louisiana, in which 26-year-old Hale Boggs was running for a seat in the House of Representatives. Five Boggs allies who worked as election commissioners were convicted of changing 97 votes for his primary opponents into votes for Boggs. (Boggs won the primary by more than 8,000 votes and went on to a long career in Congress, including stints as House majority leader and as a member of the Warren Commission.)
Many observers assumed that the court had already ruled in Newberry v. United States,. that primary elections could not be regulated under the powers granted to Congress under Article I, Sec. 4 of the Constitution. But writing for the majority, Justice Harlan Fiske Stone argued that the Newberry court had been deeply divided on the issue and no majority had ruled one way or the other. Utilizing the reasoning by Chief Justice Edward Douglass White and Justice Mahlon Pitney in their concurrent opinions in Newberry, Stone argued that the Constitution's protection of the right to vote cannot be effectively exercised without reaching to primary elections and/or political party nominating procedures.
Though broadly noting that the constitutional right to vote extends to a party primary even when it "sometimes or never determines the ultimate choice of the representative," the Court offered no standard for determining whether a primary "was made an integral part of the election machinery."Classic, 313 U.S. at 314.  However, in Morse v. Republican Party of Virginia, the Court clarified that this extends to virtually all primaries, noting that "Virginia, like most States, has effectively divided its election into two stages, the first consisting of the selection of party candidates and the second being the general election."..
In a "diffident" dissent, Justice William O. Douglas agreed that the Constitution gives the Congress the right to regulate primaries, but concluded that the U.S. criminal code did not explicitly outlaw the actions in question.  "It is not enough for us to find in the vague penumbra of a statute some offense about which Congress could have legislated, and then to particularize it as a crime because it is highly offensive," Douglas wrote. "Sec. 19 does not purport to be an exercise by Congress of its power to regulate primaries."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 313
References
External links
Category:1941 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States elections case law
Category:United States federal civil rights crime case law
Category:Louisiana Democrats
Category:Louisiana elections
Category:Primary elections in the United States
Category:Democratic Party (United States) litigation
"""

From "United States v. Cleveland Indians Baseball Co." ==> """
United States v. Cleveland Indians Baseball Company, 532 U.S. 200 (2001), is a United States Supreme Court case that deals with the federal tax code. The question before the court was “Is back-pay subject to federal taxes under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act and the Federal Unemployment Tax Act, based on the year the money should have been paid out?” The court held that wages are to be taxed on the year they were actually paid.. Carter G. Phillips argued for the respondent and James A. Feldman argued for the petitioner, the Department of Justice.
 Background 
The Cleveland Indians Baseball Company owed eight of its players back wages that were due in 1986 and fourteen players back wages that were due in 1987. The company paid the wages in 1994. The company paid taxes on the wages for the 1994 formula. The Company then requested that some of the taxes be refunded by the IRS under the argument that the taxes should be paid based on the year that they were supposed to be paid instead of the year they were actually paid. The taxes would have been significant because the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) and the Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) which are used to fund Medicare, Social Security and Unemployment. The FICA and FUTA were both passed after 1987. The Cleveland Indians used Sixth Court precedent in its argument that late wages are taxed upon the year they should have paid. The District Court bound by precedent ordered the government to return the taxes.Cleveland Indians Baseball Co. v. United States, No. 1:96-CV-2240, 1999 WL 72866 (N.D. Ohio Jan. 25, 1999). The Sixth Court of Appeals affirmed the District Court’s ruling.
 Opinion of the Court 
Unlike the Sixth Court of Appeals the court had limited precedent in which to follow. Therefore, the court simply decided to use the IRS’s interpretation of the law. Justice Ginsburg, delivering the opinion of the court stated “according due respect to the service’s reasonable, longstanding construction of the governments statues and its own regulations, we hold that back wages are subject to FICA and FUTA taxes by reference to the year the wages are in fact paid.”
References
External links
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:2001 in baseball
Category:Baseball law
Category:Sports case law
"""

From "United States v. Clintwood Elkhorn Mining Co." ==> """
United States v. Clintwood Elkhorn Mining Company, 553 U.S. 1 (2008), is a United States Supreme Court case that concerns refunds for a tax that was levied and subsequently found to be unconstitutional.. The Court held that a person claiming a refund for an unconstitutional tax must go through the normal administrative procedures for tax refunds before filing a lawsuit against the government.Clintwood Elkhorn Mining Company, 553 U.S. at 14-15.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:2008 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Colgate & Co." ==> """
United States v. Colgate & Co., 250 U.S. 300 (1919), is a United States antitrust law case in which the United States Supreme Court noted that a company has the power to decide with whom to do business..http://college.holycross.edu/faculty/vmatheso/antitrust.htm#United States v. Colgate & Company Per the Colgate Doctrine, a company may unilaterally terminate business with any other company without triggering a violation of the antitrust laws.http://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1797&context=flr 
This case created an exception to vertical price restraints in vertical agreements. According to the ruling, resale price maintenance is generally illegal per se, but if a supplier merely says it will not deal with resellers that charge less than the supplier's stipulated price, the supplier need not deal with such a retailer. This is a narrow exception, as companies are still prohibited from threatening or warning price-cutters.
Facts
Colgate & Co. had a policy of refusing to deal with vendors who sold below suggested retail price. Colgate simply refused to continue to deal with a vendor that Colgate determined was not abiding by the rules. In cutting off these contracts, Colgate was willing to allow a vendor to sell out current inventory.http://myweb.clemson.edu/~maloney/827/13.pdf 
Judgment
The Sherman Act §§ 1-7, 15 note, is intended to prohibit monopolies and combinations, which probably would interfere with the free exercise of their rights by those engaged, or who wish to engage in trade; but in the absence of any purpose to create or maintain a monopoly a manufacturer engaged in private business may exercise his discretion as to parties with whom he will deal, and may refuse to sell to those who will not maintain specified resale prices.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 250
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Unilateral Policy
References
External links
6 U.C. Davis Bus. L.J. 22 (2006)
Hogan Lovells May 2009 Antitrust Update
St Olaf Antirust Summary
33 American Lar Review Vol. 462 (1984)
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:1919 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:Colgate-Palmolive
"""

From "United States v. Comstock" ==> """
United States v. Comstock, 560 U.S. 126 (2010), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States, which held that the federal government has authority under the Necessary and Proper Clause to require the civil commitment of individuals already in Federal custody.JESSE J. HOLLAND, Court: Sexually dangerous can be kept in prison, Associated Press. Retrieved 5-16-2010. The practice, introduced by the Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act, was upheld against a challenge that it fell outside the enumerated powers granted to Congress by the Constitution. The decision did not rule on any other aspect of the law's constitutionality, because only the particular issue of Congressional authority was properly before the Court.
 Background 
Six days before Graydon Earl Comstock was to have completed a 37-month sentence for receiving child pornography, Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales certified that Comstock was a sexually dangerous person. The law that Attorney General Gonzales was applying was ruled unconstitutional by lower courts on the grounds it exceeded Congress’s constitutional authority.
Argued in January 2010 by Solicitor General Elena Kagan, the position of the United States was that the Necessary and Proper Clause gave Congress the power to enact the law.Justices Rule That Sex Offenders May Be Held After Their Sentences End, nytimes.com, by Adam Liptak, May 17, 2010
 Decision 
Stephen Breyer delivered the opinion of the Court, which decided that the "Necessary and Proper" Clause permitted Congress to enact such a provision. John Roberts, John Paul Stevens, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Sonia Sotomayor joined Breyer's opinion. Anthony Kennedy and Samuel Alito filed opinions concurring in the judgment. Clarence Thomas filed a dissenting opinion in which Antonin Scalia joined in all but Part III– A–1–b.
 Five considerations 
The Court said: "We base this conclusion on five considerations, taken together." The five considerations are as follows.  
The Necessary and Proper Clause grants Congress broad power to enact laws that are "rationally related" and "reasonably adapted" to executing the other enumerated powers.  
The statute at issue "constitutes a modest addition" to related statutes that have existed for many decades.  
The statute in question reasonably extends the longstanding policy to cover the mentally ill and sexually dangerous persons already in federal custody. 
The statute properly accounts for state interests, by ending the federal government's role "with respect to an individual covered by the statute" whenever a state requests.  
The statute is narrowly tailored to only address the legitimate federal interest.
 See also 
 United States federal laws governing defendants with mental diseases or defects
 Kansas v. Hendricks (1997) 
 Kansas v. Crane (2002)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 560
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:Mental health case law in the United States
Category:Sex case law
"""

From "United States v. Congress of Industrial Organizations" ==> """
United States v. Congress of Industrial Organizations, 335 U.S. 106 (1948), is a US labor law decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that a labor union's publication of a statement that advocated for its members to vote for a certain candidate for Congress did not violate the Federal Corrupt Practices Act, as amended by the 1947 Labor Management Relations Act.
Facts
Philip Murray, the president of the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO), had established a permanent political action committee (PAC) known as "CIO-PAC" in 1942. However, the CIO's political efforts were only marginally effective, and in 1946, the Republicans won a majority in both houses of Congress.
In 1947, Congress passed the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, better known as the Taft-Hartley Act. Section 304 amended Section 313 of the Federal Corrupt Practices Act to make it unlawful for any labor organization to make a contribution or expenditure in connection with any election in which presidential and vice presidential electors or a member of Congress are to be voted for or in connection with any primary election, political convention or caucus to select candidates for such offices.
President Harry S Truman vetoed the Act, but Congress overrode his veto on June 23, 1947.
On July 14, 1947, the CIO published its regular edition of "The CIO News," the labor federation's magazine. On the front page was a statement by Murray, who urged members of the CIO in Maryland to vote for Judge Ed Garmatz, a candidate for Congress in a special election to be held July 15, 1947. Murray's statement also said that the message was being published because Murray and the CIO believed that amended Section 313 unconstitutionally infringed on the rights of free speech, press, and assembly, which are guaranteed by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
In January 1948, Murray and the CIO were indicted in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. The defendants moved to dismiss the charges on constitutional grounds. On March 15, 1948, the district court agreed (77 F. Supp. 355) and dismissed the indictment. The government appealed to the Supreme Court, which accepted certiorari.
Jesse Climenko served as attorney for the appellant. Charles J. Margiotti of Pittsburgh and Lee Pressman of Washington, DC, served as attorneys for the appellees.
Judgment
Justice Stanley Forman Reed delivered the opinion for the court. Reed refused to reach the constitutional question before the court but argued instead that the use of funds to publish the statement did not constitute an "expenditure" under Section 313, as amended.
Reed concluded that the term "expenditure" was not a term of art and had no defined meaning.
"The purpose of Congress is a dominant factor in determining meaning," he wrote. "There is no better key to a difficult problem of statutory construction than the law from which the challenged statute emerged."United States v. Congress of Industrial Organizations, 335 U.S. 106, 112.
Reed reviewed the enactment of the Federal Corrupt Practices Act in 1910 as well as its 1911 and 1925 amendments, the court's ruling in Newberry v. United States, and the limitations imposed on unions' political expenditures by the 1943 War Labor Disputes Act.
Quoting extensively from Congressional debates over Section 304 of the Taft-Hartley Act, Reed concluded that Congress clearly did not intend for the act to cover union newspapers supported by advertising or member subscriptions. Reed acknowledged that some members of Congress contemplated a different reading of Section 304. However, such contradictory statements could be dismissed as not indicative of the sense of Congress, Reed said, as "the language itself, coupled with the dangers of unconstitutionality, supports the interpretation which we have placed upon it."United States v. Congress of Industrial Organizations, 335 U.S. 106, 122.
It would require explicit words in an act to convince us that Congress intended to bar a trade journal, a house organ or a newspaper, published by a corporation, from expressing views on candidates or political proposals in the regular course of its publication. It is unduly stretching language to say that the members or stockholders are unwilling participants in such normal organizational activities, including the advocacy thereby of governmental policies affecting their interests, and the support thereby of candidates thought to be favorable to their interests.United States v. Congress of Industrial Organizations, 335 U.S. 106, 123.
Frankfurter's concurrence
Justice Felix Frankfurter issued a concurring opinion: "A case or controversy in the sense of a litigation ripe and right for constitutional adjudication by this Court implies a real contest — an active clash of views, based upon an adequate formulation of issues, so as to bring a challenge to that which Congress has enacted inescapably before the Court," Frankfurter wrote.United States v. Congress of Industrial Organizations, 335 U.S. 106, 125.
Rather, Frankfurter said, the constitutional and the interpretative issues were ripe for review. Frankfurter pointed out that during oral argument before the Supreme Court, the federal government claimed that the district court had misread and misinterpreted its claims. The district court, Frankfurter said, had three times argued that the government had admitted that Section 304 abridged rights guaranteed by the First Amendment. However, that was not the admission of the government, federal attorneys said. If the court had misinterpreted the government's position, Frankfurter concluded, the case should be remanded for further proceedings rather than adjudicated. However, since a majority has seen fit to grant certiorari, Frankfurter reluctantly agreed to concur in the majority opinion.
Rutledge's concurrence
Justice Rutledge also issued a concurring opinion, in which Justices Black, Douglas and Murphy joined. Rutledge argued that a close reading of the legislative history finds "a veritable fog of contradictions relating to specific possible applications" of Section 304.United States v. Congress of Industrial Organizations, 335 U.S. 106, 134. With no clear legislative guidance, Rutledge argued for a plain reading of the term "expenditure." A dictionary definition of the term shows that it does not matter whether a union publication is supported by general union dues or by advertising and/or subscription; an expenditure is an expenditure, which is prohibited by the Act.
That forces the Court to reach the constitutional question, Rutledge argued, and the Act plainly is unconstitutional on such grounds. The statute was not narrowly drawn and did not specifically proscribe the conduct to be prohibited. Rather, it imposed a blanket prohibition on labor union participation in the political process, and that was patently unconstitutional: "To say that labor unions as such have nothing of value to contribute to that process and no vital or legitimate interest in it is to ignore the obvious facts of political and economic life and of their increasing interrelationship in modern society."United States v. Congress of Industrial Organizations, 335 U.S. 106, 144. The majority, Rutledge pointed out, also cites Congressional debate, which indicates a purpose of the statute was to protect minority interests within labor unions. However, even if that reading of the statute's legislative history were correct, the statute would still be unconstitutionally overbroad in reaching that objective.
Rutledge would also have found the statute unconstitutional under the majority's interpretation of the meaning of "expenditure." The majority twists itself into knots to distinguish between general union support for a publication and advertising- or subscription-supported support. However, that, too, runs afoul of the Constitution, Rutledge concluded. "I know of nothing in the Amendment's policy or history which turns or permits turning the applicability of its protections upon the difference between regular and merely casual or occasional distributions.... Neither freedom of speech and the press nor the right of peaceable assembly is restricted to persons who can and do pay."United States v. Congress of Industrial Organizations, 335 U.S. 106, 155.
See also
US labor law
Notes
References
 Abraham, Steven E. "The Impact of the Taft-Hartley Act on the Balance of Power in Industrial Relations." American Business Law Journal. 33 (1996).
 Angelo, Pat. Philip Murray, Union Man. A Life Story. Philadelphia, Pa.: Xlibris Corporation, 2003. 
 Lee, R. Alton. Truman and Taft-Hartley: A Question of Mandate. Lexington, Ky.: University of Kentucky Press, 1966.
 Zieger, Robert H. The CIO, 1935-1955. Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press, 1995. 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:History of labor relations in the United States
Category:United States labor case law
Category:1948 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "United States v. Constantine" ==> """
United States v. Constantine, 296 U.S. 287 (1935), was a case before the United States Supreme Court that concerned liquor laws and taxation. Congress placed a tax on liquor dealers who violate state liquor laws. The Court struck down the relevant portion of the Revenue Act of 1926 as an attempt to punish a state violation through taxation.
 Background 
A Prohibition era federal law required that sellers of alcohol obtain a federal excise license which costs $25 if the holder was in compliance with state law but $1,000 if they were not. The appellee had paid the lower fee but was found to be in violation of Alabama law by selling malt liquor in a Birmingham restaurant that exceeded the strength allowed by state law. The federal government then pursued Constantine for the $975 difference even though the violation occurred after the repeal of Prohibition.
 Opinion of the court 
The court ruled that the primary purpose of the tax law was to enforce police powers not to raise revenue. Since the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment, the federal law was no longer enforceable. 
 Dissents 
Justice Cardozo, in an opinion joined by Justices Brandeis and Stone, dissented, arguing that Congress could have had any one of several non-punitive justifications for the statute.
 Subsequent history 
National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius referenced the logic in this decision to determine whether the Affordable Care Act was a penalty or tax in terms of the Constitution. The Court held that it was a tax by "[d]isregarding the designation of the exaction, and viewing its substance and application."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 296
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Eighteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Twenty-first Amendment case law
Category:History of Birmingham, Alabama
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:Restaurants in Birmingham, Alabama
"""

From "United States v. Continental Can Co." ==> """
United States v. Continental Can Co., 378 U.S. 441 (1964), was a U.S. Supreme Court case which addressed antitrust issues. One issue it addressed was how should a market segment be defined for purposes of reviewing a merger of companies which manufacture different but related products.
Facts
In 1956, Continental Can Company, the second largest producer of metal containers in the U.S., acquired the Hazel-Atlas Glass Company, the third largest producer of glass containers.
The government sought Continental Can's divestiture of the assets of Hazel-Atlas, arguing that the merger was a violation of Section 7 of the Clayton Antitrust Act. The government claimed ten product markets existed, including the can industry, the glass container industry, and various lines of commerce defined by the end use of the containers. 
Judgment
The United States District Court for the Southern District of New York found three product markets: metal containers, glass containers, and beer containers. The district court dismissed the case, holding that the government had failed to prove reasonable probability of lessening competition in the markets it had identified.
Supreme Court
See also
US antitrust law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 378
External links
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
"""

From "United States v. Cook" ==> """
United States v. Cook, 86 U.S. (19 Wall.) 591 (1873), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that Indian tribes do not own the land their reservations are on, the land is owned by the United States and the Indians only have a right to occupy the land. They may not cut and sell timber merely for the purpose of selling timber, they may only sell timber that was cut incidental to another purpose. The government has a right to take action to recover damages for timber sold illegally from that land.
Background
In 1831, the Menominee tribe turned over part of their reservation in Wisconsin to the United States for use by the Stockbridge Indians..  Some of the tribe cut timber and sold the logs to George Cook. The federal government brought an action in common law known as a writ of replevin to recover the logs from Cook. It came to the Supreme Court on a certificate of division. The only side to present an argument was the United States, Cook was not represented before the Court.Cook, 86 U.S. at 591.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|left|Author of the opinion, Chief Justice Morrison Waite
Chief Justice Morrison Waite delivered the opinion of the Court. Justice Waite stated that the title held by the Stockbridge tribe was one of occupancy only, that the United States held the fee title to the land.Cook, 86 U.S. at 592-93; citing . Justice Waite noted that this had been decided in Johnson v. M'Intosh. 50 years earlier, in 1823.Cook, 86 U.S. at 593. The Indians were not allowed to cut and sell lumber under the legal principal of waste.Cook, 86 U.S. at 594. If they were clearing land for agriculture, they could sell the lumber as an incidental byproduct of the improvement to the land.Cook, 86 U.S. at 593-94. The sale must be incidental to the improvement, and if not, the federal government may take legal action to recover the lumber.Cook, 86 U.S. at 594, citing .
Subsequent developments
This principle of waste and sale of material from reservation land was changed in 1920, when Congress passed a law authorizing the sale of timber for the benefit of the tribes.Act of June 25, 1910,  (codified as amended at ); see also United States v. Mitchell, .
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:1874 in United States case law
Category:Native American history of Wisconsin
"""

From "United States v. Cooley" ==> """
United States v. Cooley (2021) was a Supreme Court of the United States case on the powers of tribal police.
Background
The case stemmed from a 2016 incident where a tribal police officer detained a non-tribal motorist found with guns and drugs. In lower courts it had been argued that evidence gathered by Native American police should not be admissible in cases regarding non-Native Americans.
Decision
The case was argued on March 23, 2021. The case was decided unanimously on June 1, 2021, allowing tribal police to detain and investigate those suspected of criminal activity on tribal lands regardless of racial status. The court found that in such cases non-natives may be detained when on a public right of way inside a reservation. Non-native detainees may be detained for a reasonable length of time until non-tribal police can arrive at the scene to handle the incident. The opinion for the case was written by Justice Stephen Breyer. A concurring opinion was written by Justice Samuel Alito.
 References 
Category:Native American tribal police
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Native American case law
"""

From "United States v. Correll" ==> """
United States v. Correll, 389 U.S. 299 (1967), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court ruled 5-3 that in order for the taxpayer to be allowed to deduct the cost of his meals incurred while on a business trip, the trip must have required him to stop for sleep or rest.
Facts
The respondent, a traveling salesman from Tennessee, routinely took same-day business trips throughout 1960 and 1961. He would leave on business early in the morning and come back by dinner. Because he would eat breakfast and lunch on the road, he deducted the cost of those meals from his 1960 and 1961 income tax return pursuant to § 162(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. § 162(a)(2) allows the taxpayer to deduct "traveling expenses [incurred] while away from home in the pursuit of a trade or business." The Commissioner of Internal Revenue ("Commissioner") disallowed the deductions on the ground that the respondent did not meet the definition of "away from home" under § 162(a)(2) because his trip did not require him to sleep or rest.. Therefore, the Commissioner ruled that the cost of the meals was not a § 162(a)(2) business expense, but rather a "’personal, living’ expense under § 262." The respondent paid the tax and sued for a refund in the District Court. He received a favorable verdict in the District Court, which was affirmed by the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. The Supreme Court granted certiorari “in order to resolve a conflict among the circuits on this recurring question of federal income tax administration.”Correll, 389 U.S. at 301.
Analysis
If the cost of the meals did not qualify for a § 162(a)(2) business expense deduction, then they would be classified as a § 262 personal expense, and would be non-deductible. Whether the cost of the meals falls under § 162(a)(2) depends on how the phrase "traveling ... away from home" is interpreted. The Commissioner has interpreted the phrase as requiring the taxpayer to sleep or rest during his trip.Correll, 389 U.S. at 299. The Court found two advantages to the Commissioner’s interpretation. First, the Court noted that a business traveler who is allowed a § 162(a)(2) business deduction receives a windfall, because part of what is spent on meals represents a personal living expense that other taxpayers are not entitled to deduct at all.Correll, 389 U.S. at 302. Therefore, fairness demands that § 162(a)(2) should not extend to all situations involving business travel. Allowing a taxpayer who has to travel two blocks from his home on a business trip to take a § 162(a)(2) deduction, but not the taxpayer whose business requires no travel at all, illustrates the inequitable result of a contrary approach. Second, the requirement that the taxpayer must sleep away from home in order to qualify for a § 162(a)(2) deduction is a bright-line, easy to administer rule that avoids unnecessary litigation.
The Court uses statutory interpretation to affirm the Commissioner’s approach. First, the Court notes that “traveling” implies being “away from home.” Therefore, a broad interpretation of “away from home” would make the phrase redundant.Correll, 389 U.S. at 304. In addition, the Court observes that the statute groups “meals and lodging” together, suggesting Congress’ intent to allow a deduction for the cost of meals only where the business traveler has to pay for lodging as well.
Finally, the Court notes that even if alternatives to this bright-line rule are available, it is not the Court’s role to fashion a new rule.Correll, 389 U.S. at 307. “In this area of limitless factual variations, ‘it is the province of Congress and the Commissioner, not the courts, to make the appropriate adjustments.’”
Justices Douglas, Black and Fortas dissented on the ground that the phrase “while away from home” goes to geography and not time. The dissent argued that the majority’s approach of interpreting the phrase as “overnight” incorrectly switches the focus to a time element.
Significance of the decision
The Court affirmed the Commissioner’s interpretation of the “away from home” requirement of § 162(a)(2). By doing so, the Court chose to retain a bright-line rule instead of a case-by-case approach — thereby avoiding uncertainty and excessive litigation.
Furthermore, the decision puts all one-day travelers forced to pay for their meals on an equal footing when it comes to allowing a § 162(a)(2) business expense deduction.Correll, 389 U.S. at 303.
See also
Commissioner v. Kowalski - A 1977 Supreme Court decision on the taxability of employer provided meals.
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 389
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:Food law
"""

From "United States v. Cors" ==> """
United States v. Cors, 337 U.S. 325 (1949), was a United States Supreme Court case interpreting the Merchant Marine Act of 1936 and the Takings Clause of the 5th amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
Background
The respondent Cors had purchased a tugboat at auction, and after paying both the purchase price, and conducting repairs, he had spent $8,574.78 on the boat. Months later in October 1942, the War Shipping Administration requisitioned the tug for use in the war effort, offering Cors $9,000.
Arguments and analysis
Cors accepted 75% of the Administration's compensation amount and sued for an additional $20,000, as he was permitted to do by section 902(d) of the Merchant Marine Act (codified at ). For purposes of the case, the boat's original cost was estimated to be $45,000; its replacement cost, $56,000; and its present value $9,000.. The Court also acknowledged that the improvements made to the ship had a market value higher than the amount Cors expended, largely because he oversaw repairs himself.
The Merchant Marine Act contained a clause that, while awarding the "just compensation" for the requisition, "in no case shall the value of the property taken or used be deemed enhanced by the causes necessitating the taking or use." In the context of the war effort, the value of the ship at issue was tied to the increased value of the ship caused by the war itself. The Administration argued that this clause prevented the value of the ship that was due to the war effort from being required as part of the just compensation.
Cors argued that this clause varied the understanding of just compensation in the 5th amendment's taking's clause, and was unconstitutional. Cors relied on Monongahela Navigation Co. v. United States, 148 U.S. 312 for this proposition.
Decision
In a decision, in which Justice Douglas wrote the opinion, the Court rejected Cors' arguments, and the judgment of the lower court. In its reversal, the Court indicated that market value, while relevant in some just compensation cases, was not the only yardstick available. Stating "[i]t is not fair that the government be required to pay the enhanced price which its demand alone has created", the Court rejected the pure market value test.
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:Tugboats
Category:1949 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "United States v. Cortez" ==> """
United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411 (1981), was a United States Supreme Court decision clarifying the reasonable suspicion standard for the investigative stop of a vehicle..
 Background 
Border Patrol officers were monitoring a remote section of the southern Arizona desert known to be a common point for illegal border crossings. The officers repeatedly found human footprints in the sand that indicated that groups of 8 to 20 persons had walked north from the Mexican border to Arizona State Route 86. This pattern of footprints appeared numerous times, always on weekend nights under clear skies. There was also a shoe print with a chevron shape that consistently reappeared, leading the officers to nickname the suspected guide "Chevron."
In late January 1977, Border Patrol officers noticed it had been two weeks since the footprints were last seen, and, moreover, it had rained on Friday and Saturday, meaning that Sunday, January 30/31 would be a likely night for "Chevron" to lead another crossing. The Border Patrol officers waited a few miles from where the footprints usually met the state highway. The officers waited from 2 am to 6 am. In this desolate area, only around 15 vehicles passed by, and only two were large enough to fit a large number of passengers. Of these vehicles, a pickup truck with a camper shell passed the officers at 4:30 am going westbound. Then, at 6:12 am, the same vehicle passed the officers again going eastbound. The officers then stopped the vehicle. They found six unauthorized immigrants in the back of the camper, and arrested Jesus Cortez, the vehicle's driver.
The Ninth Circuit ruled that the officers did not have a sufficient basis to justify the stop. The Court of Appeals relied on United States v. Brignoni-Ponce,. ruling that the officers "did not have a valid basis for singling out the Cortez vehicle" and had violated Cortez's Fourth Amendment rights.Cortez, 449 U.S. at 416-17.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court unanimously reversed the Ninth Circuit, ruling that the Border Patrol had reasonable suspicion to stop Cortez's vehicle. Chief Justice Burger emphasized that reasonable suspicion must be based on the "totality of the circumstances," and does not depend on "hard certainties, but ... probabilities."Cortez, 449 U.S. at 417-18. Officers who stop a vehicle must have a "particularized and objective basis for suspecting the particular person stopped," but are allowed to use their experience and training to "draw inferences and make deductions."
The Court found that the officers in this case made "permissible deductions" from the known facts and had a "legitimate basis for suspicion."Cortez, 449 U.S. at 419. Based on their familiarity with the area and on their two-month period of observation, the officers concluded that "Chevron" had a regular pattern of operations. Based on this pattern, it is "not surprising that when [the officers] stopped the vehicle on its return trip it contained 'Chevron' and several illegal aliens."Cortez, 449 U.S. at 420-21. The Chief Justice praised the officers' work, writing, "We see here the kind of police work often suggested by judges and scholars as examples of appropriate and reasonable means of law enforcement."
In a concurrence, Justice Stewart highlighted the facts of the case, writing, "this nocturnal round trip into desolate desert terrain" was "in any event ... puzzling," but "coming when and as it did, surely the most likely explanation for it was that Chevron was again shepherding aliens."Cortez, 449 U.S. at 422.
Justice Marshall concurred without opinion.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 449
 References 
External links
Category:1981 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "United States v. Cotton" ==> """
United States v. Cotton, 535 U.S. 625 (2002) is a United States Supreme Court case that held the omission of a fact in a federal indictment that would enhance the maximum sentence is not a jurisdictional error and thus is not justification for a vacation of the sentence.
 Background 
Leonard Cotton was a drug dealer from Baltimore, Maryland who was charged by a federal grand jury with conspiracy to possess and conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute crack cocaine. The prosecution did not state the quantity of drugs in the indictment, however the court later found Cotton responsible for  of cocaine.
Under federal sentencing guidelines, the maximum sentence for a conviction without a specified quantity is twenty years imprisonment. The Court of Appeals vacated the sentence on the grounds of a jurisdictional error by the amounts not being included in the grand jury indictments.
The United States was represented by Deputy Solicitor General Michael Dreeben.
 Decision 
The court ruled unanimously 9-0 in favour of the United States. The opinion read as follows:
This ruling in part overturned Ex parte Bain, 121 U.S 1 (1887).
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2002 in United States case law
Category:Grand Jury Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
"""

From "United States v. Craft" ==> """
United States v. Craft, 535 U.S. 274 (2002) is a United States Supreme Court ruling that held a tenant possesses an individual right in their own estate to the level to constitute "rights to property" for the purpose of a lien.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "United States v. Creek Nation" ==> """
United States v. Creek Nation, 295 U.S. 103 (1935), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the compensation for land taken from the Creek Nation by the United States was the value of the land at the time of the taking, plus interest.
Background
In 1833, the United States government made a treaty with the Muscogee (Creek) Indians, and conveyed a large part of the Indian Territory to the tribe.United States v. Creek Nation, ;  681 (Donald L. Fixico ed. 2007). Unlike most treaties, the Creek obtained the land under fee simple title, rather than the federal government holding the land in trust for the tribe.Creek Nation, 295 U.S. at 105; Fixico, at 681. In 1866 the Creek tribe ceded the western half of the land to the United States and in 1872 the land was surveyed.Creek Nation, 295 U.S. at 106; Fixico, at 681. The survey contained an error, and as a result, 5,575.57 acres of Creek land was turned over to the Sac and Fox tribe.Creek Nation, 295 U.S. at 106; Fixico, at 681.
In 1924, Congress passed a lawAct of May 24, 1924, ch. 181, . allowing the Creek Nation to sue the United States for compensation arising out of government misdeeds from a treaty, agreement, or law of the United States.Creek Nation, 295 U.S. at 105. The Creek Nation sued for compensation in the United States Court of Claims.Creek Nation, 295 U.S. at 105.
In the Court of Claims, the United States admitted that the Creek Nation was entitled to compensation, the disagreement was over the way that the damages would be calculated.Creek Nation, 295 U.S. at 107-08. The United States wanted the damages to be fixed at the value of the property in 1873, while the tribe wanted it to be the value of the land at the time that they filed suit.Creek Nation, 295 U.S. at 107; Fixico, at 681. The Court of Claims ruled in favor of the tribe, setting the value at $30 per acre as the value in 1926.Creek Nation, 295 U.S. at 108.
Supreme Court
thumb|left|Justice Willis Van Devanter, author of the opinion
Justice Willis Van Devanter delivered the opinion of the Court. Although he noted that, unlike most tribes, the Creeks actually owned the land in this case, Van Devanter said that the United States had the right to act as a guardian over the tribe, but that did not authorize the government to take the land.Creek Nation, 295 U.S. at 109;  349 (Bruce Elliott Johansen ed. 1998); ,  40 (2006). Van Devanter stated that the government's taking of Creek land did not occur in 1873, when the survey was filed, nor had it occurred in 1926 when the Creeks brought suit.Creek Nation, 295 U.S. at 111. Instead, he found that the taking occurred in 1891, when Congress authorized the government to dispose of the land to settlers.Creek Nation, 295 U.S. at 111; , at 40. The value of the land at that time would need to be determined, and the Creek Nation would be entitled to that amount, with interest at 5% per annum.Creek Nation, 295 U.S. at 112;  , at 40. The decision of the Court of Claims was reversed and the matter remanded for the Court of Claims to determine the proper compensation based on the Supreme Court opinion.Creek Nation, 295 U.S. at 112.
Subsequent developments
The case is thought to have laid the groundwork for later trustee-violation cases, such as United States v. Shoshone Tribe,United States v. Shoshone Tribe of Indians, . that cited Creek Nation in support.Johansen, at 354. It was noted that the courts began to transition from a guardianship role to a trustee role, and that the Fifth Amendment protected Indian lands from government seizures. 46 and 46 n.18 (Vine Deloria ed. 1992).
References
External links
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Native American treaty case law
Category:Muscogee (Creek) Nation
"""

From "United States v. Cruikshank" ==> """
United States v. Cruikshank, 92 U.S. 542 (1876), was a major decision of the United States Supreme Court ruling that the U.S. Bill of Rights did not limit the power of private actors or state governments despite the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment. It reversed the federal criminal convictions for the civil rights violations committed in aid of anti-Reconstruction murders. Decided during the Reconstruction Era, the case represented a major defeat for federal efforts to protect the civil rights of African Americans.
The case developed from the strongly contested 1872 Louisiana gubernatorial election and the subsequent Colfax massacre, in which dozens of black people and three white people were killed. Federal charges were brought against several whites using the Enforcement Act of 1870, which prohibited two or more people from conspiring to deprive anyone of their constitutional rights. Charges included hindering the freedmen's First Amendment right to freely assemble and their Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms.
In his majority opinion, Chief Justice Morrison Waite reversed the convictions of the defendants, judging that the plaintiffs had to rely on Louisiana state courts for protection. Waite ruled that neither the First Amendment nor the Second Amendment limited the powers of state governments or individuals. He further ruled that the Due Process Clause and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment limited the lawful actions of state governments, but not of individuals. The decision left African Americans in the South at the mercy of increasingly hostile state governments dominated by white Democratic legislatures, and allowed groups such as the Ku Klux Klan to continue to use paramilitary force to suppress black voting.
Cruikshank was the first case to come before the Supreme Court that involved a possible violation of the Second Amendment. Decades after Cruikshank, the Supreme Court began incorporating the Bill of Rights to apply to state governments. The Court incorporated the First Amendment's freedom of assembly in De Jonge v. Oregon (1937), while the Second Amendment was incorporated in McDonald v. City of Chicago (2010).
Background
On Sunday, April 13, 1873, an armed white Democrat militia attacked African-American Republican freedmen, who had gathered at the Grant Parish courthouse in Colfax, Louisiana to protect it from the pending Democratic takeover. Although some of the black people were armed and used their weapons, estimates were that 100–280 were killed, most of them after surrendering, including 50 being held prisoner that night. Three white people were killed, two perhaps by friendly fire. This was in the tense aftermath of months of uncertainty after the disputed gubernatorial election of November 1872, when two parties declared victory at the state and local levels. The election results were still undetermined at the beginning of spring, and both Republican and Fusionists, who were endorsed by the Democrats, had certified their own candidates for the local offices of sheriff (Christopher Columbus Nash) and justice of the peace in Grant Parish, where Colfax is the parish seat. Federal troops reinforced the election of the Republican governor, William Pitt Kellogg.
Some members of the white gangs were indicted and charged by the Enforcement Act of 1870. The Act had been designed primarily to allow Federal enforcement and prosecution of actions of the Ku Klux Klan and other secret vigilante groups against blacks, both for violence and murder and for preventing them from voting. Among other provisions, the law made it a felony for two or more people to conspire to deprive anyone of his constitutional rights. The white defendants were charged with sixteen counts, divided into two sets of eight each. Among the charges included violating the freedmen's rights to lawfully assemble, to vote, and to bear arms.Cruikshank, 92 U.S. 542 at 544-546
Opinion of the Court
Majority opinion
thumb|The Waite Court in 1876.
The Supreme Court ruled on March 27, 1876, on a range of issues and found the indictment faulty. It reversed the convictions of the white defendants in the case. Chief Justice Morrison Waite authored the majority opinion.
In its ruling, the Court did not incorporate the Bill of Rights to the states. The Court opined about the dualistic nature of the U.S. political system:
There is in our political system a government of each of the several States, and a Government of the United States. Each is distinct from the others, and has citizens of its own who owe it allegiance, and whose rights, within its jurisdiction, it must protect. The same person may be at the same time a citizen of the United States and a citizen of a State, but his rights of citizenship under one of those governments will be different from those he has under the other.Cruikshank, 92 U.S. 542 at 549
The ruling said that all U.S. citizens are subject to two governments, their state government and the other the national government, and then defined the scope of each:
The Government of the United States, although it is, within the scope of its powers, supreme and beyond the States, can neither grant nor secure to its citizens rights or privileges which are not expressly or by implication placed under its jurisdiction. All that cannot be so granted or secured are left to the exclusive protection of the States.Cruikshank, 92 U.S. 542 at 551
The Court found that the First Amendment right to assembly "was not intended to limit the powers of the State governments in respect to their own citizens, but to operate upon the National Government alone," thus "for their protection in its enjoyment ... the people must look to the States. The power for that purpose was originally placed there, and it has never been surrendered to the United States".
In addition the Justices held that the Second Amendment restricts only the powers of the national government, and that it does not restrict private citizens from denying other citizens the right to keep and bear arms, or any other right in the Bill of Rights. The Justices held that the right of the people to keep and bear arms exists, and that it is a right that exists without the Constitution granting such a right, by stating "Neither is it [the right to keep and bear arms] in any manner dependent upon that instrument [the Constitution] for its existence." Their ruling was that citizens must look to "municipal legislation" when other citizens deprive them of such rights rather than the Constitution.
The right there specified is that of "bearing arms for a lawful purpose." This is not a right granted by the Constitution. Neither is it in any manner dependent upon that instrument for its existence. The second amendment declares that it shall not be infringed, but this, as has been seen, means no more than that it shall not be infringed by Congress. This is one of the amendments that has no other effect than to restrict the powers of the national government, leaving the people to look for their protection against any violation by their fellow citizens of the rights it recognizes, to what is called, in The City of New York v. Miln, 11 Pet. 139, the "powers which relate to merely municipal legislation, or what was, perhaps, more properly called internal police," "not surrendered or restrained" by the Constitution of the United States.Cruikshank, 92 U.S. 542 at 553
The Court also ruled that the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses applied only to state action, and not to actions of individuals: "The fourteenth amendment prohibits a State from depriving any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; but this adds nothing to the rights of one citizen as against another."Cruikshank, 92 U.S. 542 at 554
Dissenting/concurring opinion
Justice Clifford agreed with the other Justices to rescind the indictments but for entirely different reasons: he opined that section five of the 14th Amendment invested the federal government with the power to legislate the actions of individuals who restrict the constitutional rights of others, but he found that the indictments were worded too vaguely to allow the defendants to prepare an effective defense.
Aftermath
African Americans in the South were left to the mercy of increasingly hostile state governments dominated by white Democratic legislatures; neither the legislatures, law enforcement, nor the courts worked to protect freedmen. As white Democrats regained power in the late 1870s, they struggled to suppress black Republican voting through intimidation and fraud at the polls. Paramilitary groups such as the Red Shirts acted on behalf of the Democrats to suppress black voting. In addition, from 1890 to 1908, 10 of the 11 former Confederate states passed disfranchising constitutions or amendments, with provisions for poll taxes, residency requirements, literacy tests, and grandfather clauses that effectively disfranchised most black voters and many poor white people. The disfranchisement also meant that black people could not serve on juries or hold any political office, which were restricted to voters; those who could not vote were excluded from the political system.
The Cruikshank ruling allowed groups such as the Ku Klux Klan to flourish and continue to use paramilitary force to suppress black voting. As white Democrats dominated the Southern legislatures, they ignored the violence and refused to allow African Americans any right to bear arms.
As constitutional commentator Leonard Levy later wrote in 1987, "Cruikshank paralyzed the federal government's attempt to protect black citizens by punishing violators of their Civil Rights and, in effect, shaped the Constitution to the advantage of the Ku Klux Klan". In 1966, (United States v. Price; United States v. Guest) the Court vitiated Cruikshank.Leonard W. Levy, et al., eds., Encyclopedia of the American Constitution, MacMillan/Professional Books, 1987.
All five Justices of the majority had been appointed by Republicans (three by Lincoln, two by Grant). The lone Democratic appointee Nathan Clifford dissented.
Continuing validity
Cruikshank has been cited for more than a century by supporters of restrictive state and local gun control laws such as the Sullivan Act.
Although significant portions of Cruikshank have been reversed by later decisions, most notably the 5–4 McDonald v. City of Chicago ruling in 2010, it is still relied upon with some authority in other portions. Cruikshank and Presser v. Illinois, which reaffirmed it in 1886, are the only significant Supreme Court interpretations of the Second Amendment until the ambiguous  United States v. Miller in 1939. Both preceded the court's general acceptance of the incorporation doctrine and have been questioned for that reason.
The majority opinion of the Supreme Court in District of Columbia v. Heller suggested that Cruikshank and the cases flowing from it would no longer be considered good law as a result of the radically changed opinion of the Fourteenth Amendment when that issue eventually comes before the courts:
With respect to Cruikshank's continuing validity on incorporation, a question not presented by this case, we note that Cruikshank also said that the First Amendment did not apply against the States and did not engage in the sort of Fourteenth Amendment inquiry required by our later cases. Our later decisions in Presser v. Illinois, 116 U. S. 252, 265 (1886) and Miller v. Texas, 153 U. S. 535, 538 (1894), reaffirmed that the Second Amendment applies only to the Federal Government.
This issue did come before the Supreme Court in McDonald v. Chicago (2010), in which the Supreme Court "reversed the Seventh Circuit, holding that the Fourteenth Amendment makes the Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms for the purpose of self-defense applicable to the states."
Regarding this assertion in Heller that Cruikshank said the first amendment did not apply against the states, Professor David Rabban wrote Cruikshank "never specified whether the First Amendment contains 'fundamental rights' protected by the Fourteenth Amendment against state action"
The Civil Rights Cases (1883) and Justice Rehnquist's opinion for the majority in United States v. Morrison (2000) referred to the Cruikshank state action doctrine.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 92
 Jim Crow laws
References
Further reading
  Pdf. 
  Pdf.
 C. Peter Margrath, Morrison R. Waite, MacMillan, 1963.
External links
Category:1876 in United States case law
Category:African-American history between emancipation and the civil rights movement
Category:Overruled United States Supreme Court decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States Freedom of Assembly Clause case law
Category:United States Second Amendment case law
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Fifteenth Amendment case law
Category:Criminal cases in the Waite Court
Category:Grant Parish, Louisiana
Category:Riots and civil disorder during the Reconstruction Era
"""

From "United States v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corp." ==> """
United States v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corp., 299 U.S. 304 (1936), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the foreign affairs powers of the President of the United States. It held that the President, as the nation's "sole organ" in international relations, was therefore innately vested with significant powers over foreign affairs, far exceeding those permitted in domestic matters or accorded to the U.S. Congress.. The Court's majority reasoned that although the U.S. Constitution does not explicitly provide for such authority, the powers are implicit in the President's constitutional role as commander-in-chief and head of the executive branch.
Curtiss-Wright was the first decision to establish that the President's plenary power is independent of congressional permission. It is credited with providing the legal precedent for further expansions of executive power in the foreign sphere.
Background
In June 1932, the Chaco War broke out between Paraguay and Bolivia. Both belligerents were poor and relied on outside military assistance, which aroused interest among American armament manufacturers. However, in response to national antiwar sentiment, widespread revulsion at the conduct of the war, and diplomatic pressure from the United Kingdom and the League of Nations, the US government sought to terminate any developing arms trade. 
To that end, on May 24, 1934, the US Congress approved a joint resolution providing that "if the President finds that the prohibition of the sale of arms and munitions of war in the United States to those countries engaged in conflict in the Chaco may contribute to the establishment of peace between those countries," he was authorized to proclaim an embargo on American arms shipments to the belligerents with violators subject to a fine, imprisonment, or both.Lofgren, Charles A. “United States v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corporation: An Historical Reassessment.” The Yale Law Journal, vol. 83, no. 1, 1973, pp. 1–32. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/795317. The same day, US President Franklin Roosevelt signed the joint resolution and issued a proclamation reaffirming its language and establishing an embargo. On November 14, 1935, that proclamation was revoked. 
Curtiss-Wright Export Corp. was indicted for violating both the joint resolution and the embargo by conspiring to sell aircraft machine guns to Bolivia. It demurred to the indictment by arguing that the embargo and proclamation were void, as Congress had unconstitutionally delegated legislative power to the executive branch and thus given the President "unfettered discretion" to make a decision that should have been determined by Congress.
Issues
The defendant raised several issues for consideration by the Court:
 Did the joint resolution passed by Congress grant unconstitutional authority and legislative power to the President in violation of the non-delegation doctrine?
 Was the President required by considerations of due process to make findings of fact in support of the proclamation?
 Did the revocation of the May 1934 proclamation eliminate the penalty for its violation?
Decision
In a 7–1 decision authored by Justice George Sutherland, the Court ruled that the U.S. government, through the President, is categorically allowed great foreign affairs powers that are independent of the US Constitution:
The Constitution does not explicitly state that all ability to conduct foreign policy is vested in the President, but the Court concluded that such power is given implicitly since the executive of a sovereign nation is by its very nature empowered to conduct foreign affairs. The Court found "sufficient warrant for the broad discretion vested in the President to determine whether the enforcement of the statute will have a beneficial effect upon the reestablishment of peace in the affected countries." In other words, the President is better suited to determine the actions and the policies that best serve the nation's interests abroad:
By contrast, Congress lacks such an inherent role under the Constitution, which accords broad discretion to the President alone because of the vastness and the complexity of international relations.
 Legacy 
The ruling not only upheld export limitations on the grounds of national security but also established the broader principle of executive supremacy in national security and in foreign affairs; this was one of the reasons advanced in the 1950s for the nearly successful attempt to add the Bricker Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
The Court has not recognized the full scope of executive power suggested by Justice Sutherland's sweeping language; consequently, it has sometimes presented contradictory rulings about foreign policy powers between the President and the Congress. For example, Reagan v. Wald (1984), established that congressional authorization may be necessary to legitimize many executive acts: Citing Curtiss-Wright, the Court upheld the constitutionality of the president's regulations restricting travel to Cuba expressly on the grounds that they had been authorized by Congress. On the other hand, in Federal Energy Administration v. Algonquin SNG, Inc. (1976), the Court validated presidential restrictions on oil imports based on the very broad congressional language that delegated apparently unlimited regulatory authority to the executive branch.
Despite its controversy, Curtiss-Wright is among the Supreme Court's most influential decisions. Most cases involving conflicts between the executive and legislative branches involve political questions that the courts refuse to adjudicate. Therefore, the sweeping language of Curtiss-Wright is regularly cited to support the executive branch's claims of power to act without congressional authorization in foreign affairs, especially if there is no judicial intervention to interpret the text's meaning.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 299
 Little v. Barreme
References
Further reading
 Lofgren, Charles A. "United States v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corporation: An Historical Reassessment." Yale Law Journal  83 (1973): 1+. online
External links
Category:1936 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States foreign relations case law
Category:Bolivia–United States relations
Category:Chaco War
Category:Curtiss-Wright Company
Category:Arms trafficking
"""

From "United States v. Darby Lumber Co." ==> """
United States v. Darby Lumber Co., 312 U.S. 100 (1941), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court upheld the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, holding that the U.S. Congress had the power under the Commerce Clause to regulate employment conditions.. The unanimous decision of the Court in this case overturned Hammer v. Dagenhart, , limited the application of Carter v. Carter Coal Company, , and confirmed the underlying legality of minimum wages held in West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish, .
Background
An American lumber company based in Georgia was charged with violating the conditions set forth in the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 aiming to fix minimum wages and maximum hours for employees engaged in the production of goods for interstate commerce. The company successfully appealed when an appellate judge ruled that the federal government is barred by the Tenth Amendment from interfering in matters that are strictly local and within state boundaries.
Darby Lumber, located in Statesboro, Georgia, was founded by entrepreneur Fred Darby in 1919 after the conclusion of World War I. After buying some land from a defunct oil company, Mr. Darby turned his lumber company into one of the premier companies in the area with over 50 employees.Novotny, Dr. Patrick “United States vs Darby Lumber Company: Statesboro, Georgia 1939-         1941” Statesboro Magazine March April 2005.  The company benefited from the forested land of South Georgia and easy railroad access to nearby Savannah and not too distant Macon. During the boom of the 1920s, and even the bust of the 1930s, Darby Lumber prospered so well that in 1938 it was able to expand its operations. The expansion, which included larger facilities and an increased payroll, garnered resources that would make the operations of the company much more efficient.
The Darby case came about due to violations of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (FLSA), one of many initiatives enacted by President Franklin  Roosevelt during the Great Depression and, to date, the most comprehensive to dictate the running of corporations. Roosevelt wanted to unite labor practices in all then 48 states then existing, as he considered that leaving that power to the states had been ineffective.
There was some concern on how the new law would affect the viability of businesses. It was passed in August 1938 and signed into law by Roosevelt two months later. The Commerce Clause addressed businesses that conducted both intrastate and interstate commerce. The law established a federal minimum wage, the 44-hour work week standard (this being the slightly longer precedent for the current 40-hour standard), and overtime pay (which remains in effect, requiring employers to pay their hourly employees at least 150% of their normal wages for work in excess of the standard).
Issues
One issue was whether Congress had overstepped its constitutional authority in creating the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Another issue was that the Act required the keeping of records to verify compliance; the appellee argued that this violated his Fifth Amendment right protecting him from self-incrimination.
Decision
The Court unanimously reversed the appellate court decision and affirmed the constitutional power of Congress to regulate interstate commerce, which "can neither be enlarged nor diminished by the exercise or non-exercise of state power." The Court held that the purpose of the Act was to prevent states from using substandard labor practices to their own economic advantage by interstate commerce. In Hammer v. Dagenhart, the Court had made the distinction between manufacturing and interstate commerce so a business could argue it was engaging in the former but had not intended the latter.
In the current case, the Court found that earlier argument facile and explained that Congress was aware that businesses produce their goods without thought to where they will go, and product is pulled and shipped to meet the orders of the day. The Court also concluded that the requirement to keep records was entirely appropriate, as a matter of enforcing the Act.
The Court ruled that Congress could require companies to conform to production regulation under the FLSA. The Court also ruled that the employer could be held responsible for transgressions of the law and that the employer had to keep a record of his compliance with the law.
Further reading
.
References
External links
 Case Brief for United States v. Darby at Lawnix.com
 United States vs. Darby Lumber Company historical marker
Category:1941 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Bulloch County, Georgia
Category:Timber industry
"""

From "United States v. Davila" ==> """
United States v. Davila, 569 U.S. 597 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that when a federal judge participates in the plea process in violation of rule 11(c) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, a guilty plea need not be vacated if the record shows prejudice to the decision to plea due to rule 11(h).Syllabus p. 2
 Notes 
 References 
External links
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "United States v. Davis (1962)" ==> """
United States v. Davis, 370 U.S. 65 (1962), is a federal income tax case argued before the United States Supreme Court in 1962, holding that a taxpayer recognizes a gain on the transfer of appreciated property in satisfaction of a legal obligation.United States v. Davis, .
In 1984, "having heard criticism of the Davis/Farid rule for many years," Congress overruled the main holding: Under § 1041(a), no gain or loss shall be recognized by the transferor-spouse (or former spouse, but "only if the transfer is incident to divorce"); as a corollary, §1041(b) provides that transferor's basis shall carry over into the hands of the transferee-spouse. (Thus, for transfers between spouses, §1041(b) overrules the lower-of-cost-or-market rule for determining loss on subsequent sale of a gift, in §1015.)
Facts
Pursuant to a separation agreement, the taxpayer's (ex-)wife agreed to relinquish any potential claims or marital rights, in exchange for which he transferred to her 1,000 shares of stock in DuPont.  These shares had cost him $74,775.37, and had appreciated to $82,250 at the time of the transfer.
The government argued that the appreciation should be included in the taxpayer's gross income, viewing the transfer of property as an exchange for the release of an independent legal obligation.  The taxpayer argued that the appreciation should not count as gross income, since the transfer was more like a division of property between co-owners than a sale that resulted in gain.Davis, 370 U.S. at 69.
Holding
The Supreme Court held that the $7,000 appreciation should count as gross income, as "the 'amount realized' from the exchange is the fair market value of the released marital rights, which in this case would be equal to the value of the stock transferred."See Philadelphia Park Amusement Co. v. United States, 126 F.Supp. 184 (U.S. Court of Claims, 1954), determining that the fair market value of consideration of indeterminable value is equal to the value of the property exchanged for it, assuming arms-length transaction.
Further Reasoning
The court bolstered its position by arguing that the lower court's ruling (that the value of the released marital rights is indeterminable and therefore, not included in gross income) could prejudice the taxpayer's spouse, as her basis in the shares would not include the $7,000 appreciation, and she would have to include this in her gross income if she decided to sell the shares.
Overruled by Congress
In response to this decision, Congress enacted Internal Revenue Code § 1041.  This statute provides that, generally, "no gain or loss shall be recognized on a transfer of property from an individual to...(2) a former spouse, but only if the transfer is incident to divorce."
While this statute overrules the specific holding of Davis, it does not change the general rule—that "a taxpayer recognizes a gain on the transfer of appreciated property in satisfaction of a legal obligation."Donaldson (2007), 136.
These legislative changes were regarded by most tax specialists as overdue and welcome, because the Davis/Farid rule had a number of weaknesses:Chirelstein (2005), 93.
It had been a complicating factor in divorce settlements
It resulted in better treatment for residents of community property states (since the Service had held that it would not apply Davis to an equal division of community property) that for residents of common law jurisdictions.
It added considerably to the Treasury's enforcement burden—the Treasury ran the risk that gain would be reported by neither spouse, unless it was prepared to audit every substantial property settlement:
transferor-spouses sometimes seemed not to know about Davis or to find it counter-intuitive, and hence often omitted to report their taxable gain when property was transferred.
By contrast, transferee-spouses, well aware of Farid, almost invariably computed their gain(loss) on subsequent sale by using a basis equal to fair market value at time of receipt.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 370
Draft-card burning
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1962 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Davis (2019)" ==> """
United States v. Davis, 588 U.S. ___ (2019), is a United States Supreme Court decision handed down June 24, 2019.United States v. Davis, .
Background
On November 19, 2015, a jury found defendant Maurice Lamont Davis guilty on six counts, including the illegal use or carrying of a firearm in relation to a crime of violence (a “Hobbs Act robbery”) and the illegal use or carrying of a firearm to aid and abet conspiracy to commit a crime of violence. Also on November 19, 2015, a jury found defendant Andre Levon Glover guilty on seven counts, including the two counts described above.
On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit issued an opinion on January 31, 2017, denying both defendants’ challenges and affirming the district court’s judgment below.United States v. Davis,  The defendants petitioned the US Supreme Court for certiorari, and following the Court’s decision in Sessions v. Dimaya,. the Court remanded their case back to the Fifth Circuit for further consideration in light of that decision.Davis v. United States,  After requesting supplemental briefing from the parties on the effect of Dimaya, the Fifth Circuit affirmed in part and vacated in part.United States v. Davis, https://www.oyez.org/cases/2018/18-431 
Judgment
Affirmed in part, vacated in part, and remanded, 5–4, in an opinion by Justice Gorsuch on June 24, 2019. Justice Kavanaugh filed a dissenting opinion, in which Justices Thomas and Alito joined, and in which Chief Justice Roberts joined as to all but Part II–C.
Legal principles
18 U.S.C. § 924(c) contains both an “elements clause” and a “residual clause.”. The elements clause defines an offense as a crime of violence if it “has as an element the use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical force against the person or property of another,” and the residual clause defines an offense as a crime of violence if it, “by its nature, involves a substantial risk that physical force against the person or property of another may be used in the course of committing the offense.” In Dimaya, the Court addressed (and invalidated) a residual clause identical to the residual clause in § 924(c) but did not address the elements clause. Thus, the Fifth Circuit held the residual clause in 924(c) unconstitutionally vague under Dimaya but did not invalidate the elements clause in that section. As a result of this holding, the Fifth Circuit affirmed its prior judgment as to the Hobbs Act robbery count but vacated as to the aiding and abetting conspiracy count, because the former relies on the elements clause while the latter relies on the residual clause.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:Hobbs Act case law
Category:United States federal firearms case law
"""

From "United States v. Detroit & Cleveland Navigation Co." ==> """
United States v. Detroit & Cleveland Navigation Co., 326 U.S. 236 (1945), is a Supreme Court of the United States administrative law case holding that the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) had sufficient authority to order an expansion of automobile carrier capacity in anticipation of post-war demand.. 
Background
An application during World War II had been jointly filed by the T. J. McCarthy Steamship Company and Automotive Trades Steamship Company with the ICC for a certificate of public convenience and necessity (CPCN) to operate as a common carrier of automobile transportation services from Detroit, Michigan, to other ports on the Great Lakes. The application was opposed by the Detroit and Cleveland Navigation Company and another carrier company, both of which had provided this service prior to the war. During the war, production of automobiles for civilian use had stopped and the federal government had requisitioned many of the automobile carrying vessels of the companies for conversion to and use as commodity carriers, but the carriers were believed to be suitable for conversion back to automobile carriers after the war. The ICC, in granting the application, found that there was insufficient capacity prior to the war, and there would likely be a need for additional capacity for post-war service.
On appeal in the United States District Court for Michigan, the court reversed the order of the ICC on the basis that there was no evidence that the vessels of the two companies were the only ones available to meet any future demand, and that there were no other vessels that could be chartered.
Court's decision
The Supreme Court unanimously reversed the district court, holding that the ICC could authorize additional capacity, and that it had found that the existing carrying capacity on the Great Lakes was deficient prior to the war. The opinion stated, "The Commission is the guardian of the public interest in determining whether certificates of convenience and necessity shall be granted. For the performance of that function the Commission has been entrusted with a wide range of discretionary authority." Part of this authority included authorizing increases in capacity based on forecasts.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 326
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1945 in United States case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:Transportation in Detroit
Category:Interstate Commerce Commission litigation
Category:Automotive industry in the United States
Category:1945 in Michigan
Category:Detroit and Cleveland Navigation Company
"""

From "United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co." ==> """
United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Company, 200 U.S. 321 (1906), is a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States. Although the primary issue to the parties of the case was to determine ownership of 44 tracts of timberland, the case has become the standard reference to warn attorneys not to rely on the syllabus of a reported case.
Prior to Detroit Timber, the Reporter of Decisions had mischaracterized the holding of Hawley v. Diller (1900)Hawley v. Diller, . in its syllabus for that case. The attorneys representing the United States in Detroit Timber relied on the Hawley syllabus (which incorrectly reported the case) rather than the text of the actual decision (which actually represents the results). The Court pointed out that the headnote is not the work of the Supreme Court and cannot be relied upon to state the Court's decision. Also, for the case cited, the headnote in question had misinterpreted the scope of the decision.Detroit Timber at 337 ("In the first place, the headnote is not the work of the court, nor does it state its decision, though a different rule, it is true, is prescribed by statute in some states. It is simply the work of the reporter, gives his understanding of the decision, and is prepared for the convenience of the profession in the examination of the reports.... And finally, the headnote is a misinterpretation of the scope of the decision.").
All syllabi issued by the Supreme Court now include a paragraph of boilerplate text to warn readers not to rely on the syllabus for the actual meaning of the decision.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 200
References
External links
Category:1906 in United States case law
Category:1906 in Detroit
Category:February 1906 events
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Forests of Michigan
"""

From "United States v. Dinitz" ==> """
United States v. Dinitz, 424 U.S. 600 (1976), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States determined that the U.S. Const., Amend. V protection against double jeopardy did not prevent a retrial of a defendant, who had previously requested a mistrial..
Facts
Nathan Dinitz was charged with narcotics offenses in violation of 84 Stat. 1260, 1265, 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1), 846. Five days before trial, Dinitz retained new lawyer, Wagner, for his defense. Wagner had not been admitted to practice in that court, but on the first day of the trial, the court permitted him to appear pro hac vice. The jury was selected and sworn, and opening statements by counsel began. In the defense's opening statements, Wagner gave improper personal opinions regarding the prosecution's key witness and case. The prosecutor objected, and the judge warned Wagner not to do it again. The judge found it necessary to twice more remind Wagner of the purpose of the opening statement and to instruct him to relate, "the facts that you expect the evidence to show, the admissible evidence." Id. at 603. Wagner, however, continued to present improper arguments. The judge then excluded Wagner from the trial and ordered him to leave the courthouse. The judge asked Meldon, Dinitz's original defense counsel, if he was ready to proceed with trial or whether he would be willing to seek one of three alternative courses - (1) a stay or recess pending application to the Court of Appeals to review the propriety of expelling Wagner, (2) continuation of the trial with prior counsel, or (3) a declaration of a mistrial which would permit the respondent to obtain other counsel. Following the short recess, Meldon moved for a mistrial stating that the Dinitz had reviewed the alternatives and believed that mistrial would be in his best interest. Mistrial was granted without opposition.
Procedural history
Before the retrial, Dinitz moved to dismiss the indictment on the ground that a retrial would violate the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Constitution. The motion was denied. The appellate court took the view that the exclusion of Wagner and the questioning of Meldon left no choice but to move for mistrial. On that basis, the court concluded that the request for mistrial should be ignored and treated as though mistrial was declared over the objection of the defendant. The appellate court held that the Double Jeopardy Clause barred the second trial because there was no "manifest necessity" that another trial be held.
Analysis of the Court
The Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment protects a defendant in a criminal proceeding against multiple punishments or repeated prosecutions for the same offense. Underlying this constitutional safeguard is the belief that:
"the State, with all its resources and power, should not be allowed to make repeated attempts to convict an individual for an alleged offense, thereby subjecting him to embarrassment, expense and ordeal and compelling him to live in a continuing state of anxiety and insecurity, as well as enhancing the possibility that, even though innocent, he may be found guilty.".
Since Justice Story's 1824 opinion in United States v. Perez,. of whether, under the Double Jeopardy Clause, there can be a new trial after a mistrial has been declared without the defendant's request or consent depends on whether there is a manifest necessity for the mistrial, or the ends of public justice would otherwise be defeated. A motion by the defendant for mistrial is ordinarily assumed to remove any barrier to retrial, absent bad faith on part of the prosecutor of judge. This is because the defendant has a choice to take the chance to go to the first jury and end the dispute, then and there, with an acquittal. The important consideration is whether the defendant retained primary control over the course to be followed in the event of error.
The Double Jeopardy Clause protects a defendant against bad-faith conduct on part of the prosecutor or judge intended to provoke mistrial requests, and thereby, subject defendant to the substantial burdens imposed by multiple prosecutions. But here the judge's banishment of Wagner from the proceedings was not done in bad faith to goad Dinitz into requesting a mistrial or prejudice his changes of an acquittal. Wagner was guilty of improper conduct, which may have justified disciplinary action.
Therefore, the Supreme Court held that the Court of Appeals erred in finding the retrial violated Dinitz's constitutional right not to be twice put in jeopardy.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 424
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
 References 
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "United States v. Dion" ==> """
United States v. Dion, 476 U.S. 734 (1986), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States which held that, pursuant to the Eagle Protection Act, American Indians were prohibited from hunting eagles. Justice Thurgood Marshall wrote the unanimous opinion of the Court..
Facts
Dwight Dion Sr., a member of the Yankton Sioux Tribe of South Dakota, was convicted of shooting five bald eagles in violation of the Endangered Species Act, and of selling the carcasses in violation of the Eagle Protection Act and Migratory Bird Treaty Act. The takings occurred on the Yankton Indian Reservation. The reservation was created by an 1858 treaty; the Yankton tribe ceded all but  of their territory to the United States. In exchange for the land, the United States guaranteed the tribe quiet and undisturbed possession of the reserved land, as well as monetary compensation. All parties to the litigation acknowledged that the treaty granted exclusive rights to hunt and fish on the reservation.
The Eagle Protection Act, by its express terms, made it a federal offense to hunt bald or golden eagles anywhere within the United States unless provided a permit by the Secretary of the Interior. The Endangered Species Act also imposed strict sanctions on the hunting of species such as the bald eagle that have been listed as endangered or threatened.
Procedural history
The District Court convicted Dion for the shooting of bald eagles in violation of the Endangered Species Act, and for the distribution of carcasses in violation of the Eagle Protection Act. The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, however, held that members of the Yankton Sioux Tribe have a treaty right to hunt bald eagles within the Yankton Reservation for noncommercial purposes. It also held that the Eagle Protection Act and Endangered Species Act did not abrogate this treaty right. Since neither the District Court nor the jury ruled on whether the killings were for commercial or noncommercial purposes, the appellate court directed that Dion's convictions for shooting bald eagles be vacated. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to determine the correctness of the Eighth Circuit's holding that noncommercial hunting of bald eagles on the Yankton reservation was not punishable under the Endangered Species Act or Eagle Protection Act.
Decision
The Court began by acknowledging that generally Indian tribes enjoy the exclusive rights to hunt and fish on lands granted to them by treaty; such rights, however, could be abrogated by the express terms of Congress. Citing Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock as precedent, the Court concluded that Congress retained the power to modify Indian treaties so long as it does so in clear and explicit terms. Justice Marshall acknowledged that the Court has adopted different standards of review to determine whether Congress intended to abrogate treaty rights. The overriding emphasis, however, is evidence that Congress considered the effect of its actions on existing treaty rights, and chose to resolve the conflict by abrogating the treaty. The Court found that such evidence was strongly suggested on the face of the Eagle Protection Act. The statute allowed for the Secretary of the Interior to grant permits to Indians in some situations; such a framework convincingly showed that Congress was aware of the effect its action would have on Indian hunting rights. The Court also found compelling evidence of congressional intent in the legislative history of the Act. Before hearings on an amendment to extend protection to the golden eagle, Assistant Secretary of the Interior Frank P. Briggs wrote a letter to the subcommittee acknowledging the religious significance of the golden eagle to many Indian tribes of the southwest. The record also revealed that various witnesses gave testimony as to the effects of the ban on Indian tribes. The bill passed with an amendment granting the Secretary the authority to grant case specific permits for Indians to hunt eagles for religious purposes. The Court found adequate evidence in the legislative history that Congress intended to abrogate the treaty rights of Indians.
The Court was unconvinced by the respondent's evidence of an Interior Department memorandum stating that the Eagle Protection Act did not apply to Indian tribes.  The Court found no evidence that the memorandum was ever shown to, or contemplated by Congress. The respondent argued further that the permit framework was meant to bind non-Indians from hunting eagles for Indian religious ceremonies, but did not deprive Indian hunters of their exclusive right to hunt eagles on reservations.  The Court thought this argument strained credulity.
Finally, Dion asserted a treaty defense to his convictions under the Endangered Species Act. Because the legislative history of that Act revealed almost no discussion of its effect on Indian rights, Dion argued that he was immune from prosecution. The Court disagreed, however, stating that because the Eagle Protection Act divested Dion of his right to hunt eagles, he was barred from asserting that right as a defense in another context such as the Endangered Species Act.
Ruling
The Court of Appeals ruling was reversed to the extent it recognized a treaty defense to the Eagle Protection Act and Endangered Species Act prosecutions, and remanded for further proceedings consistent with the Court's opinion. Because the issue was not raised on appeal, the Court did not rule on whether Congress' criminalization of hunting eagles violated Dion's religious freedom.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 476
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Native American treaty case law
Category:1986 in the environment
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Yankton Dakota
Category:Eagles
Category:Charles Mix County, South Dakota
"""

From "United States v. Dixon" ==> """
United States v. Dixon, 509 U.S. 688 (1993), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning double jeopardy. The case overruled Grady v. Corbin (1990) and revived the traditional Blockburger standard. The case held that subsequent convictions for offenses that contained the same elements were violative of the Double Jeopardy Clause.
Background
Alvin Dixon was arrested for murder in the District of Columbia and released on bail, on the condition that he not commit any criminal offense, or he would be held in contempt of court. While awaiting trial, Dixon was arrested and indicted for possession of cocaine with intent to distribute and was found guilty of contempt and sentenced to 180 days in jail. Dixon moved to dismiss this indictment on double jeopardy grounds because he argued that the prosecution was secondary to his first offense.
Michael Foster's wife obtained a civil protection order against him due to domestic attacks. The order required that he not molest, assault, or in any manner threaten or physically abuse her. Later his wife sought to have him held in contempt for violation of that order. Foster also filed a motion to dismiss, arguing that his double jeopardy rights were violated because his contempt charges arose out of the original prosecution.
Opinion of the Court
The court concluded that the Double Jeopardy Clause prohibited the subsequent prosecutions of Foster for assault and Dixon for possession with intent to distribute cocaine, but did not prohibit the subsequent prosecutions of Foster for threatening to injure another or for assault with intent to kill.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 509
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "United States v. Dominguez Benitez" ==> """
United States v. Dominguez Benitez, 542 U.S. 74 (2004), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that, in a criminal proceeding in federal court, a defendant who does not alert the district court to a possible violation of Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure must show on appeal that the violation affirmatively affected his rights in order to obtain reversal of his conviction by guilty plea.  Rule 11, which pertains to criminal prosecutions in United States federal courts only, governs the offering of plea bargains to criminal defendants and the procedures district courts must employ to ensure that the defendant knows of and properly waives his trial-related constitutional rights.
In Benitez, the trial court violated Rule 11 when it took the defendant's plea by failing to warn him that the plea could not be withdrawn if the court did not accept the prosecution's sentencing recommendations.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed the conviction, considering that the non-English speaking defendant did not understand his rights under those circumstances.
The Supreme Court unanimously reversed, ruling the Court of Appeals had applied the wrong test by not requiring the defendant to show how the error actually prejudiced the proceedings.  The Court of Appeals had consequently failed to consider the entire record regarding what the defendant understood.  An eight-justice majority of the Supreme Court, in an opinion by Justice David Souter, held that a defendant attempting to reverse his conviction due to a Rule 11 violation must show a reasonable probability that, but for the trial court's error, he would not have entered the plea.  Justice Antonin Scalia concurred in the judgment but disagreed with the majority's standard.
Background of the case
Arrest and indictment
Carlos Dominguez Benitez arranged to sell several pounds of methamphetamine to an informant secretly working with law enforcement.  Benitez was arrested while making the sale, confessed, and gave information on his supplier and fellow drug dealers.  Benitez was then indicted by a federal grand jury under the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 for conspiracy to possess more than  of a methamphetamine mixture, and for possession of  of a methamphetamine mixture, both with intent to distribute.21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1)(A) and 21 U.S.C. § 846, respectively.  Under the statutory sentencing ranges, Benitez faced anywhere from ten years to life in prison, and his court-appointed counsel began discussing a plea bargain while he faced trial before the United States District Court for the Central District of California.
Plea agreement and District Court sentencing
Benitez, who could only speak and write in Spanish, sent several letters to the District Court, in which he expressed dissatisfaction with his attorney and the plea agreement he was being encouraged to sign.  During a hearing, however, Benitez expressed that he did not want to go to trial but just wanted a better deal, and the court declined to make any change.  Benitez and the federal prosecutor subsequently agreed that he would plead guilty to the conspiracy charge in exchange for the possession charge being dropped, and that the prosecutor would stipulate to a "safety valve" that would allow him to avoid the statutory ten year minimum sentence, provided he could meet the statutory conditions.18 U.S.C. § 3553(f), which states a court shall impose a sentence in accordance with the applicable guidelines without regard to any statutory mandatory minimum if the defendant meets five criteria: (1) the defendant does not have more than one criminal history point, as defined under the United States Sentencing Guidelines; (2) the defendant did not use violence or credible threats of violence or possess a firearm or other dangerous weapon; (3) the offense did not result in death or serious bodily injury; (4) the defendant was not the organizer, leader, manager or supervisor of others and was not engaged in a continuing criminal enterprise; and (5) the defendant has truthfully provided the government all information the defendant has concerning the offense(s) that were part of the same course of conduct.  Benitez was warned in discussion with the prosecutor and in the written plea agreement that the agreement was not binding on the District Court, and that Benitez would not be able to withdraw his guilty plea if the court rejected the prosecutor's recommendations.
However, at the hearing the next day when Benitez entered his guilty plea, District Court judge Alicemarie H. Stotler failed to deliver the warning required by Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 11(c)(3)(B)Numbered at Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(e)(2) at the time of Benitez' conviction; the rule was subsequently renumbered and the Supreme Court's opinion used the new numbering. that he would not be able to withdraw his plea.  Benitez' earlier criminal convictions under a different name were subsequently discovered, which rendered him ineligible for the "safety valve."  He was then sentenced to the statutory minimum of ten years in prison over his objection that he was never told what the conditions of the "safety valve" sentence reduction were.
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals decision
Benitez appealed his conviction and sentencing to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, arguing that the District Court's failure to comply with all of the required Rule 11 warnings was ground for reversal.  A three-judge panel of the court consisting of Circuit Judges James R. Browning, Stephen Reinhardt, and Richard C. Tallman voted 2-1 to reverse his conviction and sentence.United States v. Benitez, 310 F.3d 1221 (9th Cir. 2002).  The court's opinion was written by Judge Browning, and the dissent by Judge Tallman.
Because Benitez did not object to the District Court's failure prior to his conviction, the error was not preserved for appeal and so was reviewed under the plain error standard of Fed. R. Crim. P. 52(b), pursuant to the Supreme Court's ruling in United States v. Vonn, 535 U.S. 55 (2002).  The Court of Appeals applied a two part test to determine whether plain error had been committed.  First, the defendant had to establish that the court's error was not "merely minor or technical."  The court considered this satisfied by the inherently serious nature of a Rule 11 violation alone, because the rule was intended to ensure that a defendant's plea was made intelligently and knowingly.  Second, the defendant had to establish that he did not understand the rights at issue when he entered his guilty plea.  The court found that this second element was satisfied because Benitez' language barrier had prevented him from gaining a full understanding of his rights from only the written plea agreement and other comments made by the court.
Judge Tallman's dissent argued that Vonn required the court to view the proceedings as a whole in determining whether the Rule 11 violation constituted plain error.  He believed that although the record showed that the Rule 11 "magic words" may not have been spoken, Benitez' counsel and the District Court had fully discussed the plea agreement with him, and that he had expressed understanding of all the relevant issues.
The court's decision
The Supreme Court granted review on the narrow issue of on what basis a court's failure to comply with Rule 11 constitutes reversible error, and unanimously reversed.Dan Himmelfarb, Assistant to the Solicitor General, argued the case on behalf of the United States.  Myra D. Mossman, a solo practitioner from Santa Barbara, California, argued for Benitez on appointment by the Supreme Court.  Justice David Souter wrote the majority opinion, which seven Justices joined.  Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a separate opinion concurring in the judgment.
The Court stated that even for preserved errors, only those that structurally "undermine the fairness of a criminal proceeding as a whole" require reversal without a consideration of the effect the error had on the proceeding.  The omission of a Rule 11 warning alone does not fall into this category.  Furthermore, the Rule 52 phrase "error that affects substantial rights," which is used in Rule 52, "has previously been taken to mean error with a prejudicial effect on the outcome of a judicial proceeding."  The Court concluded by holding that "a defendant who seeks reversal of his conviction after a guilty plea, on the ground that the district court committed plain error under Rule 11, must show a reasonable probability that, but for the error, he would not have entered the plea."  The Court explained that a reasonable probability is one that is "sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome" of the proceeding.This statement, and the standard itself, were imported from Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668 (1984), which established the standard for showing reversible prejudice in ineffective assistance of counsel claims under the Sixth Amendment.
In the Court's view—essentially the same as Judge Tallman's—the Court of Appeals' standard failed because it did not consider record evidence that tended to show that any misunderstanding was inconsequential, or what the relative significance of the factors involved in Benitez' plea decision were regardless of the Rule 11 error.  The Court acknowledged that the standard it imposed would be very rarely met, but that it was still easier than if the defendant had to prove the claim by a preponderance of the evidence.
Though the Supreme Court did not explicitly decide whether Benitez met the proper standard, its opinion nonetheless proceeded with an unfavorable analysis of his case.  The Court believed that his statements in the record showed that he may have been confused about the substantive law of the safety valve provision, but not that there was a "causal link" between his confusion and the Rule 11 violation.  The strength of the government's case was also a factor, and the Court did not think that the proper Rule 11 warning would have changed his "assessment of his strategic position."  This was especially true because the written plea agreement included the warning that it would be irrevocable, and it had been read to him in Spanish.  The Court accordingly reversed the Court of Appeals, and remanded the case.
Scalia's concurrence
In a short separate opinion, Justice Scalia expressed agreement with much of the Court's analysis, but disagreed with the standard of probability the Court required the defendant to meet.  Scalia listed four different standards that the Court had adopted in different contexts to prove what would have happened in a trial absent error, and stated that these "ineffable gradations of probability" confused judicial reasoning more than aided it.  He wrote that a court could only achieve the precision of two standards—beyond a reasonable doubt, and by a preponderance of the evidence—and that the latter should apply to the claim at issue.
Subsequent developments
Upon remand from the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeals affirmed Benitez' conviction and sentencing in a per curiam, summary opinion.United States v. Benitez, 381 F.3d 859 (9th Cir. 2004).
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 542
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
The factual background of the case is taken entirely from section I of the Court's opinion.
Further reading
External links
[ Supreme Court case docket].
Case joint appendix—includes details of proceedings and transcripts of hearings.
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States plea bargaining case law
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "United States v. Dotterweich" ==> """
United States v. Dotterweich, 320 U.S. 277 (1943), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld strict, vicarious liability for the president of a company convicted of a public welfare offense..Bonnie, R.J. et al.  Criminal Law, Second Edition.  Foundation Press, New York, NY: 2004, p. 266
Decision
Defendant Dotterweich was the president and general manager of a company that purchased drugs from a manufacturer, repackaged them, and shipped them with a new label.  Dotterweich was convicted of a misdemeanor under the Food and Drugs Act of 1906, which prohibited the shipment of adulterated and misbranded drugs in interstate commerce.Bonnie, p. 265  The Supreme Court upheld Dotterweich's conviction even though he did not directly participate in the proscribed shipments.  The Court reasoned that this was a public welfare offense where strict, vicarious liability was appropriate because the president of a company ought to be aware of the regulations associated with their business, and that the president was in a much better position than members of the public to protect against the possible dangers of the product.Bonnie, p. 266
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 United States v. Park
References
External links
Opinion at Justia.com
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
"""

From "United States v. Drayton" ==> """
United States v. Drayton, 536 U.S. 194 (2002), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court clarified the applicability of Fourth Amendment protections to searches and seizures that occur on buses, as well as the function of consent during searches by law enforcement.Matthew Phillips, Effective Warnings Before Consent Searches: Practical, Necessary, and Desirable, 45  1185, 1190–91 (2008). During a scheduled stop in Tallahassee, Florida, police officers boarded a Greyhound bus  as part of a drug interdiction effort and interviewed passengers.. After talking to two of the passengers and asking if they could "check [their] person", officers discovered the two passengers had taped several packages of cocaine to their legs.Drayton, 536 U.S. at 199. At trial, the passengers argued that officers violated their Fourth Amendment rights against unreasonable searches and seizures because the police engaged in coercive behavior and never informed them that their participation in the drug interdiction efforts was voluntary.
Writing for a majority of the Court, Justice Anthony Kennedy held officers need not personally advise passengers of their right to refuse consent to a search on a bus.Drayton, 536 U.S. at 206–07. Furthermore, Justice Kennedy ruled that the search was not unreasonable because passengers were free to leave the bus and the individuals who were searched provided voluntary consent.Drayton, 536 U.S. at 204–07. Although some commentators have praised the Court's ruling for encouraging citizens "to stand up for their rights",The Fourth Amendment and Antidilution: Confronting the Overlooked Function of the Consent Search Doctrine, 119  2187, 2203 (2006) others have criticized it for failing to reflect the realities of "real-life confrontations occurring on the street" between citizens and law enforcement.Ric Simmons, Not "Voluntary" but Still Reasonable: A New Paradigm for Understanding the Consent Searches Doctrine, 80  773, 773 (2005).
Background
Fourth Amendment guidelines for arrests and temporary detentions
The Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution applies to both arrests and temporary detentions of criminal suspects, both of which have been defined by the Supreme Court of the United States as "seizures" of a person.United States v. Mendenhall,  ("[A] person has been 'seized' within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment only if, in view of all the circumstances surrounding the incident, a reasonable person would have believed that he was not free to leave"). Before conducting an arrest, an officer must demonstrate probable cause that a suspect has engaged in criminal activity.Brinegar v. United States,  ("Probable cause exists where 'the facts and circumstances within their [the officers'] knowledge and of which they had reasonably trustworthy information [are] sufficient in themselves to warrant a man of reasonable caution in the belief that' an offense has been or is being committed.'"). However, police officers may also conduct temporary detentions when officers have reasonable, articulable suspicion that "criminal activity may be afoot".Terry v. Ohio,  (defining standards for investigatory stops); see also United States v. Sokolow, . These temporary detentions are also known as Terry stops, which take their name from the Supreme Court's ruling in Terry v. Ohio.See Berkemer v. McCarty, . The level of suspicion that is required to conduct a temporary detention is lower than is necessary for probable cause and is “considerably less than proof of wrongdoing by a preponderance of the evidence”; however officers cannot rely upon a mere "hunch".Terry, 392 U.S. at 27; Sokolow, 490 U.S. at 7 (1989).
The Fourth Amendment Consent to Search Doctrine
Although the Fourth Amendment generally prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures,U.S. Const. amend. IV. the Supreme Court of the United States has clarified that searches and seizures are not unreasonable when citizens consent to them.Christopher M. Peterson, Irrevocable Implied Consent: The "Roach Motel" in Consent Search Jurisprudence, 51  773, 775 (2014) ("Consent searches are a category of searches that the Supreme Court deemed to be reasonable under the Fourth Amendment."). Scholars have traced the origins of the Consent to Search Doctrine as far back as the 1920s,Christopher M. Peterson, Irrevocable Implied Consent: The "Roach Motel" in Consent Search Jurisprudence, 51  773, 776 (2014) (citing Amos v. United States, ). but it was not until the 1970s that the Court clarified that searches are reasonable if, under a "totality of the circumstances", the search is "voluntary".Schneckloth v. Bustamonte,  ("It is equally well settled that one of the specifically established exceptions to the requirements of both a warrant and probable cause is a search that is conducted pursuant to consent."); see also 4  § 8.1 (5th ed. 2012). Courts generally look to whether officers believed, at the time of the search, the individual being searched provided voluntary consent.See, e.g., Florida v. Jimeno,  (holding that courts should examine whether a reasonable officer would have believed a suspect consented). Officers may also rely on the consent of someone who reasonably appears to have authority to consent to a police search, even if that person actually has no such authority.Illinois v. Rodriguez, . However, if officers obtain consent after engaging in an unconstitutional seizure, the consent is considered "tainted" and evidence obtained from such a search cannot be admitted during a subsequent criminal prosecution.Florida v. Royer,  (plurality opinion).
In Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, the United States Supreme Court established a framework for determining whether a suspect's consent is voluntary.Bustamonte, 412 U.S. at 229-34. The Court noted that historically, when "determining whether a defendant's will was overborne in a particular case, the Court has assessed the totality of all the surrounding circumstances—both the characteristics of the accused and the details of the interrogation".Bustamonte, 412 U.S. at 226. Consequently, the Court held that voluntariness should be determined "from the totality of all the circumstances".Bustamonte, 412 U.S. at 227 (noting that this approach incorporates a framework established by "the courts of California"). The Court also clarified that judges should examine the "possibly vulnerable subjective state of the person who consents" to determine whether a suspect was coerced into consenting, and "account must be taken of subtly coercive police questions".Bustamonte, 412 U.S. at 229. However, the Court also held that suspects may still give valid consent even if they do not know that they can refuse to consent to the search.Bustamonte, 412 U.S. at 234 ("neither this Court's prior cases nor the traditional definition of 'voluntariness' requires proof of knowledge of a right to refuse as the sine qua non of an effective consent to a search").
Fourth Amendment searches and seizures on buses
The United States Supreme Court first clarified the applicability of the Fourth Amendment to searches and seizures on buses in the 1991 case Florida v. Bostick, where the Court held that police officers may approach bus passengers on a random basis and ask questions and request their consent to searches, "provided a reasonable person would understand that he or she is free to refuse".Florida v. Bostick, . The Court rejected the argument that police questioning on board a bus constitutes a per se seizure under the Fourth Amendment, and instead held that courts should use a "totality of the circumstances" test to determine whether a passenger would have felt "free to decline the officers' requests or otherwise terminate the encounter", or whether a passenger was free "to ignore the police presence and go about his business".Bostick, 501 U.S. at 436–37 (quoting Michigan v. Chestnut, . Additionally, the Court ruled that even if law enforcement officers have no basis for suspecting individuals are engaged in criminal activity, officers may still approach passengers, ask them questions, request identification, and request consent to search luggage, so long as officers do not coerce passengers to cooperate with their efforts.Bostick, 501 U.S. at 434–35.
Arrest and trial of Christopher Drayton and Clifton Brown, Jr.
thumb|upright=1.5|right|The Tallahassee, Florida Greyhound station, where police inspected the bus on which Drayton and Brown were traveling.
On February 4, 1999, Christopher Drayton and Clifton Brown, Jr. were traveling on a Greyhound bus bound for Detroit, Michigan.Drayton, 536 U.S. at 197. When the bus made a planned stop in Tallahassee, Florida, passengers were told to get off the bus so it could be cleaned and refueled. After the passengers re-boarded, the driver allowed Officers Blackburn, Hoover, and Lang of the Tallahassee Police Department to enter the bus "as part of a routine drug and weapons interdiction effort". Although the officers displayed visible badges, they carried concealed weapons and were not in uniform. Upon entering the bus, Officer Hoover knelt on the driver's seat, Officer Blackburn stood at the back of the bus, and Officer Lang walked along the aisle of the bus to talk to passengers.Drayton, 536 U.S. at 197–98. He asked passengers which luggage was theirs and where they were going.Drayton, 536 U.S. at 198. None of the officers blocked the aisle or otherwise obstructed the exit, and passengers were free to leave while the officers conducted their investigation. However, the officers did not inform passengers of their right to refuse to cooperate with the investigation.
Drayton and Brown sat next to each other on the bus, Drayton by the aisle and Brown by the window. When Officer Lang arrived at their row, he identified himself as a police investigator and showed his badge. In a voice "just loud enough" to hear, he said he was a police officer "conducting bus interdiction [sic], attempting to deter drugs and illegal weapons being transported on the bus". When Lang asked Drayton and Brown if they had any luggage on the bus, they both pointed to the same green bag on the overhead luggage rack.Drayton, 536 U.S. at 198–99. Lang asked, "[d]o you mind if I check it?", and Brown replied, "[g]o ahead". The officers inspected the bag and discovered no contraband inside.
Officer Lang observed that Drayton and Brown were wearing "heavy jackets and baggy pants", despite warm weather that day. Lang suspected Brown and Drayton might have been using their baggy clothing to conceal weapons or drugs, so he asked Brown, "[d]o you mind if I check your person?" Brown responded, "[s]ure", leaned up in his seat, removed a cellular phone from his pocket, and opened his jacket. Lang patted down the outside of his clothing and felt small packages "similar to drug packages detected on other occasions". Officer Lang then arrested Brown, handcuffed him, and Officer Hoover walked him off the bus. Lang then asked Drayton, "[m]ind if I check you?", to which Drayton responded "by lifting his hands about eight inches from his legs". Lang detected similar objects during a pat down of Drayton's legs, placed him under arrest, and escorted him off the bus. A further search determined that Brown had duct-taped three bundles containing 483 grams of cocaine between several layers of boxer shorts, and Drayton had duct-taped two bundles between several layers of boxer shorts containing 295 grams of cocaine.
Trial in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Florida
Drayton and Brown were charged with conspiring to distribute cocaine and possession with the intent to distribute cocaine, in violation of  21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1) and 846. At trial, Drayton and Brown filed a motion to suppress the cocaine on the grounds that their consent to the search of their clothing was invalid. The United States District Court for the Northern District of Florida denied their motion, finding that "the police conduct was not coercive and respondents' consent to the search was voluntary".Drayton, 536 U.S. at 199–200. The District Court found that officers did not block the exit of the bus, and it was "obvious" that Drayton and Brown were free to leave the bus.Drayton, 536 U.S. at 200. Consequently, the District Court concluded that the encounter was "cooperative", and there was "nothing coercive" or "confrontational" about the encounter.
Appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit reversed the decision of the District Court, holding that the cocaine should have been suppressed and that Drayton and Brown's convictions should be reversed. The Eleventh Circuit stated that its holding was compelled by circuit precedent, which held that bus passengers do not feel free to decline police officers' requests to search without "some positive indication that consent could have been refused".Drayton, 231 F.3d at 790–91 (quoting United States v. Washington, 151 F.3d 1354, 1357 (11th Cir. 1998)); see also United States v. Guapi, 144 F.3d 1393, 1393–94, 1397 (11th Cir. 1998) (finding bus search coercive even though officers did not request defendant's ticket or identification). Applying circuit precedent to the facts of the case, the Eleventh Circuit concluded that Drayton and Brown were not aware that they could have refused the search, and the evidence discovered through the pat down must be excluded at trial.Drayton, 231 F.3d at 790–91. The Eleventh Circuit emphasized that officers gave no reassurances that passengers were free to leave, and the fact that an officer stood next to the exit "might make a reasonable person feel less free to leave the bus".Drayton, 231 F.3d at 790–91 (citing United States v. Hill, 228 F.3d 414 (11th Cir., July 24, 2000) (unpublished opinion) ("The presence of an officer at the exit, even if not so intended, is an implication to passengers that the searches are mandatory."). On January 4, 2002, the Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari to review the decision of the Eleventh Circuit.United States v. Drayton, .
Opinion of the Court
thumb|upright=1.0|right|In his majority opinion, Justice Anthony Kennedy (pictured) emphasized that "in a society based on law, the concept of agreement and consent should be given a weight and dignity of its own".Drayton, 536 U.S. at 207.
Writing for a majority of the Court, Justice Anthony Kennedy held that Drayton and Brown were not seized and their consent to the search was voluntary.Drayton, 536 U.S. at 200, 208. He explained that "[l]aw enforcement officers do not violate the Fourth Amendment's prohibition of unreasonable seizures merely by approaching individuals on the street or in other public places and putting questions to them if they are willing to listen". Additionally, Justice Kennedy emphasized that "[i]f a reasonable person would feel free to terminate the encounter, then he or she has not been seized".Drayton, 536 U.S. at 201. Citing the Court's analytic framework established in Florida v. Bostic, Justice Kennedy concluded that a reasonable person would have felt free to "leav[e] the bus or otherwise terminat[e] the encounter".Drayton, 536 U.S. at 204. Justice Kennedy noted that the officers did not brandish weapons, they did not make "intimidating movements", they left the aisle clear, and they "spoke to passengers one by one and in a polite, quiet voice".Drayton, 536 U.S. at 203–04. He noted that "[i]t is beyond question that had this encounter occurred on the street, it would be constitutional", and the fact that the encounter occurred on a bus does not make it illegal.
Justice Kennedy rejected Drayton's argument that officers coerced passengers by showing their badges, noting that the sight of police officers should be a "cause for assurance, not discomfort". Likewise, he rejected the argument that placing an officer near the door of the bus constituted a seizure, because the officer "did nothing to intimidate passengers" and "left the aisle clear".Drayton, 536 U.S. at 205. Justice Kennedy also held that the nature of the encounter did not change after Brown was arrested, because "[t]he arrest of one person does not mean that everyone around him has been seized by police".Drayton, 536 U.S. at 206. Rather, witnessing Brown's arrest "should have put Drayton on notice of the consequences of continuing the encounter by answering the officers' questions".
Furthermore, Justice Kennedy held the searches were not unreasonable because both Drayton and Brown voluntarily consented to the suspicionless search. He noted that police officers need not inform citizens of their right to refuse when conducting a search and that the Court has traditionally applied a "totality of the circumstances" test when determining whether a search is "unreasonable".Drayton, 536 U.S. at 206–07 (citing Ohio v. Robinette, ; Schneckloth, 412 U.S. at 227). Because officers requested consent to search Drayton and Brown, Justice Kennedy concluded the search was consensual and voluntary. Justice Kennedy also mentioned in dicta that, absent consent, officers likely had reasonable suspicion to conduct a Terry stop.Drayton, 536 U.S. at 207–08. Consequently, Justice Kennedy ordered the case to be remanded to Eleventh Circuit for reconsideration in light of the Supreme Court's decision.Drayton, 536 U.S. at 208.
Dissenting opinion of Justice Souter
thumb|upright=1.0|right|In his dissenting opinion, Justice David Souter (pictured) compared the encounter in the bus to a "scene in a narrow alley."Drayton, 536 U.S. at 210, 213 (Souter, J., dissenting).
Justice David Souter wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that the cocaine should have been suppressed because Drayton and Brown would not have felt free to leave the bus and they likely were not aware that they could have refused consent to the search.Drayton, 536 U.S. at 211–13 (Souter, J., dissenting). He noted that "[t]he commonplace precautions of air travel have not, thus far, been justified for ground transportation" and that "no such conditions have been placed on passengers getting on trains or buses".Drayton, 536 U.S. at 208 (Souter, J., dissenting). Additionally, Justice Souter argued that police officers "exercise power free from immediate check, and when the attention of several officers is brought to bear on one civilian the imbalance of immediate power is unmistakable".Drayton, 536 U.S. at 210 (Souter, J., dissenting). He argued that this imbalance of power may rise to a "threatening" level, which "may overbear a normal person's ability to act freely, even in the absence of explicit commands or the formalities of detention".
After analyzing the encounter between Drayton, Brown, and the police, Justice Souter concluded that the interdiction "was not a consensual exercise".Drayton, 536 U.S. at 211 (Souter, J., dissenting). He argued that the manner in which the police conducted the interdiction created an "atmosphere of obligatory participation".Drayton, 536 U.S. at 212 (Souter, J., dissenting). He concluded that Drayton and Brown were "pinned-in by the officers", and that "it was reasonable to suppose no passenger would tend to his own business until the officers were ready to let him".Drayton, 536 U.S. at 213 (Souter, J., dissenting). Consequently, Justice Souter concluded that officers engaged in "threatening" behavior that constituted an unreasonable, non-consensual search and seizure.
Subsequent developments
On remand, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit issued a per curiam opinion affirming Drayton and Brown's convictions.United States v. Drayton, 301 F.3d 1288 (11th Cir. 2002). Five years after issuing its opinion in Drayton, the Supreme Court of the United States offered further clarification of the meaning of "coercion" in Brendlin v. California.Brendlin v. California, . Writing for a unanimous Court, Justice Souter cited Bostick and Drayton to hold that coercion should be judged according to the experiences of a "reasonable person" in the situation.Brendlin, 551 U.S. at 255. He wrote, "when a person has no desire to leave for reasons unrelated to the police presence, the coercive effect of the encounter can be measured better by asking whether a reasonable person would feel free to decline the officers’ requests or otherwise terminate the encounter".Brendlin, 551 U.S. at 255 (internal quotations omitted).
Interpretation by Circuit Courts of Appeals
Some Circuit Courts have applied the Court's ruling in Drayton to hold that citizens are not coerced when police officers approach individuals on the street and ask them questions.See, e.g., United States v. Gross, slip. op., No. 13-3102 (D.C. Cir. 2015); accord United States v. Ward, slip. op., No. 14-15719 (11th Cir. 2015) (identifying the fact that a suspect's "path was not blocked" as one reason why the suspect was not coerced). The District of Columbia Circuit, for example, wrote that "while the passengers in Drayton were questioned while inside a bus with an officer positioned near the exit ... the street encounter [posed] no physical impediment to [the suspect]’s freedom to walk away".United States v. Gross, slip. op. at 8. However, the Seventh Circuit has held that according to the Supreme Court's ruling in Drayton, a suspect was unlawfully detained when police approached him in a dark alley and asked him questions.United States v. Smith, slip. op., No. 2:13‐cr‐136 (7th Cir. 2015). The Seventh Circuit described the encounter as "coercive" and distinguished it from the events that transpired in Drayton because "[a]lleys are distinguishable from the sorts of open, populated spaces in which police questioning is typically deemed consensual".United States v. Smith, slip. op. at 8. The court noted that "'a reasonable person may feel ... more secure in his or her decision not to cooperate with police on a bus than in other circumstances' because 'many fellow passengers are present [on a bus] to witness officers’ conduct'".United States v. Smith, slip. op. at 8 (alterations in slip opinion).
Analysis and commentary
In the years following the Court's ruling in Drayton, scholars have offered a range of opinions about the case's impact and significance. Some analysts have suggested that Drayton reflects a concern among members of the Court for "ensuring that individuals retain the power to stand up for their rights". However, other scholars, such as Tracey Maclin, argue that Justice Kennedy improperly assumed that citizens will always feel free to refuse consent, and that many citizens cooperate with the police because of "fear of police reprisal if they don't".Tracey Maclin, The Good and Bad News About Consent Searches in the Supreme Court, 39  27, 67 n.254 (2008) (discussing experiences of racial minorities when interacting with police) (citing Devon W. Carbado, (E)racing the Fourth Amendment, 100  946, 1014 (2002)). Criminal law scholar Janice Nadler commented that Justice Kennedy's conclusions were products of "intuitive reflections on [his and the other Justices'] own experience and about the imagined experience of other citizens".Janice Nadler, No Need to Shout: Bus Sweeps and the Psychology of Coercion, 2002  153, 209–10 & n.193 (2002). Additionally, Ric Simmons criticized the Court's ruling for failing to reflect the realities of "real-life confrontations occurring on the street" between citizens and law enforcement. Other scholars, such as Thomas W. Hughes and Joshua Fitch, argued that the Court's decision in Drayton would impact the balance between individual liberties and heightened national security interests in the wake of the September 11 attacks.Thomas W. Hughes, Bus interdiction efforts by the police: United States v. Drayton, 27 Am. J. Crim. Justice 197 (2003); Joshua Fitch, United States v. Drayton: Reasonableness & (and) Objectivity - Discussion of Race, Class, and the Fourth Amendment, 38 New. Eng. L. Rev. 97, 138 (2003) ([T]here is a heightened awareness of national security in the wake of September 11. However, as the dissent in Drayton noted, these interests need to be balanced with the competing values of the Fourth Amendment.").
Jeremy R. Jehangiri criticized the Court's ruling for failing to account for psychological pressures inherent in the "perceived legitimacy of the [police's] authority".Jeremy R. Jehangiri, United States v. Drayton: Attention Passengers, All Carry-On Baggage and Constitutional Protections Are Checked in the Terminal, 48 S.D. L. Rev. 104, 109 (2003) (internal quotations omitted). Jehangiri argued that police should be required to inform citizens that consent is voluntary, and that this kind of "prophylactic warning would serve as a natural corollary to a Miranda warning mandated by the Fifth Amendment".Jeremy R. Jehangiri, United States v. Drayton: Attention Passengers, All Carry-On Baggage and Constitutional Protections Are Checked in the Terminal, 48 S.D. L. Rev. 104, 109 (2003). Likewise, Marissa Reich also argued that passengers feel significant "psychological pressures" to cooperate with police searches on buses, and police should therefore warn passengers that consent is voluntary.Marissa Reich, United States v. Drayton: The Need for Bright-Line Warnings during Consensual Bus Searches, 93 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1057, 1087, 1093 (2003). Joshua Fitch also criticized the Court for ignoring the impact of "racial disparagement" with respect to an individual's ability to walk away from encounters with police.Joshua Fitch, United States v. Drayton: Reasonableness & (and) Objectivity - Discussion of Race, Class, and the Fourth Amendment, 38 New. Eng. L. Rev. 97, 138 (2003). He argued that "[g]iven the historical treatment of black males by members of law enforcement, it is entirely possible that Drayton and Brown feared refusing the officers' requests because they feared violent consequences".Joshua Fitch, United States v. Drayton: Reasonableness & (and) Objectivity - Discussion of Race, Class, and the Fourth Amendment, 38 New. Eng. L. Rev. 97, 127 (2003). Fitch also argued that police should provide warnings similar to Miranda warnings that "inform citizens of their right to refuse consent", and that decisions like Drayton "consistently [endorse] rules that require citizens to fend for themselves when it comes to constitutional rights".Joshua Fitch, United States v. Drayton: Reasonableness & (and) Objectivity - Discussion of Race, Class, and the Fourth Amendment, 38 New. Eng. L. Rev. 97, 134-35, 138 (2003).
===Departure from Bustamonte'''s subjective framework===
Scholars have observed that Justice Kennedy's majority opinion "embraced Bustamonte's premise that when police request consent to search, the request itself carries the implication that an alternative of refusal exists".Tracey Maclin, The Good and Bad News About Consent Searches in the Supreme Court, 39  27, 65 (2008). Other scholars, such as Ric Simmons, have noted that Drayton reflects "the Court at the midpoint of this evolution, moving from a subjective binary test that focuses on whether or not the subject acted voluntarily, to a more nuanced objective test that focuses on the amount of compulsion used by the law enforcement officer".Ric Simmons, Not "Voluntary" but Still Reasonable: A New Paradigm for Understanding the Consent Searches Doctrine, 80  773, 775 (2005). Additionally, Matthew Phillips wrote that Drayton'' "illustrates the metamorphosis of the totality-of-the-circumstances test into a purely objective test" because Justice Kennedy's opinion "did not explicitly consider any subjective factors" with respect to whether Drayton and Brown felt they could deny consent when questioned by the police. Phillips suggested that the decision to abandon subjective factors could lead to "bizarre results" in cases, like this, where "circumstances of the search indicate at least some level of coercion".
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 536
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2002 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:History of Tallahassee, Florida
Category:Greyhound Lines
"""

From "United States v. Dunn" ==> """
United States v. Dunn, 480 U.S. 294 (1987), is a U.S. Supreme Court decision relating to the open fields doctrine limiting the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution..
Background
Drug Enforcement Agents began investigating the defendant when he purchased large quantities of chemicals used in the production of illegal drugs. The officers then witnessed the defendant placing these chemicals in a barn on his private ranch. The ranch was completely encircled by a perimeter fence, and contained several interior barbed wire fences, including one around the house approximately  from the barn, and a wooden fence enclosing the front of the barn, which had an open overhang and locked, waist-high gates. Without a warrant, officers crossed the perimeter fence, several of the barbed wire fences, and the wooden fence in front of the barn. They were led there by the smell of chemicals, and, while there, could hear a motor running inside. They did not enter the barn but stopped at the locked gate and shined a flashlight inside, observing what they took to be a drug laboratory. They then left the ranch, but entered it twice the next day to confirm the laboratory's presence.
They obtained a search warrant and executed it. The equipment was feeding off the mains. The DEA arrested the respondent, seizing chemicals and equipment, as well as bags of amphetamines they discovered in the house. After the District Court denied the defendant’s motion to suppress all evidence seized pursuant to the warrant and the defendant was convicted of conspiracy to manufacture controlled substances and related offenses. However, the Court of Appeals reversed that decision, holding that the barn was within the residence's curtilage and therefore within the Fourth Amendment's protective ambit.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion for the majority by Justice White, the Supreme Court overturned the appeals court’s decision by finding that the barn was outside the curtilage and all evidence obtained by the officers while standing outside the barn and looking in was admissible. Looking at whether the barn was inside the curtilage or rather in an open field, the Court stated:
[C]urtilage questions should be resolved with particular reference to four factors: the proximity of the area claimed to be curtilage to the home, whether the area is included within an enclosure surrounding the home, the nature of the uses to which the area is put, and the steps taken by the resident to protect the area from observation by people passing by.  We do not suggest that combining these factors produces a finely tuned formula that, when mechanically applied, yields a "correct" answer to all extent-of-curtilage questions. Rather, these factors are useful analytical tools only to the degree that, in any given case, they bear upon the centrally relevant consideration — whether the area in question is so intimately tied to the home itself that it should be placed under the home's "umbrella" of Fourth Amendment protection. Applying these factors to respondent's barn and to the area immediately surrounding it, we have little difficulty in concluding that this area lay outside the curtilage of the ranch house."Dunn, 480 U.S. at 301.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 480
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1987 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. E. C. Knight Co." ==> """
United States v. E. C. Knight Co., 156 U.S. 1 (1895), also known as the "Sugar Trust Case," was a United States Supreme Court antitrust case that severely limited the federal government's power to pursue antitrust actions under the Sherman Antitrust Act. In Chief Justice Melville Fuller's majority opinion, the Court held that Congress could not regulate manufacturing, thus giving state governments the sole power to take legal action against manufacturing monopolies.. The case has never been overruled, but in Swift & Co. v. United States and subsequent cases the Court has held that Congress can regulate manufacturing when it affects interstate commerce.
The case
In 1892, the American Sugar Refining Company gained control of the E. C. Knight Company and several others which resulted in a 98% monopoly of the American sugar refining industry. President Grover Cleveland, in his second term of office (1893–1897), directed the national government to sue the Knight Company under the provisions of the Sherman Antitrust Act to prevent the acquisition.  The question the court had to answer was, "could the Sherman Antitrust Act suppress a monopoly in the manufacture of a good, as well as its distribution?"
The decision
thumb|alt=The Fuller Court.|The Fuller Court.
The court's 8–1 decision, handed down on January 21, 1895 and written by Chief Justice Melville Weston Fuller, went against the government. Justice John Marshall Harlan dissented.
The court held "that the result of the transaction was the creation of a monopoly in the manufacture of a necessary of life" but ruled that it "could not be suppressed under the provisions of the act".
The court ruled that manufacturing—in this case, refining—was a local activity not subject to congressional regulation of interstate commerce. Fuller wrote:
That which belongs to commerce is within the jurisdiction of the United States, but that which does not belong to commerce is within the jurisdiction of the police power of the State. . . . Doubtless the power to control the manufacture of a given thing involves in a certain sense the control of its disposition, but . . . affects it only incidentally and indirectly.
Under the Knight decision, any action against manufacturing monopolies would need to be taken by individual states. The ruling prevailed until the end of the 1930s, when the court took a different position on the national government's power to regulate the economy.
In the dissent, Harlan argued "the doctrine of the autonomy of the states cannot properly be invoked to justify a denial of power in the national government to meet such an emergency." He continued to argue the Constitution gives Congress "authority to enact all laws necessary and proper" to regulate commerce, citing McCulloch v. Maryland. .
Later developments
Although the decision was never expressly overturned, the Court later retreated from this position in a series of cases (see for example Swift and Company v. United States) that defined various steps of the manufacturing process as part of commerce. Eventually, E.C. Knight came to be a precedent narrowed to its precise facts, with no force whatsoever.
See also
American sugar industry
Antitrust
Commerce Clause
Sugar refining
Sugarcane
References
External links
Category:American sugar industry
Category:1895 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "United States v. Eaton (1898)" ==> """
United States v. Eaton, 169 U.S. 331 (1898), was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States involving the Appointments Clause holding that the United States Congress had the power to authorize the President of the United States to recognize a temporary diplomatic official during a period of unavailability of the congressionally approved appointee to the position.
In October 1890, Sempronius H. Boyd was commissioned as Minister Resident and Consul General of the United States to Siam. He qualified and proceeded to his post, but became seriously ill in June 1892. Boyd was granted a leave of absence by the President, and before leaving Siam, Boyd asked a resident American missionary, Lewis A. Eaton, to take charge of the consulate and its archives. After being sworn in by Boyd, Eaton performed the duties of the consul general until Robert M. Boyd, arrived in Siam and qualified for the position in May 1893. Sempronius Boyd died in 1894, and both Eaton and the estate of Sempronius Boyd sued for payment of the salary due to the consul general for the period up until Robert Boyd took over, Eaton on the theory that he had performed the job, and Boyd's estate on the theory that even after his return to the United States, he officially retained the title. The lower courts held that Eaton was properly entitled to this payment and Boyd was not, and the Supreme Court upheld this outcome.
The case was cited in 2017 as an argument in favor of the legitimacy of the appointment by President Donald Trump of Matthew Whitaker as Acting United States Attorney General following the resignation of Jeff Sessions from the office.
 References 
 External links 
Category:1898 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "United States v. Eichman" ==> """
United States v. Eichman, 496 U.S. 310 (1990), was a United States Supreme Court case that by a 5-4 decision invalidated a federal law against flag desecration as a violation of free speech under the First Amendment..  It was argued together with the case United States v. Haggerty.  It built on the opinion handed down in the Court's decision the prior year in Texas v. Johnson (1989), which invalidated on First Amendment grounds a Texas state statute banning flag burning..
Background
In response to Texas v. Johnson, the 101st Congress passed the Flag Protection Act of 1989, which attempted to circumvent the Johnson ruling by prohibiting mistreatment of the flag without regard to any message being conveyed. On the day that the law took effect, protests were staged around the nation. Demonstrators at two of these incidents, in Seattle and Washington, D.C., were arrested and charged under the revised statute.
In Seattle, flags were burned at a demonstration organized by the Vietnam Veterans Against the War Anti-Imperialist outside the Capitol Hill post office shortly after midnight, moments after the law took effect. No one was arrested during the demonstration, but four people identified from photographs were later charged with violating the federal Flag Protection Act of 1989: Mark Haggerty, Jennifer Campbell, Darius Strong and Carlos Garza. None of the four were members or supporters of VVAW-AI or the Revolutionary Communist Party. None of the four had been among the organizers of the demonstration or had previously known each other. 
In Washington, D.C., Gregory Lee Johnson, the defendant in Texas v. Johnson, staged a protest together with three companions – artists Dread Scott and Shawn Eichman and Vietnam veteran David Blalock – by burning flags on the steps of the United States Capitol building before a crowd of reporters and photographers. Scott had recently aroused controversy with a "flag on the floor" exhibit at the Art Institute of Chicago. Eichman was a member of the Coalition Opposed to Censorship in the Arts, and Blalock was a member of the Vietnam Veterans Against the War Anti-Imperialist. All four were supporters of the Revolutionary Communist Party and/or the Revolutionary Communist Youth Brigade. On the day of the protest they released a statement calling for others to express opposition to "compulsory patriotism" by burning the flag.
In both cases, federal district judges in Seattle and Washington, D.C. dismissed charges brought against the protesters, citing Texas v. Johnson. U.S. attorneys appealed the decisions directly to the Supreme Court. Because the Flag Protection Act called for expedited review, the two cases were consolidated into United States v. Eichman (1990), which would serve as a test case for the amended statute.
Opinion of the Court
In a 5-4 decision by Justice Brennan joined by Marshall, Blackmun, Scalia, and Kennedy; with 
Stevens, Chief Justice Rehnquist, White, and O'Connor dissenting (the same as in Texas v. Johnson); the Court held that the federal government, like the states, cannot prosecute a person for desecration of a United States flag, because to do so would be inconsistent with the First Amendment. The Government conceded that desecration of the flag constitutes expressive conduct and enjoys the First Amendment's full protection. It is clear that the "Government's asserted interest" in protecting the "physical integrity" of a privately owned flag in order "to preserve the flag's status as a symbol of the Nation" and certain national ideals, is related to the suppression, and concerned with the content, of free expression.
The majority wrote that mere destruction or disfigurement of a symbol's physical manifestation does not diminish or otherwise affect the symbol itself. The Government's interest is implicated only when a person's "treatment of the flag communicates a message" to others that is inconsistent with the identified ideals of the flag. The precise language of the Act's prohibitions confirms Congress' interest in the communicative impact of flag destruction, since each of the specified terms – with the possible exception of "burns" – unmistakably connotes disrespectful treatment of the flag and suggests a "focus on those acts likely to damage the flag's symbolic value." This is further supported by the Act's explicit exemption for disposal of worn or soiled flags, which the Act protects from prosecution since disposing a worn or soiled flag does not desecrate the flag's symbolic nature. Thus, the Act is struck down as its restriction on expressive conduct cannot "be justified without reference to the content of the regulated speech.". It must therefore be subjected to "the most exacting scrutiny,"Boos, 485 U.S. at 321. which cannot justify its infringement on First Amendment rights. While flag desecration – like virulent ethnic and religious epithets, vulgar repudiations of the draft, and scurrilous caricatures – is deeply offensive to many, "the Government may not prohibit the expression of an idea simply because society finds the idea itself offensive or disagreeable."Eichman, 496 U.S. at 313–319.
See Texas v. Johnson for the gist of the dissenting opinion.
Subsequent developments
On remand, Eichman's case was dismissed, as she and her fellow defendants had only been charged with flag desecration. However, the defendants in the Haggerty case had faced an additional charge of destruction of government property, as the burned flag was alleged to have been stolen from Seattle's Capitol Hill Post Office. On those charges, all four Seattle defendants pleaded guilty and were fined. Carlos Garza and Darius Strong each served three days in jail.
When Republicans retook control of Congress in 1995 for the 104th session, the Flag Desecration Amendment was first proposed, which would grant the federal government the authority to proscribe flag burning. A resolution for this Amendment passed the House in every session from the 104th until the 109th Congress, but never got past the Senate (in the most recent vote in 2006 it failed by one vote 66-34), and has not been considered since.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 496
 Flag desecration
Street v. New York
Notes
References
External links
First Amendment Library entry archive on United States v. Eichman
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:Flag controversies in the United States
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
"""

From "United States v. Enmons" ==> """
United States v. Enmons, 410 U.S. 396 (1973), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the federal Anti-Racketeering Act of 1934, known as the Hobbs Act,  does not cover union violence in furtherance of the union's objectives.
The case involved a labor strike in which members of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW) fired rifles at three utility company transformers, drained the oil from another, and blew up a company substation. The labor union in question was seeking a higher-pay contract and other benefits from their employer, the Gulf States Utilities Company which is now part of Entergy. The federal government tried the defendants under the Hobbs Act.
The Court ruled that "The Hobbs Act, which makes it a federal crime to obstruct interstate commerce by robbery or extortion, does not reach the use of violence (which is readily punishable under state law) to achieve legitimate union objectives, such as higher wages in return for genuine services that the employer seeks.".
Details of the case
The indictment against the alleged conspirators charged them with being in violation of the Hobbs Act, which states that anyone attempting to affect or obstruct commerce through violence or the threat of violence against any person or property "shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than twenty years, or both." The indictment argued that the union members obstructed commerce with their actions against the Utilities Company, and attempted to "obtain the property of [their employer] in the form of wages and other things of value" by using the wrongful use of force and the fear of economic loss.
The court acknowledged that using threats and force to obtain property is wrongful. However, the court reasoned that it is considered "wrongful" only when the perpetrator has no "legitimate claim" to it. Since federal law empowers unions with the right to strike, the use of violence to secure higher pay and benefits was not extortion. The case was dismissed. Such violent acts can, however, be punishable under normal state or federal laws.
In understanding Enmons, it is important to keep in mind that what the Hobbs Act outlaws is extortion, not just any bad act. Federal law, in particular the National Labor Relations Act, says that collective bargaining and strikes in support of collective bargaining goals are legal and protected. Therefore, since collective bargaining has a purpose that is not extortion, one of the key elements of a Hobbs Act violation is not met.
Reactions
Since 1973, a number of bills have been proposed by Republicans to overturn United States v. Enmons. The Freedom from Union Violence Act (FUVA) was first introduced by Rep. Phil Crane as H.R. 1796 on June 8, 1995,H.R. 1796: Freedom from Union Violence Act, govtrack.us; accessed July 31, 2018. and was reintroduced three times; however, none of the bills made it out of committee.
Despite the Court indicating that union officials are subject to criminal law ("This type of violence...is subject to state criminal prosecution"), think tanks which oppose unions claim the Enmons decision grants union officials exemption from criminal prosecution for acts of violence. However, subsequent to the decision, cases have been successfully brought under the Hobbs Act against union officials who engaged in extortion.
On the extent of union violence, a 2001 law review article by law professor Julius Getman and former Secretary of Labor Ray Marshall, analyzing the evidence of union violence, indicated that:Julius G. Getman and F. Ray Marshall, The Continuing Assault on the Right to Strike, 79 Tex. L. Rev. 703, 712-13 (2001)...the claim that strike violence is "escalating" has no empirical basis. Even the study conducted by the National Institute for Labor Relations Research - cited regularly as authority for this proposition by FUVA's proponents - draws no such conclusion. And the study itself is a scholarly monstrosity that seeks to study union violence by compiling media reports, mainly newspaper articles concerning strike violence. The Institute admits that it did not actually investigate any of the incidents reported and does not know if the reports are accurate. It concludes: "Because it relies on news accounts the Institute cannot guarantee the accuracy of the file itself." In fact, articles about employer-instigated violence are included in the study's effort to determine union violence.  It seems obvious that the methodology employed confuses those strikes most written about with those most violent. Further, the Institute includes incidents of "psychological violence; i.e., intimidation, coercion and verbal threats" - terms which it does not bother to define. It seems clear, however, that this definition would include nonviolent civil disobedience of the type used by the civil rights movement and increasingly by the labor movement. But whatever the definition, it is almost certain that strike-related violence has decreased since the Enmons decision because the number of strikes has declined significantly.
See also
 Entergy Corp. v. Riverkeeper Inc.
 Entergy Louisiana, Inc. v. Louisiana Public Service Commission
Footnotes
External links
 Small Business and Entrepreneurship Council: Union's Bad Name Moving toward cleanup
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:Labor-related violence in the United States
Category:Union violence
Category:Hobbs Act case law
Category:International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers
Category:United States labor case law
Category:History of Beaumont, Texas
Category:Entergy
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "United States v. Feola" ==> """
United States v. Feola, 420 U.S. 671 (1975), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the court held that conspiracy to assault a federal officer, like the substantive crime of assaulting a federal officer, doesn't require knowledge that the victims were federal officers.
The case involved a drug "rip-off" in which the defendant and his co-conspirators agreed to sell sugar as heroin to unsuspecting buyers. They agreed that if the buyers discovered their ruse, they would jump the buyers and take their money. The sellers didn't know that the buyers were all undercover federal narcotics agents. Although the sellers tried to assault one of the agents, another agent pulled out his revolver and the agents eventually arrested the sellers.
The court's opinion addressed—and eventually dispensed with—Judge Learned Hand's famous analogy in United States v. Crimmins 123 F.2d 271, 273 (2d Cir. 1941). Hand noted that conspiracy to commit mail fraud was akin to conspiracy to run a red light - both substantive crimes don't require knowledge beforehand. But agreement or conspiracy requires knowledge that there is such a red light, or that the mails will be used. The Court characterized this analogy as "effective prose...[but]...bad law." 420, at 689-90. The court argued that conspiracy agreements don't require agreement on every point of the crime, and so imposing a higher agreement requirement for a conspiracy to assault was illogical in light of the policy reasons for criminalizing conspiracy. The court identified these reasons as protecting society from concerted criminal activity and the social threat posed even by an inchoate crime.
Instead the court reasoned that because the conspiracy statute didn't require a higher mens rea than the substantive crime, the same mens rea requirement applies to both by default. The court reasoned that one purpose of the assault statute was to provide a federal forum (specific jurisdiction) for assaults on federal officers. Therefore, conspiracy to assault a federal officer didn't require proof that the defendant knew that his intended victim was a federal officer.
Justice Potter Stewart dissented, arguing that the structure of the assault statute and legislative history of its predecessor supported his interpretation that the statute only applied if the defendant knew his victim was a federal officer.
Sources
 Stephen A. Saltzburg, et al. Criminal Law-Cases and Materials (2008, Third Ed.) Newark, NJ: LexisNexis. pp 752–53.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
"""

From "United States v. Flores-Montano" ==> """
United States v. Flores-Montano, 541 U.S. 149 (2004), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that customs agents may remove the gas tank from a vehicle crossing the international border in an effort to look for contraband.
 Background 
Flores-Montano ("Flores") was driving a 1987 Ford Taurus station wagon as he attempted to enter the United States through the port of entry at Otay Mesa, California.  A customs inspector referred the vehicle to secondary inspection, where a second inspector tapped the gas tank and noticed it sounded solid.  The second inspector summoned a mechanic who, less than half an hour later, arrived and removed the gas tank from the car.  The mechanic then removed an access plate from the tank and found 37 kilograms of marijuana.  The process of removing the gas tank took between 15 and 25 minutes.
Flores was indicted in the United States District Court for the Southern District of California for importing marijuana into the United States and for possession of marijuana with intent to distribute it.  Relying on Ninth Circuit precedent in effect at the time requiring reasonable suspicion for removal of a gas tank, Flores filed a motion to suppress the marijuana found in his car.  Although the Government urged the district court to ignore that precedent, the district court declined to do so and granted Flores's suppression motion.  The Ninth Circuit summarily affirmed the granting of the suppression motion, and the Government asked the Supreme Court to review the case.
Opinion of the Court
In United States v. Montoya de Hernandez, , the Court had said, "Routine searches of the persons and effects of entrants are not subject to any requirement of reasonable suspicion, probable cause, or warrant."  The Ninth Circuit interpreted this language to mean that reasonable suspicion was required when government agents sought to conduct an "intrusive" search at the border, including searches involving the removal and dismantling of gas tanks.  The Supreme Court rejected this reasoning because "the reasons that might support a requirement of some level of suspicion in the case of highly intrusive searches of the person — dignity and privacy interests of the person being searched — simply do not carry over to vehicles."  Accordingly, the Supreme Court found the Ninth Circuit's rule to be inconsistent with the meaning of "reasonableness" under the Fourth Amendment.
The Court's ruling in this case rests on the fact that the search at issue in this case took place at the international border.  "The Government's interest in preventing the entry of unwanted persons and effects is at its zenith at the international border."  In light of the Government's interest in protecting its sovereignty and territorial integrity, "searches made at the border... are reasonable simply by virtue of the fact that they occur at the border."  Indeed, the statute authorizing the search in this case derived ultimately from a statute first passed in 1789.  Smugglers frequently attempt to penetrate the border, and using vehicle gas tanks is a common tactic. In the five and a half years preceding the decision in this case, 18,788 drug seizures had occurred at the ports of entry in southern California, and of those involving vehicles, 4,619, or 25%, were from gas tanks. In addition, instances of persons smuggled in and around gas tank compartments are discovered at the ports of entry of San Ysidro and Otay Mesa about once ever 10 days.  
Flores argued he had an expectation of privacy in his gas tank.  But the Court pointed out that a reasonable expectation of privacy is diminished at the international border.  "It is difficult to imagine how the search of a gas tank, which should be solely a repository for fuel, could be more of an invasion of privacy than the search of the automobile's passenger compartment."  Flores also pointed to the potential of a search like the one at issue in this case to cause damage to the vehicle.  But the Court replied that the searches are not truly destructive, and that there was not a single accident among the "many thousands of gas tank disassemblies that have occurred at the border."  A gas tank search is a brief procedure that can easily be reversed without damaging the vehicle, and if by chance the vehicle were damaged in the process, the owner could sue for damages. 
See also
 Border search exception to the Fourth Amendment warrant requirement.
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 541
List of United States Supreme Court cases
External links
  Government's opening brief on the merits
  Government's reply brief on the merits
  Amicus brief, Washington Legal Foundation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2004 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Florida East Coast Railway Co." ==> """
United States v. Florida East Coast Railway Co., 410 U.S. 224 (1973), was a case decided by the United States Supreme Court.
Due to a chronic freight car shortage, Congress had enlarged the scope of the Interstate Commerce Commission's authority to prescribe per diem rate charges for the use of one company's freight car by another, thus giving an incentive to each company to use the cars more efficiently or to acquire more freight cars. The Commission in passing the regulation had allowed railroads 60 days to file statements of position on the matter. The Commission had said: "that any party requesting oral hearing shall set forth with specificity the need therefore and the evidence to be adduced."  Several railroads filed statements requesting oral hearings, but the Commission did not hold further hearings and overruled the requests.
Two railroad companies brought an action in the Middle District of Florida to set aside the per diem rates that had been established because they had only been allowed to make written submissions during "hearings" for the proposed rule and not oral arguments. The District Court found that the Interstate Commerce Act required that the Interstate Commerce Commission act in accordance with Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. Sec. 556(d), which required that parties would not be "prejudiced" by an agency's decision to receive all submissions of evidence in written form.  
The Supreme Court reversed the District Court's decision. Justice Rehnquist delivered the opinion, explaining that Section 1(14)(a) of the Interstate Commerce Act which had enlarged the Commission's authority to pass regulations "after hearing" was not a requirement that the ICC allow oral arguments in its rulemaking proceedings and that the hearing requirement had been met.
The Court distinguished between administrative rulemaking and administrative adjudications. Since there had been no effort to single out a particular railroad, the court found the agency's action was of a basically legislative type judgment as opposed to an adjudication which could entail due process hearing rights.
The Court referred to its decision in Bi-Metallic Investment Co. v. State Board of Equalization in which it held that no hearing at all was constitutionally required prior to a decision by state tax officers in Colorado to increase the valuation of all taxable property in Denver by a substantial amount.
Justice Douglas joined by Justice Stewart dissented finding that the Railroads had not been afforded hearings guaranteed by Section 1(14)(a) of the Interstate Commerce Act and 5 U.S.C. Sections 553, 556, and 557
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:Interstate Commerce Commission litigation
Category:Florida East Coast Railway
Category:Railway litigation in 1973
"""

From "United States v. Fordice" ==> """
United States v. Fordice, 505 U.S. 717 (1992), is a United States Supreme Court case that resulted in an eight to one ruling that the eight public universities in Mississippi had not sufficiently integrated and that the state must take affirmative action to change this under the Equal Protection Clause. The Court found that, although the state had eliminated explicit prohibitions on the admission of black students to institutions including the University of Mississippi, Mississippi State University, and the University of Southern Mississippi, the Court of Appeals had not properly reviewed the set of discriminatory policies used by the state to suppress black enrollment at these schools. On this point, the Court stated that "[i]f the State perpetuates policies and practices traceable to its prior system that continue to have segregative effects - whether by influencing student enrollment decisions or by fostering segregation in other facets of the university system - and such policies are without sound educational justification and can be practicably eliminated, the State has not satisfied its burden of proving that it has dismantled its prior system.".
Four opinions were filed in the case. In addition to Justice White's majority opinion, Justice O'Connor and Justice Thomas filed concurring opinions. Thomas, in particular, expressed a concern that the strict review of policies that divided students by race should not be used against historically black universities in the state.
Justice Scalia filed a separate opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part, expressing his disagreement with the burden that the Court imposed on universities and his concern that the standards set forth by the Court would create confusion and lead to more litigation.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 505
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "United States v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola" ==> """
United States v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola, 241 U.S. 265 (1916), was a federal suit under which the government unsuccessfully attempted to force The Coca-Cola Company to remove caffeine from its product.
Context
In 1906, Harvey Washington Wiley was the head of the United States Department of Agriculture Bureau of Chemistry when Congress passed the Pure Food and Drug Act. The Bureau started prosecuting companies which were selling products with harmful components and companies which were making misleading claims about their products. In 1903, Coca-Cola had already stopped using spent coca leaves (which only carried trace amounts of cocaine) and had dropped the claim that it cured headaches. But to compensate, the company had increased the amount of caffeine, and Wiley believed that even small amounts of caffeine in beverages was harmful to people.
He was particularly worried that Coca-Cola was being consumed by children as young as 4 years old. So, in 1909, he ordered the seizure of 40 barrels and 20 kegs of a Coca-Cola shipment.
Claim
On March 13, 1911, the government initiated the case under the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act. It tried to force The Coca-Cola Company to remove caffeine from the Coca-Cola formula, believing that the product was adulterated and misbranded.
 "Adulterated": The allegation of adulteration was, in substance, that the product contained an added poisonous or added deleterious ingredient (namely, caffeine) which might render the product injurious to health. The government stated that the syrup, when diluted as directed, would result in a beverage containing 1.21 grains (or 78.4 mg) of caffeine per 8oz serving.
 "Misbranded": It was alleged to be misbranded in that the name "Coca Cola" was a representation of the presence of  coca and cola but that the product "contained no coca and little if any cola" and thus was an "imitation" of these substances and was offered for sale under their "distinctive name".. At that time, the labels had images of coca leaves and kola nuts.
Title
The case title—naming an object, "Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola", as defendant—is an instance of jurisdiction in rem (jurisdiction against a thing). Rather than directly naming The Coca-Cola Company as defendant, the food itself was the subject of the case, with the company only indirectly subject. The barrels and kegs had been seized in 1909 by the government.
Decision
 "Adulterated": The decision, delivered by Justice Hughes, states that the intent of the word "added" in the context of the Act did not exclude the ingredients of a formula "sold under some fanciful name which would be distinctive" if any were found deleterious and was included to protect natural foodstuffs from prosecution because of constituent poisons rendered inert in their natural state (such as fusel oil in liquor); furthermore, it states that the introduction of caffeine in the later stages of syrup production made it an "added ingredient" in any sense of the term and the removal of harmful ingredients, even if vital to the identity of the product, did not constitute adulteration.
 "Misbranded": Of the misbranding charge, the Court held neither had the government proved that "coca cola" was a descriptive name nor had the Coca-Cola Company proved it was not, making both of these assertions irrelevant. Thus the Court found that the issue of whether the product contained any coca or cola had not been settled.
 "Details": The case was returned to the lower court for retrial to determine the remaining, factual matters; Justice McReynolds abstained.
Effect
In 1912, even though Coca-Cola had won the case, two bills were introduced to the U.S. House of Representatives to amend the Pure Food and Drug Act to add caffeine to the list of "habit-forming" and "deleterious" substances, which must be listed on a product's label.
The government made a first appeal in 1913 to the Sixth Circuit Court in Cincinnati, but the ruling was reaffirmed. Worried that this ruling would debilitate the Pure Food and Drug Act, it appealed again in 1916 to the Supreme Court. This time it won, and it ruled among other things that the original case had evidence both for and against caffeine being toxic, and that it should have been dismissed by the judge before reaching the jury, and sent the case back to a lower court.
Coca-Cola then voluntarily reduced the amount of caffeine in its product, and offered to pay all legal costs to settle and avoid further litigation."Pop psychology: The man who saved Coca-Cola", by Ludy T. Benjamin, Monitor on Psychology, February 2009, Vol 40, No. 2, p. 18 The settlement was accepted because Wiley had already resigned in 1912, and no one at the FDA was interested in continuing the pressure against Coca-Cola.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 241
 In rem jurisdiction
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1916 in United States case law
Category:Consumer protection case law
Category:Coca-Cola litigation
Category:United States civil forfeiture case law
Category:Caffeine
Category:United States in rem cases
Category:Consumer protection in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "United States v. Forty-Three Gallons of Whiskey" ==> """
United States v. Forty-Three Gallons of Whiskey, 108 U.S. 491 (1883), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that Congress has the power to regulate the possession and sale of liquor in the lands of and near Native American tribes and upheld an order to seize barrels containing forty-three gallons of whiskey that were being traded on Native American land., .
The form of the styling of the case in which the defendant being an object, rather than a legal person, is caused by it being a jurisdiction in rem (power over objects) case, rather than the more familiar in personam (over persons) case.
 Background 
In 1872, Bernard Lariviere took unlicensed barrels of whiskey to the Indian village of Crookston, Minnesota, to trade with Native Americans under the assumption that the land belonged to the Chippewa tribe and was thus outside of the United States' jurisdiction, and the federal government seized the barrels under the 1834 Nonintercourse Act.
 Case 
Lariviere filed a lawsuit claiming that the United States government had no jurisdiction over Indian land. He argued that the whiskey was seized in the organized county of Polk County, Minnesota, and not on Indian territory, as Polk County did not border any Indian lands. Lower courts agreed, holding that the whiskey was unlawfully seized. The United States appealed against this to the Supreme Court.
Writing for the Court, Justice Davis observed that the Treaty of Old Crossing, which ceded the land to the United States, stated that though Crookston was Indian land, legislation passed by Congress would apply in relation to the regulation of liquor being introduced to the area and that trading with the tribes implied consent to the United States legislation. He further wrote that the formation of the State of Minnesota did not ipso facto stop the land being "Indian Country", as Congress had the authority to determine what the boundaries of Native American land were and that Congress had extended the definition of "Indian Country" to the area in which the whiskey was seized as part of an area ceded under the Treaty but not a full Indian reservation. Holding that the treaty superseded state law, the Court vacated the original judgement and remanded the case back to the United States District Court for the District of Minnesota.
The case has been cited as precedent in cases involving Native Americans and alcohol importation...
 References 
External links
For text of the initial Treaty of Old Crossing (1863), see WikiSource and the  University of Texas.
For text of the 1864 supplement to the 1863 treaty, known as the Treaty of Old Crossing (1864), see WikiSource and the  University of Texas.
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1876 in American law
Category:Minnesota law
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States in rem cases
Category:United States civil forfeiture case law
Category:Alcohol law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Ojibwe in the United States
Category:Alcohol and Native Americans
Category:Whisky
"""

From "United States v. Freed" ==> """
United States v. Freed, 401 U.S. 601 (1971), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the National Firearms Act's registration requirements do not violate the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Additionally, the Court held that the Act's restrictions against a person's "receiv[ing] or possess[ing] a firearm which is not registered to him," did not require the recipient to have the specific intent to possess an unregistered firearm. Consequently, the Court ruled that the buyer of unregistered hand grenades was subject to criminal liability, despite a lack of a requirement that the defendant have had a "specific intent or knowledge that the hand grenades were unregistered."
Decision of the Court
The Court concluded, "This is a regulatory measure in the interest of the public safety, which may well be premised on the theory that one would hardly be surprised to learn that possession of hand grenades is not an innocent act.".
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:United States Fifth Amendment case law
Category:United States federal firearms case law
"""

From "United States v. General Dynamics Corp." ==> """
United States v. General Dynamics Corp., 481 U.S. 239 (1987), is a United States Supreme Court case, which hold that under 162(a) of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. 162(a)) and Treasury Regulation 1.461-1(a)(2) ( 26 CFR 1.461-1(a)(2)), the "all events" test entitled an accrual-basis taxpayer to a federal income tax business-expense deduction, for the taxable year in which (1) all events had occurred which determined the fact of the taxpayer's liability, and (2) the amount of that liability could be determined with reasonable accuracy.
Background
Facts
The corporation used the accrual method of accounting for federal tax purposes; its fiscal year was the same as the calendar year. From 1962 until October 1, 1972, the corporation purchased group-medical insurance for its employees and qualified dependents from two private insurance carriers. Beginning in October 1972, the corporation became a self-insurer with regard to its medical care plans. Instead of continuing to purchase insurance from outside carriers, it undertook to pay medical claims out of its own funds, while continuing to employ private carriers to administer the medical care plans.
An accrual-basis employer—a corporation which filed a consolidated federal income tax return with several subsidiaries--(1) reimbursed employees for certain medical expenses of employees and their qualified dependents; (2) established reserve accounts to reflect the employer's liability for medical care which had been received by covered individuals during the last quarter of 1972, but still not paid for by the employer as of December 31, 1972; (3) calculated the amount of the reserve based upon an estimate of the aggregate liability to be incurred for the period in question; and (4) claimed the estimated reserve as a business expense in an amended 1972 federal income tax return.
Audit
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) audited appellee corporation's 1972 tax return. The corporation filed an amended return, claiming it was entitled to deduct its reserve as an accrued expense, and seek a refund. The IRS disallowed the deduction.
Claims Court
General Dynamics challenged the disallowance and sought a federal income tax refund in the Claims Court, which sustained the deduction and expressed the view that (1) there was no dispute that expenses incurred by the employer in connection with its employee medical-benefit plans were deductible as ordinary and necessary business expenses under 162(a), so that the issue in the case was the timing of the deduction; and (2) deduction of the reimbursement reserve on the 1972 return satisfied the "all events" test, where (a) the fact of the employer's liability was established when a qualified employee or dependent received covered medical services, (b) the subsequent acts of claims filing and processing were ministerial in nature, not conditions precedent to liability, and (c) the employer's aggregate-estimate system for determining the amount of liability was logical and reasonable (6 Cl. Ct 250).
Federal Circuit
On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit affirmed, largely on the basis of the Claims Court opinion.
Opinion of the court
The issue before the Court on certiorari was whether an accrual-basis taxpayer providing medical benefits to its employees could deduct at the close of the taxable year an estimate of its obligation to pay for medical care obtained by employees or their qualified dependents during the final quarter of the year, for claims which had not been reported to the employer.
The Supreme Court reversed the judgment of the Federal Circuit, disallowing the deduction for employee medical expenses incurred, but not reported to the employer, in 1972. In an opinion by Justice Marshall, the Court held that, under 162(a) of the Code, the accrual-basis employer did not satisfy the "all events" test so as to enable the employer to deduct at the close of 1972 an estimated reserve for the employer's obligation to reimburse employees or their qualified dependents for covered medical expenses incurred but not reported to the employer during the final quarter of 1972, where (1) the last event necessary to fix the employer's liability was the filing of a claim with the employer; (2) the employer had failed to demonstrate that any of the reserve represented claims which had been filed prior to the close of 1972 but not yet processed; (3) the fact that the employer might have been able to make a reasonable estimate of how many claims would be filed for the last quarter of 1972 might justify such a reserve as an appropriate accounting measure, but did not, by itself, warrant a tax deduction; and (4) if the "all events" test permitted deduction of an estimated reserve representing claims that were actually likely but not yet reported, Congress would not have needed to maintain an explicit provision (26 U.S.C. 832(b)(5), 832(c)(4)) that insurance companies could deduct such reserves.
Dissent
Justice O'Connor, joined by Justices Blackmun and Stevens, wrote a dissent chastising the majority for adopting a rigid version of the "all events" that retreated from prior holdings, arguing that the decision will "unnecessarily burden[] taxpayers by further expanding the difference between tax and business accounting methods without a compelling reason to do so."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 481
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:General Dynamics
"""

From "United States v. General Electric Co." ==> """
United States v. General Electric Co., 272 U.S. 476 (1926), is a decision of the United States Supreme Court holding (per Chief Justice Taft) that a patentee who has granted a single license to a competitor to manufacture the patented product may lawfully fix the price at which the licensee may sell the product.. 
Background
300px|left|thumb|GE's patent on the tungsten filament lamp, US Pat 1,018,502 – one of the patents that the Supreme Court said completely covered the manufacture and sale of incandescent light bulbs
GE owned three patents that “cover[ed] completely the making of the modern electric lights with the tungsten filaments.”GE, 271 U.S. at 481. GE accounted for 69% of total manufacture and sale of incandescent light bulbs, and Westinghouse, 16%. GE licensed Westinghouse to manufacture and sell light bulbs on the condition that Westinghouse should sell at prices that GE fixed and changed at its discretion.271 U.S. at 488.
100px|right|thumb|GE tungsten filament lamp embodying the invention of US Pat 1,018,502 – one of those involved in the 1926 US v GE litigation
Supreme Court opinion
The Court pointed out that GE had not sold the light bulbs to Westinghouse but rather had granted Westinghouse a license to manufacture and sell the bulbs under GE’s patents. It was well settled that, under the exhaustion doctrine, “where a patentee makes the patented article and sells it, he can exercise no future control over what the purchaser may wish to do with the article after his purchase. It has passed beyond the scope of the patentee's rights.”271 U.S. at 489. On the other hand, “the question is a different one…when we consider what a patentee who grants a license to one to make and vend the patented article may do in limiting the licensee in the exercise of the right to sell.”271 U.S. at 489–90. If all that the patentee does is grant a license to make, the Court said, the licensee only gets an implied license to use the article and not one to sell it. That raises the question of what happens if the patentee also licenses sale:
If the patentee goes further and licenses the selling of the articles, may he limit the selling by limiting the method of sale and the price? We think he may do so provided the conditions of sale are normally and reasonably adapted to secure pecuniary reward for the patentee's monopoly. One of the valuable elements of the exclusive right of a patentee is to acquire profit by the price at which the article is sold. The higher the price, the greater the profit, unless it is prohibitory. When the patentee licenses another to make and vend, and retains the right to continue to make and vend on his own account, the price at which his licensee will sell will necessarily affect the price at which he can sell his own patented goods. It would seem entirely reasonable that he should say to the licensee, "Yes, you may make and sell articles under my patent, but not so as to destroy the profit that I wish to obtain by making them and selling them myself." He does not thereby sell outright to the licensee the articles the latter may make and sell, or vest absolute ownership in them. He restricts the property and interest the licensee has in the goods he makes and proposes to sell.271 U.S. at 490 (emphasis supplied). However, in , the patentee Adams assigned the right to make, use, and sell the patented product (a coffin lid) within a ten-mile radius of Boston to another, who manufactured the patented product and sold it to Burke. Burke then took the product more than ten miles from Boston and used it in his undertaking business to bury a customer. Adams sued Burke for patent infringement, but the Supreme Court held that the exhaustion doctrine freed Burke from infringement liability.
That is the core of the opinion in the case, and the rule for which the GE case is usually cited today: the patentee may impose any conditions in a manufacturing license that “are normally and reasonably adapted to secure pecuniary reward for the patentee’s monopoly.”See, e.g.,  (“As was said in United States v. General Electric Co., 272 U.S. 476, 489 (1926), the patentee may grant a license ‘upon any condition the performance of which is reasonably within the reward which the patentee by the grant of the patent is entitled to secure.’”), quoted in 
The decision also upheld price fixing restrictions that GE imposed in agreements with agents for sale of bulbs that GE had manufactured. The Court ruled: “The owner of an article, patented or otherwise, is not violating the common law or the Anti-Trust Act by seeking to dispose of his articles directly to the consumer and fixing the price by which his agents transfer the title from him directly to such consumer.”GE. 271 U.S. at 488 (emphasis supplied).
Subsequent developments
The U.S. Department of Justice has been trying to overturn the 1926 GE decision almost since it was first handed down, and has twice seen it upheld by an equally divided 4–4 Supreme Court.; .
Subsequent decisions of the Court, however, have repeatedly circumscribed the scope of the dispensation that the 1926 GE case offers.Robert A. Lipstein & Ryan C. Tisch, RPM in IP: RIP to Per Se?, Competition Law 360, The Newswire for Business Lawyer (April 9, 2007), at 2 (“courts have nibbled away at [General Electric], leaving it a narrow rule surrounded entirely by wide exceptions”). It does not apply when several patentees pool their patentsSee Line Material, supra. or when the patentee has multiple licensees.See  It does not apply when the patentee-licensor is not itself a manufacturer licensing competitive manufacturers. (licensor is patent holding company and licensees are manufacturers). See also  It does not apply to a price-fix on an unpatented product made by a patented machine or patented method.See Cummer-Graham Co. v. Straight Side Basket Corp., 142 F.2d 646 (5th Cir. 1944); 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has continued to rely on what is termed, above, the core of the opinion. In Mallinckrodt, Inc. v. Medipart, Inc., the Federal Circuit relied on GE as the basis for its ruling that the patentee’s post-sale restrictions were not prohibited under the exhaustion doctrine. The Federal Circuit’s Quanta decision relied for its rationale on Mallinckrodt, and thus on GE. But the Supreme Court’s reversal of that decision in Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc. has created uncertainty about the continuing authority of this line of precedent and has left this area of law unsettled.
In its initial brief in the Quanta case, as amicus curiae, the United States had pointed to the "seeming anomaly" between the two lines of authority that the GE case addresses.For a more detailed discussion of this issue, see the article on Quanta v. LGE. One line is represented by the Supreme Court's "exhaustion" cases such as United States v. Univis Lens Co.. and Quanta. Another line is reflected by such decisions and GE and General Talking Pictures Corp. v. Western Electric Co. The Mallinckrodt case seemed to expand the scope of the second line of authority at the expense of the first, but now Quanta may be reversing the direction of expansion. This area of law may thus remain unsettled for several years.
Early in 2015, the Federal Circuit called for en banc briefing and argument of whether the Mallinckrodt case should be overruled, in light of Quanta.See Mallinckrodt—Continued viability questioned. In February 2016, the Federal Circuit, in a 10–2 decision, reaffirmed Mallinckrodt.
 References 
External links
Category:1926 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:General Electric litigation
Category:Anti-competitive practices
"""

From "United States v. Georgia" ==> """
United States v. Georgia, 546 U.S. 151 (2006), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court decided that the protection of Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), passed by the U.S. Congress, extends to persons held in a state prison and protects prison inmates from  discrimination on the basis of disability by prison personnel. Specifically, the court held that Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, ., is a proper use of Congressional power under the Fourteenth Amendment, Section 5,  making it applicable  to  prison system officials..
Facts of the case
The petitioner, Tony Goodman, a paraplegic prisoner using a wheelchair, sued the State of Georgia and others alleging that the conditions of his confinement in the Georgia state prison system violated ADA.  Goodman stated  that, because of his disability, he was kept in his cell for twenty-three hours per day, a cell too narrow for him to move his wheelchair, and denied access to medical treatment, such as catheters, treatment for bed sores and boils and access to mental health care, and to other privileges granted to prison inmates, such as access to programs, classes, and religious activities. Further, he claimed the prison was not handicapped accessible. For example, the prison did not make toilet and bathing facilities accessible to him, such that he was occasionally  forced to sit in his own human waste. He was also injured  multiple times while trying to transfer from his wheelchair to the shower or toilet himself, as assistance in these matters  was denied.
The position of Georgia was that state prisons were immune from suit  for damages, claiming that the U.S. Congress had exceeded its constitutional authority in authorizing suits for damages against states under ADA.
Decision
The Supreme Court was unanimous in its decision. It narrowly ruled  that Congress  has the authority to apply ADA to  the administration of  state prisons to the extent that it relates to conduct that actually violates the Fourteenth Amendment. Thus Congress was granted more authority over the States in this area of disability rights.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 546
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:United States disability case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "United States v. Germaine" ==> """
United States v. Germaine, 99 U.S. 508 (1878), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the Appointments Clause. 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1878 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "United States v. Gettysburg Electric Railway Co." ==> """
United States v. Gettysburg Electric Ry. Co., 160 U.S. 668 (1896), was a case to prevent trolley operations on the Gettysburg Battlefield.  The dispute began in August 1891 when the Gettysburg Battlefield Memorial Association's board approved attorney Samuel Swope's motion to deny trolley right-of-way along GBMA roads. (cited by Unrau p. 64)   NOTE: In 1894 during the trolley suit, Swope became a judge.  Despite the 1896 US Supreme Court ruling that the railway could be seized for historic preservation, as well as earlier legislative efforts to appropriate federal acquisition funds, create a War Department commission, and form the Gettysburg National Military Park; the trolley continued operations until obsolete in 1916.
Background
Near the end of the 19th century, tourists to the 1863 Gettysburg Battlefield typically arrived at the borough by train and paid fees for horse-drawn jitney taxis to travel over the battlefield on primitive wagon roads of the private Gettysburg Battlefield Memorial Association.  The GBMA owned less than  of the battlefield's much larger area, and nearly all military engagement areas were privately owned and had twelve small GBMA-owned monument plots of .  Some owners rented land for camping, sold souvenirs/refreshments, and by 1894 required top dollar prices for real estate purchases.  Similarly, the original battlefield roads had fallen into disrepair after the GBMA funds had become nearly exhausted by late 1882.  Despite the preceding 1884 Round Top Branch steamtrain railroad that operated across the field of Pickett's Charge and Hancock Avenue to Round Top Station, an 1892 meeting next-door at the Round Top School formed an opposition committee of Cumberland Township voters (William H. Tipton was the only attendee favoring the trolley, also attended (1892 Gettysburg Compiler, 1942 Out of the Past articles) and the township subsequently granted road right-of-way.)
Gettysburg Park Commission
The Gettysburg Park Commission (GPC) was established by the United States Department of War on March 3, 1893, (NPS webpage for monument MN508)  for "ascertaining the extent of...the trolley" (trolley track construction began April 1893).  The Appropriations Act of 1893 on March 3 had funded $25,000, a June 9 supplemental act directed "acquisition and designation by tablets of the lines of battle", and the battlefield survey "was at once commenced" after topographer Emmor Cope was selected at the first commission meeting on July 1.  Federal acquisition of land that would become the 1895 Gettysburg National Military Park began on June 2, 1893, with a tract of  from John H. Miller & wife.  By July 1893, GPC commissioner John B. Bachelder reported to the Secretary of War (local article, New York Times article) about battlefield railbed construction (notably planned along the west of The Angle's historic stone wall),  and acting secretary Lewis A. Grant referred the complaint to the acting Judge Advocate General.
Trolley right-of-way over the private  72nd Pennsylvania Infantry Monument tract at The Angle was denied by June 13, 1893; and the route was changed to instead use the Emmitsburg Road.  During the July 2–3, 1893, New York Monuments Commission visit for dedicating the 44th New York monument with observation deck on Little Round Top, two altercations against photographer Tipton resulted in a writ by local judge McClean against General Daniel Sickles, General Daniel Butterfield, and two civil war colonels. The writ was followed by an August 2, 1893, trolley complaint to the commonwealth by the GBMA, Edward McPherson, and thirty-nine other citizens; and a counter petition by 268 Gettysburg and 58 Cumberland township citizens favoring the trolley. The PA Attorney General denied action after the subsequent hearing: "the right of owners of private property—whatever public interest may attach to it—to dispose of it to passenger railway corporations, cannot be disputed. ...the line itself...has been chosen with a view of affording tourists the best possible means of visiting and viewing this great battlefield and doing the least possible injury to its natural conditions". (published in Gettysburg Times, August 15)
Despite a lack of funds that halted construction in August 1893, the railway began operations as early as September 1893 and was completed to Tipton Park and Round Top Park in 1894.  Also despite the lawsuit, a new trolley powerhouse was built to replace the original in the borough that had burnt down by January 22, 1895, and by October 1895 total trackage was .  The trolley system had been sold to a new owner in the month prior  to passage of the February 11, 1895, "Sickles Gettysburg Park Bill" that authorized federal land acquisition to form the Gettysburg National Military Park. Also during the federal suit, the railway company became insolvent and Judge Dallas had placed it into receivership by September 1895.
Federal case
US v. Gett. Elec. Ry. Co. began with the GBMA's April 7, 1894, bill in equity to block trolley use of a particular railway section over Hancock Avenue as recommended by the 72nd PA Infantry committee in 1893: "set aside spots right in the route of the trolley".  Likewise, the US District Attorneyhttps://news.google.com/newspapers?id=7VRAAAAAIBAJ&sjid=g_8FAAAAIBAJ&dq=switch%20carlisle-street%20gettysburg&pg=3571%2C3432350 petitioned for condemnation of a strip of  of land on May 3, 1894; and the trolley company responded with a bill in equity to stop the US eminent domain acquisition . (Attorneys Hart, Hebner, & David Wills)  The US motion to stop construction was dismissed  by Judge Dallas of the United States Circuit Court: "powers of congress are distinctly enumerated in the constitution, and in that enumeration none is included to which the uses for which it is proposed to condemn this land can be related, without, in my opinion, enlarging the constitutional grant by grafting upon its express terms a construction so lax and comprehensive as to be subversive of its limited character."
Judge Dallas swore in the jury of Adams County residents on June 29, 1894; and the local hearing in front of the jury was September 11–15 after which "they adjourned for argument in Philadelphia."  On November 3, 1894, the jury identified $30,000 "as the measure of damage that would be done the Trolley by the proposed change".The Star and Sentinel - Google News Archive Search  Both parties appealed the jury amount as too high/low (the company on November 12, 1894),   "On "July 8, 1894, the Attorney-General of the United States directed proceedings to be commenced against the electric railway at Gettysburg". and the company agreed on November 13 to move tracks from the vicinity of Devil's Den and Tipton Station if the expense would be paid (refused ).  The US attorney Ellery P. Ingham filed an additional petition for condemning a second tract in January 1895, which along with his June 7 petition were denied by the Philadelphia federal court. (dissenting opinion, PA Judge Butler)  The 1896 reversal by the Supreme Court of the United States ruled historic preservation "seems" to be "a public use".
Aftermath
"The impression in the town" was the Secretary of War would not pay the $30,000 nor "take further steps" to acquire the railway, and the trolley operated even after the Commission—following a May 7 federal hearing—acquired 2 William H. Tipton tracts of  on December 31, 1901.  In 1908, Borough of Gettysburg vs. Gettysburg Transit Co. required trolley payment of "car tax" assessed after the company failed to perform agreed maintenance of borough streets [cited by Google News Archive (Gettysburg Compiler)] (reversed August 1908).  In 1909, C. Taylor Leland vs. The Gettysburg Transit Company ordered a trustee's auction in the foreclosure of the 1898 mortgage (purchased in September), and an injury lawsuit was initiated for trolley cars colliding on August 15 near Devil's Den.  Trolley operations ended in November 1916 when the railway had become obsolete with disrepair and increased use of battlefield avenues that had been improved with War Department Telford piking.
First Army Appropriations Act of 1917
Congressional funding for the seizure failed in an attempted amendment on February 26, 1917.Congressional Record containing the Proceedings and Debates of the Second Session of the Sixty-Fourth Congress of The United States of America, Volume LIV, Part 5; From February 25, 1917, to March 4, 1917; page 4334  After annual trolley operations on the battlefield hadn't commenced in the spring, the First Army Appropriations Act of 1917 funded $30,000 on May 9 for the "practically abandoned property".  Instead of paying damages to the trolley company, the funds paid for removing the tracks and acquiring the associated landowners' tracts (most had been deeded to the US years earlier).
Remnants of the trolley were entered-documented in 2004 as historic contributing structures of the Gettysburg Battlefield Historic District.  Similar eminent domain acquisitions include the 1904 United States v. Five Tracts of land that seized land near Reynolds Grove and, on September 18, 1905, Cunningham Grove.  The 1974 Gettysburg National Tower, which was on private land not used for military engagements and which had been granted use of federal land, was seized in 2000 and demolished due to its appearance.
References
External links
Category:1896 in United States case law
Category:Historic preservation in the United States
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Gettysburg, Pennsylvania
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
"""

From "United States v. Gilmore" ==> """
United States v. Gilmore, 372 U.S. 39 (1963), was a federal income tax case before the United States Supreme Court.
 Background 
In the course of a hotly contested divorce, the taxpayer had incurred substantial legal fees in defending against his wife's claim to ownership of a controlling interest in the family business.  Had she succeeded, his principal source of livelihood—his salary as chief executive—might be jeopardized.
Accordingly, he sought to deduct some of these fees for the "conservation ... of property held for the production of income."
 Opinion of the Court 
Following its earlier decision in Lykes v. United States, the Supreme Court sustained the Commissioner in disallowing the deduction as a "family" expense under § 262. The Court reasoned that the deductibility of legal fees depends upon the origin of the litigated claim rather than upon the potential consequences of success or failure to the taxpayer's income status.  Since the origin of the litigation was to be found in the taxpayer's marital difficulties, no deduction was allowable.
From the Syllabus:
The Supreme Court, Mr. Justice Harlan, held that origin and character of claim with respect to which expense was incurred, rather than its potential consequences upon fortunes of taxpayer, is controlling basic test of whether expense was ‘business' or ‘personal’ and, hence, whether it is deductible as expense incurred for conservation of property held for production of income.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Warren Court
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1963 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Glaxo Group Ltd." ==> """
United States v. Glaxo Group Ltd., 410 U.S. 52 (1973),.  is a 1973 decision of the United States Supreme Court in which the Court held that (1) when a patent is directly involved in an antitrust violation, the Government may challenge the validity of the patent;This overruled or further limited United States v. Bell Tel. Co., 167 U.S. 224 (1897), which held that the United States lacked standing to challenge the validity of its issued patents "on the mere ground of error of judgment" in issuing them. The United States had standing to seek to invalidate patents, however, on grounds of fraudulent procurement and also as a defense to a charge of patent infringement. and (2) ordinarily, in patent-antitrust cases, "[m]andatory selling on specified terms and compulsory patent licensing at reasonable charges are recognized antitrust remedies."
 Background 
Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI) and Glaxo Group Ltd. (Glaxo) each owned patents covering various aspects of the antifungal drug griseofulvin.ICI had patents on the dosage form of the drug. Glaxo had patents on manufacturing patents.  They "pooled" the patents (that is, cross-licensed one another), subject to express licensing restrictions that the chemical from which the "finished" form of the drug (tablets and capsules) was made must not be resold in bulk form. ICI and Glaxo licensed three "brand name" drug companies to make and sell the drug in finished form only. The purpose of this restriction was to keep the drug chemical out of the hands of small companies that might act as price-cutters, and the effect was to maintain stable, uniform prices.
The Department of Justice Antitrust Division sued, alleging violations of § 1 of the Sherman Act and also alleging that the patents were invalid.  The district court granted summary judgment against the defendants on the antitrust charges, but dismissed the invalidity claims on the ground that the Government lacked standing to challenge patent validity. The district court also denied the Government’s request for mandatory selling of the bulk chemical and compulsory licensing, on reasonable terms. The Government then appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
thumb|right|150px|Justice Byron White wrote the majority opinion for the Court
Justice Byron White wrote the 6-3 majority opinion for the Court. Justice William Rehnquist wrote a dissenting opinion in which Justices Potter Stewart and Harry Blackmun joined.
 Standing 
The Court observed that the defendants had been adjudged to be antitrust violators. The Court said that while "we do not recognize unlimited authority in the Government to attack a patent by basing an antitrust claim on the simple assertion that the patent is invalid," whether the patents are valid or invalid could significantly affect what remedies were appropriate. Therefore, when the Government presents substantial claims for relief, a court should entertain the Government’s validity challenge.
 Relief 
The Court noted that mandatory sales and reasonable royalty compulsory licensing were "well established forms of relief when necessary to an effective remedy, particularly where patents have provided the leverage for or have contributed to the antitrust violation adjudicated." Here, the evidence showed that the patents "gave the appellees the economic leverage with which to insist upon and enforce the bulk-sales." Reasonable royalty licensing was necessary to assure competitive access to the input factor for production of the drug. In addition, both mandatory sales of "bulk-form griseofulvin on reasonable and nondiscriminatory terms’ and grants of "patent licenses at reasonable-royalty rates to all bona fide applicants’ were necessary in order to "’pry open to competition’ the griseofulvin market that ‘has been closed by defendants' illegal restraints.’"
 Subsequent developments 
The Glaxo case was brought, initially, as a test case on government standing to challenge patent validity—a vehicle for overturning or at least limiting the 1897 decision of the Supreme Court in United States v. Bell Tel. Co.167 U.S. 224 (1897). That decision had held that the United States lacked standing to challenge its own grant, because of the doctrine of legal estoppel. Substantively, Glaxo was one of a series of antitrust challenges against patent license restrictions on the sale of bulk drugs. Such restrictions were used to keep the bulk chemical form of drugs out of the hands of generic drug houses and other potential price-cutters, so that "finished" drug prices could be maintained at high levels. (The Supreme Court's statement of the facts in its Glaxo opinion explains this point.See Glaxo, 410 U.S. at 63.) 
The defendants asserted no health and safety or other factual defenses. The district court then granted three summary judgment motions in the government's favor on the issue of antitrust violation, granted the defendants' motion to dismiss the patent validity challenges, and denied any significant relief.See Glaxo, 410 U.S. at 56. The case then went to the Supreme Court on a record consisting of legal briefs and supporting affidavits, without live testimony: there had not been a single day of trial in the usual sense—nothing but legal argumentation.Glaxo, 410 U.S. at 56 n.5.
After the Supreme Court's decision, the government found itself possessed of a new power to challenge antitrust defendants' patents. However, the government did not rush to exploit this power. It appears that only one reported decision has involved a patent validity challenge based on the doctrine of the Glaxo case. See also United States v. FMC Corp., 717 F.2d 775 (3d Cir. 1983) (government has no standing to invalidate patent for failure to file copy of interference settlement).
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:GSK plc litigation
Category:United States standing case law
Category:Legal doctrines and principles
"""

From "United States v. Gonzalez-Lopez" ==> """
United States v. Gonzalez-Lopez, 548 U.S. 140 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court ruling that the erroneous deprivation of a defendant's attorney of choice entitles him to a reversal of his conviction under the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution..
 Background 
The defendant in the underlying case, Cuauhtemoc Gonzalez-Lopez, was charged with conspiracy to distribute marijuana, in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri.  His family initially hired local attorney John Fahle to represent him, but Gonzalez-Lopez then contacted and hired a California attorney, Joseph Low, to represent him, and the understanding appeared to be that Fahle and Low would work together on his case.  The district court initially permitted Low and Fahle to work together, admitting Low pro hac vice (i.e., just this once), but soon revoked such permission, ruling that Low, when he passed notes to Fahle in a pretrial hearing, violated a local court rule restricting the cross-examination of a witness to one attorney.
Gonzalez-Lopez then informed Fahle that he wanted Low to be his only attorney, and Low then filed another request to be admitted pro hac vice, which the district court and the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit both rejected.  Meanwhile, Fahle filed a complaint against Low, claiming that Low had violated the Missouri Rules of Professional Conduct by contacting Gonzalez-Lopez while Fahle represented him.  Fahle also sought to withdraw from the case.  The district court let Fahle withdraw, ruled that Low violated the rules of professional conduct, and did not let Low represent Gonzalez-Lopez.  Gonzalez-Lopez went to trial represented by another attorney, Karl Dickhaus, who requested permission for Low to sit with him at the counsel table.  The trial judge denied that request and ordered Low to sit in the audience and not to speak with Dickhaus, enforcing the order by having a federal marshal sit between Dickhaus and Low throughout the trial.  Gonzalez-Lopez was found guilty.
On appeal, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Gonzalez-Lopez's conviction, ruling that the district court erred both in ruling that Low violated the rules of professional conduct and in refusing to allow Low to represent Gonzalez-Lopez.  It further ruled that the error in denying Gonzalez-Lopez his right to choice of counsel (Low) was "structural" in nature—i.e., reversible without harmless error analysis.  The prosecution then petitioned for certiorari from the United States Supreme Court.  It did not dispute that the district court erred and improperly denied Gonzalez-Lopez his choice of counsel, but argued that such error should be subject to harmless error analysis, and that Gonzalez-Lopez was not prejudiced by the error.
 Opinion of the Court 
 Majority 
Justice Antonin Scalia, writing for an unusual majority (5-4), held that the denial of Gonzalez-Lopez's right of choice of counsel was a structural error, requiring reversal without harmless error analysis.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 203 (2006).  The Scalia opinion reasoned that the refusal to let Low represent Gonzalez-Lopez caused effects that could never be adequately measured for harmless error, because it is impossible to speculate on what the effect that a different attorney and one that the defendant wished to have would have had on the proceedings—including whether a trial would have occurred in the first place.  The entire proceeding was therefore unfair and unreliable, and must be reversed.  Justice Scalia was joined by Justice John Paul Stevens, Justice David Souter, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Justice Stephen Breyer. This case was one of only three in his tenure where Scalia alone sided with the liberal wing of the Court.
 Dissent 
Justice Samuel Alito, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts, Justice Anthony Kennedy, and Justice Clarence Thomas, dissented.  Alito wrote that the Court had misinterpreted the Sixth Amendment's protection of the right to counsel to protect a defendant's choice of counsel, when he believed the text and history of the Amendment indicated that it merely protected a defendant's right to assistance that was as effective as his choice of counsel would be. Even if it protected choice of counsel, it did not mean that violation of this right should be grounds for automatic reversal. Instead, because the Constitution lacked directives as to how such rights should be enforced, the Court should follow the Congressional directive to apply harmless error analysis.
References
 Further reading 
 External links 
 Brief for the United States as Petitioner
 Northwestern University article on the case with background information
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment choice of counsel case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Gouveia" ==> """
United States v. Gouveia, 467 U.S. 180 (1984), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that prisoners in administrative segregation pending the investigation of crimes committed within the prison had no Sixth Amendment entitlement to counsel prior to the initiation of adversary judicial proceedings against them.United States v. Gouveia, 467 U.S. 180, 189 (1984). In an opinion written by Justice William Rehnquist, the Court stated that the right to counsel may extend to "'critical' pretrial proceedings" that are adversarial in nature, but the Sixth Amendment right to counsel "attaches at the initiation of adversary judicial criminal proceedings".Gouveia, 467 U.S. at 189-90 (noting that "[o]ur speedy trial cases hold that that Sixth Amendment right may attach before an indictment and as early as the time of 'arrest and holding to answer a criminal charge ....'").
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 467
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment appointment of counsel case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "United States v. Grimaud" ==> """
United States v. Grimaud, 220 U.S. 506 (1911), was a case argued before the Supreme Court of the United States. The case tested the constitutionality of the Forest Reserve Act of 1891, which delegated to the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (a part of the Federal Executive Branch) the power to make rules and regulations regarding the use of federal Forest Service lands and to punish violations of these rules as a criminal offense. The Court ruled, after a re-argument, that such a delegation of rulemaking power was permissible because it was separate from true legislative power (which is only vested in Congress as the legislative branch)..
Back story
Shepherds in California had seen the creation of forest reserves take place over the course of about ten years. In this time, the Forest Reserve Act of 1891 was established after wealthy capitalists from the northeast failed to monopolize the ranching industry. As a result, it left shepherds with less and less land to let their sheep graze, and this did not sit well with many of them.
Six years later, Congress enacted the Organic Act of 1897. This law “granted management authority to the United States Department of the Interior, then the nation’s sole custodian of the public domain." As part of this process, rangers were hired, and regulations were set for the use of these reserves’ various resources. "When in 1905 the United States Forest Service was established as part of the United States Department of Agriculture, and the nation's forests transferred to its care, the number of rangers increased again, the permitting process intensified, and the related rules and fees were widely published."How Counting Sheep Saved the U.S. Forest Service"” The new rules angered the shepherds, farmers, ranchers, miners, etc., especially those who were around when the land wasn’t protected by the government. It got to a point where these members of society began to directly defy the authority of these agencies. Miners sneaked onto reserves to pan for gold, loggers secretly harvested timber, and ranchers sneaked various livestock into and out of these protected lands. The case of the United States versus Pierre Grimaud begins in what is now Oakhurst, California. Pierre was one of these agitated workers; he just wasn’t lucky enough to break the law undetected.
In the early 20th-century, Pierre Grimaud – a farmer and shepherd, attempted, with his partner PJ Carajous, to sneak his flock of sheep into the Sierra Forest Reserve. On his endeavor to find a good spot for his sheep to graze, he was stopped by a forest ranger who asked to see Grimaud’s permit. Once it was revealed that Grimaud did not have a permit, and was essentially trespassing, the forest ranger arrested him and took him to court.
The trial(s)
It was found that Pierre Grimaud's case was more complicated than a simple case of trespassing. Grimaud and his lawyer denied the claim that Grimaud's actions were a crime against the United States because Congress broke the Constitution when it voted for the relevant forest laws and ordinances. These "rules and regulations," they said, were "Congress's attempt to give its legislative power to an administrative officer." If, as they said, this kind of delegation was against the Constitution, Grimaud couldn't have done anything wrong because there was no wrong to do. Since Grimaud made this a case involving constitutional law, it was eventually moved up to the Supreme Court where Grimaud was ruled guilty as if he had been tried. Grimaud’s claim was an obvious con, and the Court knew it, but constitutional law is difficult to navigate. Finally, after four years, the Supreme Court (specifically Justice Joseph Rucker Lamar) unanimously agreed that Grimaud “did knowingly, willfully, and unlawfully pasture and graze, and cause and procure to be pastured and grazed, certain sheep (the exact number being unknown to the grand jurors) upon certain land within the limits of and a part of said Sierra Forest Reserve, without having theretofore or at any time secured or obtained a permit or any permission for said pasturing or grazing, or any part of said sheep, as required by the said rules and regulations of the Secretary of Agriculture................. Grimaud's lawyers said that these accusations were not true. They said that when Congress first voted to support the relevant forest legislation, they did not have the right to do so under the Constitution. Congress was said to be giving the power they have over government property to an "administrative officer" who didn't have the right skills, the park ranger. If this were proven to be true, then Grimaud could not have committed a crime because there was no crime to commit. Initially, jurors didn't buy this defense, and decided that Pierre was guilty. The defense then appealed, or demurred, their case, which means that the case gets turned over to the district court. After more than a year of on-again, off again arguments, the District Court finally ruled in favor of Grimaud, overturning the lower court in the process. From here, the case was appealed to the Supreme Court, where the ruling was once again overturned, and the final ruling said that the Forestry Act was indeed constitutional and that Pierre Grimaud had broken the law. The only reason Pierre could even suggest that his being tried was unconstitutional in the first place was the final ruling in the Field v. Clark case. This case established that “Congress cannot delegate legislative power.”. However, according to the Supreme Court, “the authority to make administrative rules is not a delegation of legislative power, and such rules do not become legislation because violations thereof are punished as public offenses.”
Historical Significance
“The immediate public reaction to Grimaud adopted the same view of the case.Logan Sawyer, "Grazing, Grimaud, and Gifford Pinchot: How the Forest Service Overcame the Classical Nondelegation Doctrine to Establish Administrative Crimes", "University of Virginia"” The public, in general, agreed with the Supreme Court's decision. While some of the shepherds may have hoped for more freedom to graze, their hopes weren't very high, so the news of Grimaud's loss in court wasn't that unexpected. The day after the Court's decision, James Wilson said that as a result of Grimaud's case, the controversy “regarding the right to use grazing lands within the various national forests without a permit from the department of agriculture will be brought to an end.https://litigation-essentials.lexisnexis.com/webcd/app?action=DocumentDisplay&crawlid=1&doctype=cite&docid=24+J.+L.+%26+Politics+169&srctype=smi&srcid=3B15&key=81c22154d87cccccde70c479cb466849” This prediction was exactly correct. In 1911, the Department of Agriculture told Congress that "the uncertainty and unrest caused by the widespread belief that the [grazing] regulations were not enforced stopped immediately." Prior to United States v. Grimaud, shepherds and farmers in California had no real reason to fear the rangers patrolling the national forest. But after it was decided that the rangers' power was legal, the shepherds and farmers gave them respect. 
While the case of Grimaud v. United States was only explicitly mentioned in Light v. United States (another case of trespassing on forest grounds protected by the US government), it more clearly defined what Congress could do: “it could delegate power to an agency to adopt regulations subject to criminal penalties, provided that Congress itself legislated the penalties." Also, because criminal penalties are the worst kind of punishment for breaking an agency rule, Grimaud made it clear that Congress could give other kinds of punishments for breaking agency rules as well. Grimaud showed that Congress can give agencies the power to make rules that have a wide range of legal effects, as long as Congress spells out in a law what those effects are.The Harvard Law Review Association, "Harvard Law Review", "Pages 301-306" Before the dispute between Pierre Grimaud and the United States government, there was a gray area surrounding this aspect of the central government's power. United States v. Grimaud permanently and clearly defined the extent of their power.
References
External links
Case Summaries
Report of the Secretary of Agriculture
Category:Legal history of California
Category:United States Forest Service
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:1911 in United States case law
Category:United States nondelegation doctrine case law
"""

From "United States v. Grubbs" ==> """
United States v. Grubbs, 547 U.S. 90 (2006), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States involving the constitutionality of "anticipatory" search warrants under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Court ruled that such warrants, which are issued in advance of a "triggering condition" that makes them executable, are constitutional and do not need to describe that condition on their face.
In this particular decision, which arose from a federal child pornography prosecution, the Court ruled that a warrant that was predicated on the undercover delivery of a videotape to the defendant's home, but did not state this on its face, was properly issued and executed because it described the place to be searched and the objects to be seized, and the search was conducted after the delivery was made. Evidence seized from the defendant's house from that search was therefore admissible in court against him.
Background of the case
Criminal investigation
The defendant, Jeffrey Grubbs, became the subject of an undercover federal investigation and prosecution when he ordered a videotape containing child pornography from a website operated by an undercover U.S. postal inspector. The Postal Inspection Service then arranged a controlled delivery of the tape to Grubbs. An application was submitted to a magistrate judge for the Eastern District of California requesting an "anticipatory" search warrant, so-called because it is based upon the probable cause that at some time in the future (but not at present) certain evidence of a crime will be located at a specified place). An affidavit accompanying the warrant application stated as the "triggering condition" that the search warrant would not be executed until the tape had been delivered and taken into Grubbs' home. However, this condition was omitted from the issued warrant. Two days later, the undercover delivery occurred and Grubbs' house was searched after the tape was taken inside. The videotape and other items were seized, and Grubbs was arrested.
District Court and Court of Appeals proceedings
A grand jury for the Eastern District of California indicted Grubbs on one count of "receiving a visual depiction of a minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct."18 U.S.C. § 2252(a)(2).  Grubbs' defense counsel, Mark Reichel   moved to suppress the evidence seized during the search of his residence, arguing in part that the warrant was invalid because it failed to list the triggering condition and that the 4th Amendment requires officers to provide a copy of the search warrant to the homeowner when conducting a search. After an evidentiary hearing, the District Court denied the motion. Grubbs pleaded guilty, but reserved his right to appeal the denial of his motion to suppress.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed.United States v. Grubbs, 377 F.3d 1072 (9th Cir. 2004), amended, 389 F.3d 1306.  Relying on Ninth Circuit precedent, the court held that the Fourth Amendment's requirement that warrants describe with particularity the things, persons, or places to be searched fully applied to the triggering conditions necessary for an anticipatory search warrant.377 F.3d at 1077-1078.  Because the postal inspectors failed to present the application affidavit—the only document in which the triggering conditions were listed—to Grubbs or his wife, the court ruled that the "warrant was...inoperative, and the search was illegal."  The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari and reversed.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Antonin Scalia delivered the opinion of the Court.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 154 (2006). The judgment was unanimous as to the eight members of the Court participating,Justice Samuel Alito, having been confirmed thirteen days after the case was heard for argument, did not participate. as were the first two parts of Scalia's opinion that upheld the constitutionality of anticipatory warrants in general. The third and last part of the Court's opinion, which further ruled that anticipatory warrants were not required by the Fourth Amendment to state their triggering requirements on their face, was joined by four Justices; the remaining three concurred separately in an opinion by Justice David Souter.
Scalia's majority opinion
The defendant had argued that anticipatory warrants in general violated the Fourth Amendment's requirement that "no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause," because the anticipated probable cause does not exist at the time of the warrant's issuance. The Court first noted that the courts of appeals had unanimously rejected this argument. It asserted that all warrants are in a sense "anticipatory," because any search is only reasonable if there is probable cause for it when the search is conducted.  "In the typical case where the police seek permission to search a house for an item they believe is already located there, the magistrate's determination that there is probable cause for the search amounts to a prediction that the item will still be there when the warrant is executed."  The Court concluded that this makes anticipatory warrants no different in principle from ordinary warrants.
When the anticipatory warrant is predicated on a triggering condition, the Fourth Amendment requires that there is probable cause to believe that the triggering condition will occur, and that if it occurs, that there is a fair probability that the contraband will be found at the place to be searched. In this case, the warrant application satisfied both conditions, based on the delivery of the tape as the triggering condition.
Regarding the warrant's failure to describe that triggering condition, Scalia wrote in Part III of the Court's opinion that, contrary to the Ninth Circuit's ruling, the Fourth Amendment does not have a general "particularity requirement."  Warrants must only describe with particularity "the place to be searched" and "the persons or things to be seized," and the Court stated that it had previously rejected attempts to expand that scope.The Court cited to Dalia v. United States, 441 U.S. 238 (1979), in which the defendant challenged a wiretap warrant that omitted the fact that covert entry into the defendant's office was required to install the listening device. The Court ruled against the defendant on the basis that warrants did not need to specify the manner in which they were to be executed.
The defendant also argued that any "precondition to the valid exercise of executive power" must be identified on the face of the warrant. The Court denied that there was such a constitutional principle, especially considering that while a judge must find probable cause to issue a warrant, the warrant itself does not need to state the basis for the judge's finding. Finally, the defendant claimed that the omission of the triggering condition prevents the person whose property is being seized of being notified of the lawfulness of the search and seizure. However, the Court pointed out that there is no requirement that the property owner be shown the warrant prior to the search.
Souter's concurrence
Justice Souter wrote separately to "qualify some points" made in Part III of the Court's opinion. Though joining the majority in reversing the Ninth Circuit's decision, Souter wrote that the term "warrant" itself in the Fourth Amendment may be read to mean "a statement of authority that sets out the time at which (or in the case of anticipatory warrants, the condition on which) the authority begins."  He stated that the majority's rule against requiring this condition may cause consequences of "constitutional significance," as when an officer who is ignorant of the triggering condition executes the warrant before the condition occurs; Souter wrote that the government should be held to the terms of the condition in that situation, despite the unconditionally framed warrant. Souter also stated that the interest a property owner has in being notified of the accurate terms of a search has yet to be determined.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "United States v. Guest" ==> """
United States v. Guest, 383 U.S. 745 (1966), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court authored by Justice Potter Stewart, in which the court extended the protection of the 14th Amendment to citizens who suffer rights deprivations at the hands of private conspiracies, where there is minimal state participation in the conspiracy. The Court also held that there is Constitutional right to travel from state to state.
While the majority avoided the question of whether Congress, by appropriate legislation, has the power to punish private conspiracies, Justice Clark, writing in concurrence, asserted that "there now can be no doubt that the specific language of §5 empowers the Congress to enact laws punishing all conspiracies - with or without state action - that interfere with 14th Amendment rights." Justice Hugo Black and Justice Abe Fortas joined Clark's concurrence.
Background
The case arose out of the killing of Lemuel Penn, an African-American reserve officer who was returning from active duty training to Washington, D.C., where he was Assistant Superintendent of Washington, D.C. public schools. He was traveling north in a car with two other black Reserve officers when he was shot and killed on a bridge, just nine days after the Civil Rights Act of 1964 passed. 
The murder happened in Madison County, Georgia, and the alleged killers were charged but acquitted there by an all-white jury. The federal indictment in question arose after the acquittal. In District Court, the six defendants successfully "moved to dismiss the indictment on the ground that it did not charge an offense under the laws of the United States," according to the case. The Supreme Court reversed.
The argument revolved around whether or not Congress intended to apply equal protection rights of the 14th Amendment to citizens deprived of said rights on public facilities, such as  roads and bridges or interstate commerce facilities, by private actors with the collusion of public actors. In this case, "public actors" were considered the police who responded to the murderers' false reports that Penn and his cohorts had committed crimes.
Opinion of the Court
The question was whether or not 18 U.S.C. §241 of the Criminal Code could be applied to protect the rights of equal protection and due process secured by the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Court held that it could.
Concurrence/dissents
Justice William Brennan, Chief Justice Earl Warren and Justice William O. Douglas concurred in part and dissented in part. 
Brennan wrote: "(I) believe that §241 reaches such a private conspiracy, not because the 14th Amendment of its own force prohibits such a conspiracy, but because §241, as an exercise of congressional power under §5 of that Amendment, prohibits all conspiracies to interfere with the exercise of a 'right (secured) by the Constitution.'"
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 383
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment, section five case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1966 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "United States v. Haggar Apparel Co." ==> """
United States v. Haggar Apparel Co., 526 U.S. 380 (1999), is a United States Supreme Court holding that Chevron deference is appropriate for regulations issued by Customs on behalf of the Treasury.  The statutes authorizing customs classification regulations were found consistent with the usual rule that regulations of an administering agency warrant judicial deference; and nothing in the regulation in question persuaded the Court that the Customs and Border Patrol intended the regulation to have some lesser force and effect. The statutory scheme did not support the importer's argument that the regulation only applied to customs officers themselves as opposed to the adjudication of importers' refund suits in the Court of International Trade. The Customs Service (which is within the US Treasury Department) is charged with fixing duties applicable to imported goods under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury.
Facts
Haggar Apparel Co., the respondent, designs, manufactures, and markets apparel for men.  The matter arose from a refund proceeding for duties imposed on men's trousers shipped by Haggar to the United States from an assembly plant it controlled in Mexico. The fabric had been cut in the United States and then shipped to Mexico, along with the thread, buttons, and zippers necessary to complete the garments.  There the trousers were sewn and reshipped to the United States. If that had been the full extent of it, there would not have been a dispute, for if there were mere assembly without other steps, all agree the imported garments would have been eligible for the duty exemption Haggar claimed..
The Government claimed that the trousers were permapressed in Mexico.  This process involved baking, which the Customs Service claimed was a process in addition to assembly, and as such denied Haggar a duty exemption.  Haggar claimed the baking was simply part of the assembly process, or, in the words of the controlling statute, an "operation incidental to the assembly process."Subheading 9802.00.90, Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States, 19 U.S.C. 1202. Haggar's claim was difficult because Customs had issued an administrative regulation that deemed all permapressing operations as an additional step in manufacture, not part of assembly.  The regulation had been adopted in 1975 by the Commissioner of Customs upon approval by the Treasury Department, after notice-and-comment rulemaking.
Procedural posture
After being denied the duty exemption, Haggar brought suit in the Court of International Trade ("CIT"), which declined to find the regulation controlling and ruled in favor of Haggar.  On review, the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit declined to analyze the regulation with Chevron deference, and affirmed the CIT's ruling.
Haggar's arguments
Haggar advanced two sets of arguments in contending that Chevron analysis should not apply to the regulation.  First, Haggar claimed that the regulation was limited in application to customs officers themselves and was not intended to govern the adjudication of importers' refund suits in the CIT.  Second, relying on the authority and jurisdiction of the CIT, Haggar argued that even if Treasury did intend the regulation to bear on the determination of refund suits, the CIT had the power to interpret the tariff statute without giving the usual deference to regulations issued by the administering agency.
Decision
The Supreme Court found no support for the assertion that the statute only bound customs officers' classifications, and not the importer's themselves.  Rather, the Secretary of the Treasury is directed to establish and promulgate rules and regulations for the classification and assessment of duties.  Haggar tried to argue that this meant that the Secretary was only charged with ensuring that classifications were consistent among various points of entry, but the Court disagreed.
The Court also ruled that the CIT must, when appropriate, give regulations Chevron deference.  The Court noted that as early as 1809, Chief Justice Marshall had written in United States v. Vowell that for customs cases "if the question had been doubtful, the court would have respected the uniform construction which it is understood has been given by the treasury department ... upon similar questions."
See also
Customs valuation
Chevron v. Natural Resources Defense Council (1984)
United States v. Mead Corp. (2001), holding that Chevron deference did not apply to a tariff classification ruling issued by the Customs Service.
Footnotes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States trade law
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "United States v. Hamilton" ==> """
United States v. Hamilton, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 17 (1795), was a United States Supreme Court case in which a defendant committed on a charge of treason was released on bail, despite having been imprisoned upon a warrant of committal by a district court judge.Reports of cases ruled and adjudged in the several courts of the United States, and of Pennsylvania: held at the seat of the federal government, Volume 3 (Banks Law Pub. Co., 1905), pg. 16 The Judiciary Act of 1789 stated that "upon all arrests in criminal cases, bail shall be admitted, except where the punishment may be death, in which cases it shall not be admitted but by the supreme or a circuit court, or by a justice of the supreme court, or a judge of a district court, who shall exercise their discretion therein, regarding the nature and circumstances of the offence, and of the evidence, and the usages of law."An Act to establish the Judicial Courts of the United States, sess. i, chap. 20,  (1789), sec. 33. Ordinarily, habeas corpus was used to release prisoners held by the judgment of the executive, but not for those whose commitment had been authorized by a court order. Hamilton's attorney argued that the district court judge did not hold a hearing before issuing a warrant for his commitment to jail and that the affidavits alleging treasonous activity were weak, while the government urged that the Judiciary Act did not give the Supreme Court the jurisdiction to review the district court's decision unless there was new information or misconduct. The Supreme Court set bail, but without addressing either attorney's arguments.The United States v. Hamilton, .
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 3
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rutledge Court
Category:United States criminal procedure case law
Category:1795 in United States case law
Category:Prize warfare
Category:Original habeas cases
"""

From "United States v. Hansen" ==> """
United States v. Hansen (Docket 22-179) is a pending United States Supreme Court case about whether a federal law that criminalizes encouraging or inducing illegal immigration is unconstitutionally overbroad, violating the First Amendment right to free speech.
Background
Helaman Hansen operated an adult adoption program which he falsely claimed would lead to citizenship for undocumented immigrants. He persuaded victims to illegally come to the United States or overstay their visas. In a 2017 federal court trial, a jury convicted him of multiple counts of mail fraud, wire fraud, and encouraging or inducing illegal immigration for financial gain. The district court sentenced Hansen to 20 years in prison.
The two counts of encouraging or inducing were for violations of 8 U.S.C. § 1324(a)(1)(A)(iv), which states that it is a crime to "encourage[] or induce[] an alien to come to, enter, or reside in the United States, knowing or in reckless disregard of the fact that such coming to, entry, or residence is or will be in violation of law". Hansen appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, arguing that this provision was unconstitutionally overbroad under the First Amendment.
Meanwhile, the Court of Appeals was deciding another case, United States v. Sineneng-Smith, involving the same First Amendment question, and put Hansen's case on hold. Sineneng-Smith went to the Supreme Court, but the Supreme Court in 2020 decided that case on a procedural issue without deciding the First Amendment question.
Afterwards, the court of appeals resumed Hansen's case, ruling in Hansen's favor that the law was overbroad and unconstitutional. The government petitioned to the Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the case.
 Case information 
In February 2023, the ACLU along with the Federal Defender’s Office for the Eastern District of California filed a brief on behalf of Hansen, where they urged the Supreme Court to strike down the statute for violating the First Amendment. The ACLU argues that because the "encouragement" provision of the statute is so broad, it would make it a crime "for a grandmother to express a wish that her undocumented grandchild not leave the country, or for an attorney to advise that a noncitizen will forfeit statutory or constitutional rights or benefits if she leaves the country."
The Cato Institute, which filed an amicus brief in favor of Hansen, argued, "A law is facially overbroad when the amount of unprotected speech that it legitimately forbids is eclipsed by the amount of protected speech that it suppresses."
The federal government, in their brief, defends the law by arguing that "for more than a century, federal law has prescribed criminal penalties for 'encouraging' or 'inducing' certain violations of the immigration laws." As its starting point in defense of the law, the government's brief points to "the first general immigration statute" that Congress passed in 1882.Brief for the United States. United States of America, Petitioner v. Helaman Hansen. pp. 4-5.
Organizations filing an amicus brief include the National Immigration Project of the National Lawyers Guild, Asian Americans Advancing Justice, City and County of San Francisco, The Rutherford Institute, The Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the First Amendment Coalition Freedom of the Press Foundation, National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, Immigration Reform Law Institute, and Pfizer Inc.
The State of Montana also filed a brief on behalf of itself and 25 other U.S. states, encouraging the Supreme Court to reverse the appeals court decision, keeping the law intact.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2023 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Overbreadth case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "United States v. Harris" ==> """
United States v. Harris, 106 U.S. 629 (1883), or the Ku Klux Kase, was a case in which the US Supreme Court held that it was unconstitutional for the federal government to penalize crimes such as assault and murder in most circumstances.. The Court declared that only state governments have the power to penalize those crimes.
In the specific case, four men were removed from a Crockett County, Tennessee, jail by a group led by Sheriff R. G. Harris and 19 others. The four men were beaten, and one was killed. A deputy sheriff tried to prevent the act but failed.
Section 2 of the Force Act of 1871 was declared unconstitutional on the theory that an Act to enforce the Equal Protection Clause applied only to state actions, not individuals' actions.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 106
United States v. Morrison
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Criminal cases in the Waite Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:1883 in United States case law
Category:1883 in Tennessee
Category:Legal history of Tennessee
Category:Crockett County, Tennessee
Category:Ku Klux Klan
"""

From "United States v. Harriss" ==> """
United States v. Harriss, 347 U.S. 612 (1954), was a U.S. Supreme Court case applied directly to the Regulation of Lobbying Act.
Proceedings and outcome
Lobbyists challenged the Regulation of Lobbying Act for being unconstitutionally vague and unclear. In Harriss, the Supreme Court responded by upholding the act's constitutionality, but also by narrowing the scope and application of the act. The Court ruled that the act applies only to paid lobbyists who directly communicate with members of Congress on pending or proposed federal legislation. This means that lobbyists who visit with congressional staff members rather than members of Congress themselves are not considered lobbyists. In addition, the act covers only attempts to influence the passage or defeat of legislation in Congress, and excludes other congressional activities. Further, the act applies to and restricts only individuals who spend at least half of their time lobbying."Lobbying" from Answers.com
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 347
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Lobbying in the United States
Category:1954 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Hartwell" ==> """
United States v. Hartwell, 73 U.S. 385 (1867), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court which defined the characteristics of an Officer of the United States. An Officer, as opposed to a mere government employee, has a tenure, duration, emolument, and duties defined by law as opposed by contract. 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1867 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "United States v. Hatter" ==> """
United States v. Hatter, 532 U.S. 557 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned an alleged violation of the Compensation Clause of the United States Constitution when Congress extended Medicare and Social Security taxes to federal judge salaries. Additionally, the case dealt with whether a later increase of federal judge salaries, greater than the new taxes, remedied the potential violation.
Background
The Compensation Clause to the United States Constitution was written to help protect federal judges from external political pressures. There was a concern in the early United States that without such independence, the judiciary could become "dependent on" the other branches, which could skew their rulings. The question in Hatter involved this principle and other taxes Congress applied to the judiciary.
Congress extended Medicare to federal employees in 1982, including the taxes that were carried with it. Additionally, Congress required federal judges to pay into Social Security. A group of judges filed suit against both taxes, alleging a violation of the Compensation Clause of the Constitution. The Court of Federal Claims found that the judges' Medicare claims were "time barred" and that a later salary increase "cured" the Social Security tax increase violation. The group of judges appealed to the Supreme Court, who agreed to review the decision.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Breyer wrote the majority opinion for the Court, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices Kennedy, Souter, and Ginsburg. 
The opinion argued that the Social Security tax application was problematic as it "singled out then-sitting federal judges for unfavorable treatment". The determination that the Social Security tax was unconstitutional became the first instance in which the Court invalidated legislation as a discriminatory reduction of compensation. However, the Medicare tax was proper as it was not "discriminatory". The fact that one of the taxes was just a tax of "general application" meant that it could also apply to judges. 
The rule that came out of these decisions was that any "direct" reduction of judicial salaries is unconstitutional "whether or not the reduction is targeted at judges". The chances however that Congress would impose a "discriminatory" tax just on judges in the future are small, and thus the effect of this decision may not be that broad. The Court refused to hear cases after Hatter which dealt with cost-of-living salary changes.
Justices Stevens and O'Connor recused themselves from participation in the case.
Concurring/Dissenting opinions
Scalia's dissent
Justice Scalia wrote an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part. He agreed with the majority that the Social Security tax was unconstitutional but went farther and said the Medicare tax was "also unconstitutional". He noted the unique nature of compensation rules in relation to the judiciary, which unlike other federal employees except the President, cannot be diminished during their time of service.
Thomas' dissent
Justice Thomas too wrote an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part. In a two sentence statement, he simply said he would "affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals in its entirety". His basis was an older case, Evans v. Gore, 253 U.S. 245 (1920). Evans dealt with the application of federal income tax laws to the executive and judiciary. However, the Supreme Court functionally overruled Evans on the 'net reduction' standard.
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Compensation Clause case law
"""

From "United States v. Hayes" ==> """
United States v. Hayes, 555 U.S. 415 (2009), is a United States Supreme Court case interpreting Section 921(a)(33)(A) of the federal Gun Control Act of 1968, as amended in 1996. The Court held that a domestic relationship is not necessarily a defining element of the predicate offense to support a conviction for possession of a firearm by a person previously convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence.
Background
The Gun Control Act had long prohibited convicted felons from owning firearms. In 1996 the Act was amendedSection 922(g), defining the categories of persons to whom the ban extended, was expanded to add a new category under Section 922(g)(9), which included "a person convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence" within the firearms possession prohibition. In addition, a definition of "crime of domestic violence" was added as a new Section 933(a)(33)(A). to extend this prohibition to persons convicted of a "misdemeanor crime of domestic violence." 
The question before the Court was the statutory meaning of this prohibition, and how far it extended: did it require a state to have a specific statute that prohibited misdemeanor crimes of domestic violence, under which a person charged with an Act violation was convicted? Or did it only require that a person was convicted of a misdemeanor which in fact constituted "domestic violence," without regard to whether the misdemeanor statute specifically proscribed crimes of "domestic violence"?
Facts and Issues
The facts of the Hayes case illustrate the distinction. In 1994 Hayes had been convicted in West Virginia of the misdemeanor of simple battery. The offense was committed against his wife in a domestic dispute. In 2004, the police found him in possession of firearms. Had he violated the Act?
The prosecution claimed the 1994 conviction for simple battery was sufficient to place him under the federal firearms ban. He had been convicted of a violent misdemeanor (battery) under state law. And the battery was, in fact, against his wife. This was enough, the prosecution alleged, to make that a conviction of a predicate crime of "domestic violence" which would, accordingly, bring him within the scope of the federal prohibition.
Hayes claimed that more was required before he was subject to the federal firearms possession ban of the Gun Control Act. He argued that the state must have a statute that specifically defined and prohibited "domestic violence" as an independent crime; a person convicted of that crime would then be subject to the federal prohibition under Act, but a person only convicted of another crime - such as simple battery - would not be so subjected. 
Hayes agreed the person he battered was, in fact, his wife; but in 1994 the state of West Virginia did not have a statute that prohibited "domestic violence" as a specific crime. Therefore, Hayes argued, it was in effect legally impossible for him to be banned from firearm possession under the "domestic violence" extension for acts committed within West Virginia.
Hayes moved to dismiss the federal indictment but the trial court denied his motion. He entered a guilty plea, subject to his right to appeal the motion's denial, and the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals agreed with Hayes on appeal. It decided that the state misdemeanor law must contain, as an element of the crime, a "domestic relationship between the offender and the victim," 482 F.3d 749, 751 (2007), and that the indictment was indeed faulty. The Supreme Court then accepted the case to resolve a split among the circuits.
Supreme Court decision
The Supreme Court agreed with the Government that the indictment was sufficient and that the Fourth Circuit's interpretation of the Gun Control amendments was erroneous. 
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:United States federal firearms case law
"""

From "United States v. Haymond" ==> """
United States v. Haymond, 588 U.S. ___ (2019), is a case in which the U.S. Supreme Court struck down 's five-year mandatory minimum prison sentence for certain sex offenses committed by federal supervised releasees as unconstitutional unless the charges are proven to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt.. Justices Ginsburg, Sotomayor, and Kagan joined Gorsuch's plurality opinion, while Breyer provided the necessary fifth vote with his narrow concurrence that began by saying he agreed with much of Justice Alito's dissent, which was joined by Justices Roberts, Thomas, and Kavanaugh.
The Court was considering whether Congress can require mandatory minimum prison sentences that exceed the minimum for the original offense, and allow maximum prison sentences that exceed the maximum for the original offense, in federal supervised release revocation cases where the facts were not proven to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt. The supervised release statute requires only that there be a judge's finding by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation of federal supervised release has occurred.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit, relying heavily on United States v. Booker, excised the offending provision, which had been introduced in the Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act of 2006, and whose required application in this case the sentencing judge had found "repugnant."
Justice Samuel Alito noted in oral argument that this case has the potential to bring down the entire system of federal supervised release. According to a Congressional Research Service report, "The Supreme Court’s ultimate decision in Haymond could have significant implications going forward for the over 16,000 federal inmates currently incarcerated and the nearly 9,000 former federal inmates currently serving terms of supervised release for sex offenses, as well as for how Congress crafts laws concerning supervised release." 
Background
On 21 January 2010, Andre Ralph Haymond was convicted of possession of child pornography and sentenced to 38 months imprisonment and 10 years of supervised release. Haymond’s supervised release began on April 24, 2013. Two and a half years after Haymond’s supervised release, a surprise search by probation officers of his apartment was conducted, resulting in the seizure of Haymond's phone, his supervised release was revoked for knowing possession of thirteen images of child pornography in his phone's gallery cache, among other violations.
If it had been an ordinary violation, Haymond's original conviction for a Class C felony would have permitted a term of reimprisonment between zero and two years, pursuant to . He was instead sentenced to five years in prison because the violation involving possession of child pornography triggered a five-year mandatory minimum. The judge noted that had it not been for the mandatory minimum, he "probably would have sentenced in the range of two years or less." With regard to the sufficiency of the evidence, the district court stated, "If this were a criminal trial and the Court were the jury, the United States would have lost" and the appellate court noted, "This is a close case, even under a preponderance of the evidence standard".Haymond, 869 F.3d at 1159.
Relevant statute
Arguments
According to the government, the statute's prison requirement is similar to what happens after revocation of parole and probation, in which the defendant has received a benefit that is being taken away due to a violation. Also, the government argues that the jury trial right in the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution does not apply to proceedings that begin long after criminal prosecution has ended and concern sentence-implementation facts that did not exist when the criminal prosecution occurred.
In oral argument, Justice Sonia Sotomayor expressed due process and jury rights concerns under the Fifth and Sixth Amendments, respectively, noting that both were implicated in the Apprendi v. New Jersey line of cases, including Alleyne v. United States, which requires facts to be proven to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt if they constitute elements of the offense, i.e. if they change the sentencing range by altering the statutory minimum or maximum sentences.
Sotomayor raised the distinction between federal parole and federal supervised release, and the government noted that one way in which supervised release is different "is that there is a way under the supervised release statute for the term of reimprisonment to exceed even the period of conditional liberty that's represented by the supervised release itself." Justice Elena Kagan asked, "Isn't that the difference between parole cases, is that you can never get into this problem of -- of serving longer than the original authorized sentence?" to which the government responded that "we don't actually have a reimprisonment term here that is longer than the original sentence because the original term of supervised release was 10 years and his reimprisonment is for five." The defense argued that "it doesn't matter.  What does matter is that he was looking at a maximum sentence of life without parole. And the Court's cases in Frank, Duncan and Blanton versus City of Las Vegas all point out to the fact that, when you consider the right to jury trial, you look at what the maximum prison sentence could be."
The government said that the case of Morrissey v. Brewer, in which the court held that a jury finding beyond a reasonable doubt is not required for parole revocation, was precisely analogous. The government also brought up the case of Gagnon v. Scarpelli, applying similar principles to probation revocation proceedings. The government noted that "this Court has considered things like revocation of good time credits to be the denial of a right and, nevertheless, not attached full protections to them.  And it's considered the revocation of conditional liberty to implicate a defendant's liberty rights in the parole context and, nevertheless, not attached full due process, let alone Sixth Amendment, protections."
Proposed remedies
One proposed remedy was for the court to require the convening of juries for revocation hearings. According to the defense, it would be better for Congress to devise a remedy, since "You would have burden of proof issues, you'd have confrontation issues, you'd have potential double jeopardy issues that would arise.  There would be potential self-incrimination issues.  You'd be dealing with whether there needs to be something presented to the grand jury in the first place." He also argued that mandatory minimums and potential life sentences for violations would transform revocations, "a situation that has always been highly discretionary and . . . focused on the individual defendant and what he needs" into an adversarial system.
References
External links
 United States v. Haymond
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States due process case law
"""

From "United States v. Heirs of De Haro" ==> """
United States v. The Heirs of Francisco De Haro, 63 U.S. (22 How.) 293 (1860), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a plat made in 1853 of land adjudged to be covered by a Mexican grant, and confirmed in 1862, is sustained as the correct designation of the property covered by the grant.United States v. The Heirs of Francisco De Haro, .
Background
In 1843 Francisco De Haro obtained an affirmation of a Mexican land grant from the then Governor of California.  The De Haro's maintained possession of that land continuously since that time.  At his death, the United States land commissioners found against the heirs who sought to confirm their title to the land.  The U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California reversed that judgment and confirmed the title.  The United States appealed and the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear the case.
Opinion of the Court
Affirmed.  Justice John McLean delivered the opinion of the court.  McLean stated that the lower court had found that the date on the affirmation of the grant had been altered, and thus could not be used against the heirs.  In addition, the decedent and his heirs had maintained possession of the land for 16 years and had made improvements.  The heirs' title of the land was confirmed.
References
External links
Category:1860 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
"""

From "United States v. Hooe" ==> """
United States v. Hooe, 5 U.S. (Cranch 1) 318 (1803), is a case of the Supreme Court of the United States. It was a case that hinged mainly on procedural issues relating to the documents that must accompany an appeal from courts within the District of Columbia..
Background of the case
The Supreme Court had already ruled in Jennings v. The Perseverance,  that the writs of error must be accompanied by a factual record..  The act of Congress 27 February 1801, creating the District of Columbia held that, writs should be prosecuted in the same manner as had been the case of writs of error on judgments or appeals upon orders or decrees rendered in the circuit court of the United States.
The decision
The court held that the act of congress and the prior precedent, when taken together meant that all appeals from the District of Columbia must be accompanied by a statement of facts.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 5
Robert T. Hooe
Notes and references
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:Legal history of the District of Columbia
Category:1803 in the United States
Category:1803 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Hubbell" ==> """
United States v. Hubbell, 530 U.S. 27 (2000), was a United States Supreme Court case involving Webster Hubbell, who had been indicted on various tax-related charges, and mail and wire fraud charges, based on documents that the government had subpoenaed from him..  The Fifth Amendment provides that no person “shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself.” The Supreme Court has, since 1976, applied the so-called “act-of-production doctrine.” Under this doctrine, a person can invoke his Fifth Amendment rights against the production of documents only where the very act of producing the documents is incriminating in itself.
Background
This case involved the second prosecution of Webster Hubbell by the Independent Counsel. The prosecution arose from the Independent Counsel's attempt to determine whether Hubbell had violated a promise (part of a plea agreement) to cooperate in the Whitewater investigation. In October 1996, while Hubbell was in jail as a result of the conviction on the guilty plea in the Whitewater case, the Independent Counsel served him with a subpoena duces tecum calling for the production of eleven categories of documents before a grand jury.
In November 1996, Hubbell appeared before the grand jury and invoked his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination. In response to questioning by the prosecutor, Hubbell initially refused "to state whether there are documents within my possession, custody, or control responsive to the Subpoena." The prosecutor then produced an order, which had been obtained from the District Court pursuant to , directing Hubbell to respond to the subpoena and granting him immunity "to the extent allowed by law."
Hubbell then produced 13,120 pages of documents and records. He also responded to a series of questions that established that the produced documents were all of the documents in his custody or control that were responsive to the commands in the subpoena (with the exception of a few documents he claimed were shielded by the attorney-client and attorney work-product privileges).
The contents of the documents produced by Hubbell provided the Independent Counsel with the information that led to the second prosecution.
Procedural history
The U.S. District Court dismissed the indictment against Hubbell, and the Court of Appeals reversed that decision. The United States Supreme Court agreed to hear the case. Oral arguments were heard February 22, 2000, and the Court announced its decision on June 5.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court ruled in favor of Hubbell. The Court held that the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination protects a witness from being compelled to disclose the existence of incriminating documents that the Government is unable to describe with reasonable particularity. The Court also ruled that if the witness produces such documents, pursuant to a grant of immunity, the government may not use them to prepare criminal charges against him.
Thomas concurrence
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a separate concurrence examining a wide range of historical materials on the original meaning of the Fifth Amendment. He concluded that the Constitution should protect against the “compelled production not just of incriminating testimony, but of any incriminating evidence.”
Rehnquist Dissenting Statement
Chief Justice William Rehnquist issued a short dissenting statement, dissenting in part for the reasons which had been given in the dissent in the Court of Appeals below. 
Quotations from the Supreme Court's opinion
Before the U.S. Supreme Court, the prosecutor argued that because the government's possession of the documents was the fruit only of the simple physical act of Hubbell's production of those documents, Hubbell's immunity should not prevent the prosecutor from making derivative use of the documents, even though Hubbell's production of those documents was the result of Hubbell's compliance with the court order granting him immunity.
The United States Supreme Court rejected the prosecutor's argument. The Court stated:
It was unquestionably necessary for respondent [Webster Hubbell] to make extensive use of "the contents of his own mind" in identifying the hundreds of documents responsive to the requests in the subpoena.  .... The Government's anemic view of respondent's act of production as a mere physical act that is principally non-testimonial in character and can be entirely divorced from its "implicit" testimonial aspect so as to constitute a "legitimate, wholly independent source" ... for the documents produced simply fails to account for these realities.
The Supreme Court also stated:
The question is not whether the response to the subpoena may be introduced into evidence at his criminal trial. That would surely be a prohibited "use" of the immunized act of production.... But the fact that the Government intends no such use of the act of production leaves open the separate question whether it has already made "derivative use" of the testimonial aspect of that act in obtaining the indictment against respondent and in preparing its case for trial. It clearly has.
It is apparent from the text of the subpoena itself that the prosecutor needed respondent's assistance both to identify potential sources of information and to produce those sources.... Given the breadth of the description of the 11 categories of documents called for by the subpoena, the collection and production [by Webster Hubbell] of the materials demanded was tantamount to answering a series of interrogatories asking a witness [in this case, Webster Hubbell] to disclose the existence and location of particular documents fitting certain broad descriptions. The assembly of literally hundreds of pages of material in response to a request for "any and all documents reflecting, referring, or relating to any direct or indirect sources of money or other things of value received by or provided to" an individual or members of his family during a 3-year period ... is the functional equivalent of the preparation of an answer to either a detailed written interrogatory or a series of oral questions at a discovery deposition. Entirely apart from the contents of the 13,120 pages of materials that respondent produced in this case, it is undeniable that providing a catalog of existing documents fitting within any of the 11 broadly worded subpoena categories could provide a prosecutor with a "lead to incriminating evidence," or "a link in the chain of evidence needed to prosecute." ...
It is abundantly clear that the testimonial aspect of respondent's act of producing subpoenaed documents was the first step in a chain of evidence that led to this prosecution. The documents did not magically appear in the prosecutor's office like "manna from heaven." They arrived there only after respondent [Hubbell] asserted his constitutional privilege, received a grant of immunity, and—under the compulsion of the District Court's order—took the mental and physical steps necessary to provide the prosecutor with an accurate inventory of the many sources of potentially incriminating evidence sought by the subpoena. It was only through respondent's truthful reply to the subpoena that the Government received the incriminating documents of which it made "substantial use ... in the investigation that led to the indictment." ....
The Court stated:
[ . . . ] the constitutional privilege against self-incrimination protects the target of a grand jury investigation from being compelled to answer questions designed to elicit information about the existence of sources of potentially incriminating evidence. That constitutional privilege has the same application to the testimonial aspect of a response to a subpoena seeking discovery of those sources….
The Court also stated:
The Government cannot cure this deficiency through the overbroad argument that a businessman such as respondent will always possess general business and tax records that fall within the broad categories described in this subpoena. …[R]espondent's act of production had a testimonial aspect, at least with respect to the existence and location of the documents sought by the Government's subpoena….
The Supreme Court upheld the lower courts' decisions throwing out the charges against Hubbell.
Summary of the Act of Production Doctrine
Under the Act of Production Doctrine, the act of an individual in producing documents or materials (e.g., in response to a subpoena) may have a "testimonial aspect" for purposes of the individual's right to assert the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination to the extent that the individual's act of production provides information not already in the hands of law enforcement personnel about the (1) existence; (2) custody; or (3) authenticity, of the documents or materials produced.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 530
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
In re Boucher
United States v. Fricosu
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Whitewater controversy
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "United States v. Huck Mfg. Co." ==> """
United States v. Huck Mfg. Co., 382 U.S. 197 (1965), is the most recent patent-license price-fixing case to reach the United States Supreme Court. It was inconclusive, as the Court split 4–4Justice Abe Fortas did not participate. and affirmed the decision of the lower court without opinion., affirming the judgment in 
Background
thumb|right|250px|Huck's patented lockbolt
Huck Mfg. Co. and Townsend Co. were the principal U.S. manufacturers of lockbolts. A lockbolt is a two-part metal fastening device used to join together permanently two or more pieces of metal. They are used in the manufacture of aircraft, and also ships, railroad cars, and other vehicles. Huck owns United States Patents Nos. 2,531,048 and 2,531,049 on lockbolts, invented by Louis Huck, issued in 1950. After patent infringement disputes, in 1954 Huck licensed Townsend on the following terms:
 The license to Townsend is exclusive for two years and then nonexclusive, with a 5% royalty.
 Townsend grants Huck a non-exclusive royalty-free license with a right to sublicense if Townsend acquires any patent rights on lockbolts.
 During the two-year exclusive period Townsend shall maintain at least Huck's prices on lockbolts per Huck's published price schedule.
 In addition to the written agreement, a verbal side agreement between defendants Huck and Townsend provided that Huck would not grant licenses under the lockbolt patents to others so long as Townsend maintained Huck's established prices.227 F. Supp. at 796-99.
Although Huck and Townsend met from time to time since 1954, they did not meet "for the purpose of fixing prices or to enable Townsend to fix or dictate the prices charged for the patented lockbolts." Huck granted only two other licenses, both of which were limited to the making and selling of lockbolts made of titanium which Huck and Townsend do not make, and neither of these licenses require price maintenance.227 F. Supp. at 799-800.
District court proceedings
The Government filed a criminal indictment of Huck and Townsend in 1961, charging price fixing. At the close of the Government's case, the district court granted a motion for acquittal on the ground that the facts established did not constitute violations of Section 1 of the Sherman Act without evidence that what was obtained by defendants by their alleged agreements was more than a normal and reasonable reward to a patentee. The Government then proceeded to sue the defendants civilly using the record in the criminal case, by stipulation, as its evidence. .227 F. Supp. at 793. The defendants denied the Government's charges of a combination and conspiracy in unreasonable restraint of trade and to monopolize interstate trade in lockbolts, but had not put in their evidence; on that record, the district court granted defendant's motions to dismiss the case.227 F. Supp. at 794-95.
The waiver and mootness issues
At a civil pretrial conference, Government counsel allegedly stated that the Government is not attempting to have the doctrine of the General Electric case overruled and only maintains that the facts in this case do not fall within that doctrine—in other words, that the doctrine of the General Electric case is still good law but does not apply here because the defendants' actions in this case are illegal because they are outside the application of the doctrine—went beyond what was permissible under General Electric.
There was some disagreement about what actually had been said, counsel for the Government (Assistant Attorney General Turner) suggesting to the Court in oral argument that the so-called waiver came only from erroneous notes taken by the judge's law clerk. The Government argued in the Supreme Court that any failure of the Government to raise the issue at trial did not (1) make it unfair to the defendants to consider the issue on appeal, or (2) deprive the Court of any significant record material that would have materially assisted the Court in deciding the issues presented concerning the General Electric case. In hearing oral argument, the Chief Justice said (at least for him) this was an issue of whether the Government was misleading the Court.
Government counsel maintained that "the relevant factual and legal issues raised by the GE Rule are simply not issues on which any record would have provided this Court with any material help, and it is for that reason that I think it is appropriate now . . . to take a careful look at the merits because if we are right on this, we think the Court should take this opportunity to overrule the General Electric case." Any evidence concerning the GE rule, he said, would be speculative and thus "worthless." He also insisted that the underlying facts were kept secret and could not be ascertained.
Another troubling issue was that the patents had two years to run, so that it was unlikely that the final judgment could occur during the life of the patents. Some justices wondered whether it was worthwhile to decide the case in light of this factor.Oral argument.
District court's view of merits
The district court determined "upon the evidence submitted that the case at bar is in all material respects the same as and ruled by the decision in United States v. General Electric Co. The Government urged that the case was controlled by United States v. Masonite Corp., United States v. Univis Lens Co., United States v. Line Material Co., United States v. United States Gypsum Co., United States v. New Wrinkle, Inc., Newburgh Moire Co. v. Superior Moire Co., United States v. Besser Mfg. Co.,; United States v. Krasnov, United States v. General Electric Co.United States v. General Electric Co.,  The district court disagreed. It said that the present case was distinguished from these cases "in substantially the same respects as the General Electric case: was, in that:
In the case at bar the Court finds no industry-wide price-fixing licensing, no agreement or conspiracy between a plurality of licensees preventing grant of other licenses by the patent owner, no granting of a plurality of price-fixing licenses to a plurality of competing licenses, no cross licensing by one patent owner creating by contract in another the power to issue licenses and fix prices under patents which are not owned by the licensor, no pooling of independently owned competing patents with price-fixing licenses under the pooled competing patents, no arrangements for control of resale prices of patented devices, and no agreements for fixing prices on unpatented articles—some or all of which practices were found to be controlling aspects of the situations in the cases above mentioned on which the Government relies.227 F. Supp. at 805.
The district court therefore concluded:
[U]upon the evidence submitted by the plaintiff, and the law applicable thereto, that the plaintiff has not shown by preponderance of evidence that the defendants have or are engaged in a combination and conspiracy in unreasonable restraint of trade and to monopolize interstate trade and commerce in lockbolts in violation of Sections 1 and 2 of the Sherman Act, and has not shown any right to relief as prayed.
[T]he plaintiff has failed to prove a violation of Sections 1 and 2 of the Sherman Act for the additional reason that it failed to show that the patent arrangements between Huck and Townsend were designed  [806]  to or did secure a reward beyond that to which Huck as the patent owner was legally entitled.227 F. Supp. at 805-06.
Proceedings in Supreme Court
The Government appealed to the Supreme Court, which affirmed without opinion because it was divided 4–4.
Commentary
● Richard W. McLaren, Assistant Attorney General in charge of the Antitrust Division, was quoted as saying:
[T]he rule of General Electric has been getting narrower all the time. As you know, the Supreme Court has twice split four to four on the issue of whether to overrule the General Electric case altogether. In the more recent effort, United States v. Huck Manufacturing Co., a procedural error in the lower court hampered the Government's position. We believe that, when the question is properly brought to the Supreme Court again, the Court will completely overrule the General Electric doctrine. Apparently our confidence is shared by members of the bar who 'have occasion to draw up patent licenses, since we seem to be having some difficulty in finding an appropriate case in which to present the question to the Supreme Court.J. Patrick Kittler, Current State of Patent and Know-How Licensing, 27  691, 706 (1972).
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:1965 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Hudson" ==> """
United States v. Hudson and Goodwin, 11 U.S. (7 Cranch) 32 (1812), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that Congress must first enact a constitutional law criminalizing an activity, attach a penalty, and give the federal courts jurisdiction over the offense in order for the court to render a conviction.
Facts
Barzillai Hudson and George Goodwin, the defendants in the case, were charged with a libel on the President and Congress, and of having accused them of secretly voting to give Napoleon Bonaparte $2 million to make a treaty with Spain.  The circuit court was divided on whether it could exercise common law jurisdiction over such cases.
Decision
Justice William Johnson, Jr. delivered the opinion of the Court. He first explained that the federal government is one of limited powers, as set forth in the Constitution. Furthermore, only the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court was explicitly defined in Article III of the U.S. Constitution.  Since the lower federal courts were created by Congress with the Judiciary Act of 1789, their jurisdiction had to be defined by Congress. Therefore, the Court reasoned that since Congress has the power to create such courts, the principles of limited government militate in favor of limiting their jurisdiction to specific acts specified by Congress.
The Court held, "The legislative authority of the Union must first make an act a crime, affix a punishment to it, and declare the Court that shall have jurisdiction of the offence." In dicta, he also mentioned an exception to the general rule. Courts have some implied powers, such as punishing litigants for contumacy (contempt of court) and enforcing court orders.
Impact
The case effectively closed the door on the lower federal courts' powers to convict defendants for common law crimes and mandated Congress to define criminal jurisdiction specifically, through legislation.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 11
References
Gary D. Rowe, The Sound of Silence: United States v. Hudson & Goodwin, the Jeffersonian Ascendancy, and the Abolition of Federal Common Law Crimes, 101  919 (1992).
External links
Page from History of the U.S. Supreme Court website, explaining the background and context of the case (scroll down to find this case).
Category:1812 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States Supreme Court criminal cases
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:Federal common law case law
Category:Criminal cases in the Marshall Court
"""

From "United States v. Indianapolis & St. Louis Railroad Co." ==> """
United States v. Indianapolis & St. Louis Railroad Co., 113 U.S. 711 (1885), regarded a suit that was brought to foreclose mortgages given to secure bonds issued by the Indianapolis and St. Louis Railroad Company. A final decree of foreclosure having been passed, the mortgaged property was sold, and the sale was confirmed by the court. The United States intervened by petition, and asked that certain sums, alleged to be due to the government on account of taxes, be first paid out of the proceeds..
It appeared that certain interest coupons of the bonds of the company were payable and were paid on the first days of September and November 1870, and that certain other interest coupons of the same company were payable on the first day of January 1872, and were then paid out of its earnings made prior to that date and during the year 1871.
The court below held:
That the Act of July 14, 1870, 16 Stat. 269, c. 255, § 15, did not impose an internal revenue tax on interest coupons of the bonds of the railroad company payable and paid during the last five months of that year.
That the law did not impose an internal revenue tax on interest coupons of such bonds payable and paid on the first day of January 1872.
The United States acquiesces in the judgment in respect to the first of these claims, but contends that the Act of July 14, 1870, imposed a tax upon interest coupons that were paid out of the corporation earnings for 1871, although such payment was not due nor made until January 1, 1872. This question depends upon the construction of § 15 of the act of 1870, which provides:
In construing this section in Railroad Co. v. United States, 101 U. S. 550, the Court said:
The judgment was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago and St. Louis Railway
Category:Railway litigation in 1885
Category:Foreclosure
"""

From "United States v. International Boxing Club of New York, Inc." ==> """
United States v. International Boxing Club of New York, 348 U.S. 236 (1955), often referred to as International Boxing Club or just International Boxing, was an antitrust decision of the U.S. Supreme Court. By a 7–2 margin, the justices ruled that the exemption it had previously upheld for Major League Baseball was peculiar and unique to that sport and that it did not apply to boxing. Since it met the definition of interstate commerce, the government could therefore proceed with a trial to prove IBCNY and the other defendants had conspired to monopolize the market for championship boxing in the United States.
It was the first time another sport had argued it was covered by the same exemption as baseball by virtue of being a professional sport. Chief Justice Earl Warren, writing for the majority, admitted that it would never have reached the Court but for the baseball exemption, and dissenting justices Felix Frankfurter and Sherman Minton were unsparing in their criticism of the arbitrary nature of this distinction.
The case was remanded for trial, which the government won, forcing the breakup of some of the defendant companies. An appeal of that decision also was ultimately decided by the Supreme Court four years later, upholding the wide discretion  and scope of district court judges in shaping remedies for antitrust violations.
Background of the case
In January 1949 James D. Norris and Arthur Wirtz, who controlled boxing at several major arenas including Madison Square Garden, Chicago Stadium and Detroit Olympia through the International Boxing Club of New York, paid the recently retired Joe Louis $100,000 for four fighters he managed. They agreed that those fighters would fight it out among themselves for the new heavyweight title, and in return fight only in matches Norris and Wirtz promoted for several years.
This gave them an effective monopoly on all major boxing matches save those in the flyweight and bantamweight divisions. From 1949 to 1955 all but two championship fights took place under their control. They also secured exclusive television contracts for twice-weekly fights at the Garden, at a time when boxing was increasingly coming to depend on television revenues.
Trial and appeal
The Justice Department began investigating for possible antitrust violations and brought the IBCNY to trial in the Southern District of New York under the Sherman Antitrust Act in 1953. Before it started, the defendants moved to dismiss the complaint, citing the Court's recent decision in Toolson v. New York Yankees () to uphold the antitrust exemption granted Major League Baseball in 1922's Federal Baseball Club v. National League (). Like baseball, they reasoned, the interstate travel required to facilitate boxing was incidental to the staging of fights and thus boxing was not subject to antitrust law as it was not interstate commerce.Edmonds, Ed;  in Congress and Boxing: A Legislative History, 1960-2003, William Hein & Sons, Buffalo, New York, , 2005, 2. "After the district court granted the motion, the United States appealed directly to the United States Supreme Court under the Expediting Act."
The district court granted the motion. Immediately afterward, the government appealed the dismissal directly to the Supreme Court under the Expediting Act.
Decision
Chief Justice Earl Warren wrote for the majority. Felix Frankfurter and Sherman Minton dissented, with Minton signing Frankfurter's opinion as well.
Majority
"The question is perhaps a novel one in that this Court has never before considered the antitrust status of the boxing business", Warren wrote. "Yet, if it were not for Federal Baseball and Toolson, we think that it would be too clear for dispute that the Government's allegations bring the defendants within the scope of the Act."International Boxing Club, 348 U.S. at 240–241. Boxing clearly involved interstate arrangements, he said, particularly with broadcasting involved, and as early as Hart v. B.F. Keith Vaudeville Exchange () the Court had been clear that baseball's antitrust exemption could not be claimed by any other business.International Boxing Club, 348 U.S. at 242.
Prior to the Court's consideration of Toolson, he recalled, Congress had considered and rejected other bills intended specifically to genericize the baseball exemption. "The issue confronting us is therefore not whether a previously granted exemption should continue," he concluded, "but whether an exemption should be granted in the first instance. And that issue is for Congress to resolve, not this Court."International Boxing Club, 348 U.S. at 243.
Dissents
"It would baffle the subtlest ingenuity to find a single differentiating factor between other sporting exhibitions, whether boxing or football or tennis, and baseball", Frankfurter began.International Boxing Club, 348 U.S. at 248 (Frankfurter, J., dissenting). The Toolson majority, which he had been part of, had applied stare decisis, the legal doctrine under which flawed decisions can be upheld as the lesser of two evils. But here he found his colleagues irrational and inconsistent.
Minton, too, saw flawed logic. Unlike Frankfurter, he believed that boxing generally did not constitute interstate commerce, noting that the broadcasters and sponsors had not been named as defendants by the government, and that the Court was turning Federal Baseballs conclusion on its head.
He conceded that Louis had a monopoly on the championship when he retired and gave the defendants exclusives on the four fighters' championship contests, but from competition in the ring, not the marketplace. "As I see it, boxing is not trade or commerce. There can be no monopoly or restraint of nonexistent commerce or trade", he concluded.International Boxing Club, 348 U.S. at 253.
Legacy
The antitrust suit proceeded and the government won. The IBCNY appealed the divestitures proposed by the judge as having gone past the original offense, and that case came to the Supreme Court again as International Boxing Club of New York v. United States (). Again the justices ruled in the government's favor, and Norris and Wirtz dissolved the organization and sold their interest in the other defendant organizations.
While they left boxing, they remained involved in professional sports as owners of the Chicago Blackhawks National Hockey League franchise. Wirtz's grandson Rocky is today the team's principal owner.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Warren Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:Sports case law
Category:History of boxing
Category:1955 in United States case law
Category:1955 in boxing
"""

From "United States v. Interstate Commerce Commission" ==> """
United States v. Interstate Commerce Commission, 337 U.S. 426 (1949), is a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States addressing several issues, including the judicial standard of one party's inability to sue itself, the ability of the United States government specifically to sue federally affiliated departments, and the ability of courts to determine legislative intent. While this decision did not have many broad implications, it did offer a more "common-sense" understanding of determining what constitutes a justiciable controversy.
Background
During World War II, it was a common practice of many railroad companies to issue wharfage charges on customers when transporting goods from railroad cars and onto piers, or vice versa. At some point during the war, the United States government (referred to by the Court in its decision as the "Government") took over operating control of a number of piers in Norfolk, Virginia. Instead of using the railroad companies' wharfage services, the Government transferred its cargo to and from piers using its own materials. The Government, not requiring any railroad services apart from transporting the goods to and from the site, requested that it be granted an allowance for the wharfage fees, effectively asking for a refund of fees already paid before the request was made. The railroads refused to make this allowance, prompting the Government to request that the railroads then perform the services themselves, a request which the railroads also denied.
The Government, in turn, filed a complaint with the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) against the railroads. In this complaint, the Government argued that, because the railroads had not performed the service that usually called for the wharfage fees, it was, "unjust, unreasonable, discriminatory, [and] excessive" for the railroads to exact payment. The complaint went on to request that the ICC declare the railroads' actions as unlawful (claiming that they violated the Interstate Commerce Act ("Act")), and to award the Government damages for the illegal exaction of wharfage fees. The ICC found that the fees imposed upon the Government were not unreasonable or in violation of the Act. The ICC denied reparations and dismissed the Government's complaint.
After the ICC's decision, the United States government sought relief in United States District Court for the District of Columbia to have the decision rescinded. In this complaint, the U.S. Government argued that the ICC's decision was capricious, arbitrary, and based on a misapplication of law. Language in the 28 U.S.C. 46 required that any judicial action taken to set aside a decision of the ICC "shall be brought... against the United States," which effectively meant that the United States was bringing suit against itself. As such, the District Court required the Attorney General to appear in court as both plaintiff and defendant on behalf of the Government. The District Court dismissed the case without addressing the matter in contention, basing their decision on the common law standard that one party cannot bring suit against itself; accordingly, they reasoned, the United States could not bring suit against the United States.
Issues presented
In addition to the facts of the case proper, the Court first had to address the concerns raised by the District Court that prompted them to dismiss the Government's suit. Namely, it appeared that the lawsuit, as necessarily constructed by statute, caused the United States to sue itself. Similarly, the Court addressed the argument made by the railroads that, because the Act specified the United States as the defendant in this sort of case, Congress crafted the Act with the intention of preventing the Government from challenging the ICC's orders. 
Another facet of the suit that the Court addressed was the defendant's argument that the decision made by the ICC was not subject to judicial review. For precedent, the defendant cited part 9 of the Interstate Commerce Act (49 U.S.C. 9) which states, in short, that a party pursuing damages against a common carrier has the choice of bringing action against said carrier with the ICC or in any U.S. district court of "competent jurisdiction." Because the Government had already pursued relief with the ICC, it was argued that the avenue of judicial review was closed.
The final two points that the Court addressed were that of court composition and the ability for the case to be heard on its merits. Specifically, the Court decided on whether the district court hearing this case should be composed of three judges or just one, whether a decision of such court could be appealed directly to the Supreme Court, and if, in fact, the district court could hear and decide on the case based on issues of merit rather than issues of standing.
Decision
Associate Justice Hugo Black, joined by Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson and Associate Justices Reed, Douglas, Murphy, and Rutledge delivered the opinion of the Court. In brief, the Court ruled that the District Court's decision to dismiss the Government's complaint was improper, and ordered the dismissal reversed, remanding the complaint back to the lower court for a hearing based on the case's merits.
In the matter of whether this case, at one point referred to as "United States v. United States, et al.," was a violation of the long-standing theory that a group cannot sue itself, the Court declared that the line of reasoning presented was improper. The Court stated that the defendant's position relied too heavily on mere nomenclature rather than the facts of the case at hand. The opinion presents an analogy for comparison; John Smith suing himself presents no controversy that a court may rule upon, but this same John Smith might indeed have a valid case to bring against another man also named John Smith. In the present case, the Court determined that the controversies involved are "traditionally justiciable," and that the Government, unless prevented by law, has the same right as any other shipper to seek the protection of the courts. This portion of the defendant's position was judged as untenable.
Regarding the defendant's argument that the language of the Interstate Commerce Act demonstrates a legislative intent to prevent the Government from disobeying decisions made by the Interstate Commerce Commission, the Court held that the defendant was in error. If this argument was to be accepted, the Court reasoned, Congress would have been intentionally forcing the United States (as a shipper) to give up the power of self-protection that is enjoyed by every other shipper. The appearance of the Attorney General on both sides of the case was merely a function of the duties of his position rather than a necessary demonstration of the impossibility of suit. 
On the issue of the Government's inability to bring suit in a court after having unsuccessfully made a complaint with the ICC, the Court determined that forbidding judicial review in this manner was "out of harmony with the general legislative pattern of administrative and judicial relationships." The Court stated that the defendant's position on this matter was unacceptable. The opinion remarked that, by this argument, "the order [of the ICC] is final and not reviewable by any court, even though entered arbitrarily, without substantial evidence, and in defiance of law." Such a position was deemed inappropriate, and this argument was rejected.
In the final points, the Court found that a judicial review of the type brought by the Government against the railroads did not require a three-judge panel to make a ruling; rather, a single judge was the most appropriate course. In accordance with the other points the Court adopted, it declared that, because the District Court did not hear the case based on the merits of the complaint, it was appropriate to reverse the decision of the lower court and remand the case back for such judgment.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1949 in United States case law
Category:Interstate Commerce Commission litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "United States v. Jackalow" ==> """
United States v. Jackalow, 66 U.S. (1 Black) 484 (1862), is a U.S. Supreme Court case interpreting the Venue and Vicinage clauses of the United States Constitution. It was an "unusual criminal case" and one of the few constitutional criminal cases from the Taney Court. Jackalow, a mariner from the Ryukyu Kingdom, was suspected of the robbery and murder of the captain of the sloop Spray, Jonathan Leete, and Jonathan's brother Elijah, while the ship was at sea. He was convicted of robbery in the Long Island Sound, but as there was disagreement over the question of jurisdiction between the two judges who heard the post-trial motion (Judge Mahlon Dickerson and Supreme Court Justice Robert Cooper Grier), the case was referred to the Supreme Court by certificate of division.
The Supreme Court directed the circuit court for the District of New Jersey to grant Jackalow a new trial. The Court held that while the trial court should determine the description of the boundaries of New York and Connecticut, the ascertainment of their actual boundaries, and the application of those boundaries to the crime in question, should have been a question of fact for the jury. Jackalow was not retried and was released.
The trial attracted significant media interest. According to The New York Times, "every part in and near the Court room was crowded during the trial." The case is viewed as historically significant because even though it occurred during the American Civil War, the federal courts focused on proper legal procedure and jurisprudence in a case unrelated to the war.
Background
thumb|left|The Leete farm in Sachem's Head, which was mortgaged to purchase the Spray
Jonathan T. Leete had captained the schooner Reaper, owned by James Frisbie, and crewed by a man of East Asian origin, John Canoe, commonly known as Jackalow, short for John Low or John Lord. After Jonathan gave up command of the Reaper, he and Jackalow worked on Jonathan's father's farm on Sachem's Head in Guilford, Connecticut, where Jackalow was regarded as family. At some point, while in New York, Jackalow had stolen $100 from Jonathan and fled to New Haven. He was returned to New York by the police, but Jonathan refused to testify against him and rehired him. Jonathan and his brother Elijah J. Leete subsequently bought the 30-ton sloop Spray, funded in part by a mortgage their father took out on his farm. Jonathan (the captain), Elijah, and Jackalow sailed the Spray together for two or three years. By March 1860, Jackalow had sailed with Jonathan for four years.
Sprays final voyage
On March 15, 1860, the  Spray departed its home port of Guilford on a voyage to New York City, in the company of other vessels. As well as its normal crew of Jonathan, Elijah and Jackalow, there was a passenger on board: Andrew Foote, of Nut Plains. The Spray also carried hay and potatoes on consignment from David Benton of Sachem's Head.
thumb|right|upright|Andrew Foote, who became a rear admiral in the Civil War shortly after sailing as a passenger on the first leg of the Sprays final journey.
The Spray reached New York City safely and sold its cargo for $500 in gold and bills. Foote returned to Guilford by other means. The Spray set course for Guilford and was seen at various points along the route. One night, she anchored near Norwalk, where cries of "Murder!" and "Open the Cabin Door!" were allegedly heard. Supposedly, Jackalow had locked the cabin door before dispatching Elijah on the deck. Elijah had yelled "Murder!"; and Jonathan, "Open the Cabin Door!" Then, Jackalow was supposed to have shot Jonathan through the cabin skylight, thrown the bodies overboard, and searched the cabin for the money. Alone, Jackalow was further supposed to have sailed the Spray to South Brooklyn, purchased supplies, and then sailed south.
At 2 pm on Wednesday, March 21, the Spray collided with the Lucinda four miles north of Barnegat, New Jersey, knocking a hole in the Sprays bow that resulted in her filling with water; the Lucinda also sustained damage. Capt. Willis of the Lucinda saw no one other than Jackalow (whom he blamed for the collision) on board the Spray, and Jackalow refused to be rescued and taken aboard the Lucinda. Willis observed that the deck of the Spray was strewn with bedding and other articles from the cabin.
That same day, Jackalow, anchored on a nearby yawl boat and was taken aboard the schooner Thomas F. French (of Suffolk, Virginia), captained by James Webb, who believed Jackalow to be a kanaka. (Other accounts call him a lascar.) Jackalow gave contradictory accounts of the fate of the Leetes. He told Webb that Jonathan was sick in the cabin and that Elijah had been knocked overboard by the boom, but he subsequently changed his story, claiming that one brother had fallen overboard from the bowsprit, and the other had been knocked overboard by the mainsheet.  Webb sailed to Little Egg Harbor, finding the Lucinda and its captain and hearing Willis's account of the collision. Webb made no attempt to detain Jackalow, who accompanied him ashore in a small row boat before immediately disappearing into a crowd.
The Spray, already stripped of her sails and rigging, and lying on her beam ends, was towed to the New York Harbor. There, the harbor police took charge of the Spray and began retrieving items from the partially submerged cabin, including the captain's bed, which was stained and splattered with blood. A "heavy three-cornered scraper" also recovered was suspected to be the "instrument with which the bloody deed was committed." A pair of unloaded pistols, one with signs of recent discharge, were also recovered. Other items included a small pine box, suspected to be the captain's money box, that had been broken open, but no bodies or money were found.
Jackalow became a wanted man, and his description was widely disseminated. On March 25, news of the fate of the Spray reached Guilford. That same day, the pilot boat George Steers reached the Spray and towed her to Jersey City.
Jackalow's arrest
thumb|Jackalow
At 11:30 am, March 27, recognizing his description from a newspaper story, the engineer and brakeman of a train, from Philadelphia to Jersey City, crossing the Hackensack Bridge, spotted Jackalow running towards the woods. First two, then eight, New Jersey police officers went into the woods after him. Around noon, Jackalow was turned away from crossing a railroad bridge, then under construction in Newark, New Jersey, by workman William Jacobus, who recognized Jackalow. His colleague Henry Wilson mentioned a $1000 reward for Jackalow's arrest, and the pair—joined by John Sanford and John Douglass, and aided by a spy glass—spotted Jackalow heading for the Newark Plank Road. Jacobus and Douglass pursued Jackalow, while Wilson and Sanford took the car to Newark, hired a horse, and set out to intercept him on the road.
The four arrested Jackalow at the toll gate of the Plank Road; he did not respond to "Jackalow" and claimed to be Indian. He was taken to Jersey City by train, arriving at about 4:00 pm. Jackalow was taken to the Jersey City police station, where in search conducted by Assistant Superintendent Woodruff bags of gold and silver worth about $400, were found tied to his person. Jackalow was also wearing Jonathan's coat, which contained Jonathan's memorandum book. Jackalow was taken to the city prison."As the news spread, people came flocking from all directions, completely filling the stationhouse and blocking the streets around it."
Soon after 5 pm, Jackalow was taken before Recorder Bedford, where Sanford lodged a formal complaint accusing Jackalow of the murders of the Leetes. Jackalow gave his name to the Recorder as "Sam Patch" and his occupation as a crewman on the Spray. Later, Jackalow told a reporter from the New York Herald that the $400 represented his savings, and that his wages had been $30/month for four years.
On Saturday, April 2, the Spray was salvaged, and the stains believed to have been blood were discovered to be vermilion. An examination by Dr. John F. Quidor found "no evidence of a murder having been committed in the cabin." In Quidor's opinion, the blood discovered on a cotton chord belonged to an animal.
Preliminary hearings
thumb|right|Jackalow was a native of the Ryukyu Kingdom.
Also on April 2, U.S. Commissioner J.P. Vroom, in Jersey City, presided over Jackalow's preliminary hearing.  Elizabeth Schenck, an African-American, her sister Ann Louisa Talmadge, and brother-in-law James Talmadge testified that Jackalow had sought board with them, claiming to be an Indian. The court recessed until 2 pm, when Mrs. Electa Lecte and Elizabeth Leete, the mother and sister of Jonathan Leete respectively, appeared. The women identified the Leetes' effects, testified to their relationship with Jackalow, and stated that they had never known him to carry so much money. Upon seeing the women, Jackalow burst into tears and requested to speak with them. Jackalow's lawyer, William Voorhees, refused to allow Jackalow to speak to anyone without his consent.
Chas. H. Ross and Mr. Haybeck then testified to the articles he recovered from the Spray. The prosecutor, William H. Jelliffe, asked for another adjournment to await the arrival of Willis to testify to the collision. Voorhees opposed the adjournment and moved for Jackalow's immediate release on the ground that there was no jurisdiction because no crime had been proved to have been committed. Jeliffe replied that he intended to charge murder, piracy, and running away with a vessel with intent to steal it. Vroom granted an adjournment until Tuesday at 11 am. Jackalow was remanded to the city prison.
On Monday, April 4, U.S. Attorney Garret S. Cannon took over the prosecution and moved that Jackalow be transferred to the U.S. Marshall in the Essex County Jail. Voorhies again objected to jurisdiction, arguing that if the alleged murder was committed in the Long Island Sound it could only be tried in New York. Vroom on the other hand held that a showing of probable cause had been made. Further, he argued that he had jurisdiction on the grounds that the murder was committed between the state of New York and the Norwalk Islands, and Jackalow's robbery had in any case continued until his arrival in Barnegat. Jackalow was remanded to Newark to await the decision of the grand jury.
Jackalow was still incarcerated in the Essex County Jail on July 21. A reporter from the Newark Daily Advertiser visited Jackalow and found him to be intelligent, noting that he spent most of his time reading but was not proficient in spoken English. Jackalow protested his innocence to the reporter and explained that he was Japanese, from the Ryukyu Islands.
Indictment
 thumb|right|Justice Robert Cooper Grier thumb|right|Judge Mahlon Dickerson (D.N.J.)
Jackalow's indictment, in the United States Circuit Court for the District of New Jersey, was scheduled for Tuesday, September 25. Justice Robert Cooper Grier, riding circuit, and Judge Mahlon Dickerson, of the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey, presided in Newark. Jackalow, having been moved to the Mercer jail, attended. U.S. Attorney Cannon stated that he needed three or four days to bring in witnesses from Connecticut and elsewhere. The grand jurors were sworn, and Justice Grier instructed them on the law, specifically the Act of 1820, which provided:
Justice Grier further instructed the grand jury that it was unnecessary for the government to produce the corpse to prosecute a murder. But, on September 27, while the grand jury was still sitting, Jonathan Leete's clothed body was recovered in Goose Creek, Jamaica, Queens. The body was shown to the Leetes' sister for identification, and a portion of the clothing was sent to his mother in Guilford for further identification, which was inconclusive. The forehead of the corpse bore "two distinct wounds, as if the result of blows from a hatchet or hammer." The coroner cited the wounds as the cause of death. The Leete family offered their opinion that Elijah had been at the wheel, Jackalow at the lookout, and Jonathan asleep in the berth prior to the murders. (It was the habit of the Leete brothers to sleep fully clothed.)
On Saturday, October 6, the grand jury heard testimony from Joseph Langdon, the crew of the Lucinda, and a carman from Brooklyn. At 9 am, the grand jury presented five bills of indictment against Jackalow: the murder of Jonathan Leete; the murder of Elijah Leete; the robbery of Jonathan Leete; the robbery of Elijah Leete; and running away with the Spray. Voorhees was joined by lawyer Isaac R. Wilson, of New York City, for Jackalow's defense. Jackalow pleaded not guilty to each count. On the motion of U.S. Attorney Cannon, a special term of the circuit court was appointed to meet in Trenton, on the third Tuesday in January, to try the case.
Trial
The remaining, un-impanelled petit jurors were discharged from the Trenton federal court on September 28. Thus, Jackalow could have been tried no earlier than January 1861. Jackalow's trial was scheduled for January 15, 1861.
The trial was postponed until January 17 because Jackalow's counsel was not served with the list of names of the jurors until the morning of January 15, and federal law required that the panel be served two full days before trial. The government planned to call 34 witnesses, and to pay each $500 for their time. Jackalow moved to compel the attendance of Dr. Theodore R. Vanck, Robert J. Dalton, and Professor George Hammell Cook of Rutgers College. Voorhees and Wilson represented Jackalow, and the prosecution was conducted by U.S. Attorney Cannon and Andrew Dutcher.
The jury was impanelled on January 18. The indictment was read and Cannon delivered his opening statement. Most of the evidence pertained to the robbery counts, resulting in speculation that the other counts would not even be tried if a robbery conviction could be obtained.
Prosecution's case
thumb|right|The prosecution argued that the murders occurred in the Long Island Sound.
On January 21, four government witnesses testified. The testimony tended to prove that: the Spray was seen on March 15 with Jackalow and the Leetes aboard; Jackalow was seen on the vessel alone on March 17 and 18, heading to New York City; Jackalow purchased supplies from a grocer in Brooklyn on March 19 with a roll of banknotes, including one $50 bill from the Mechanics Bank, and asked for change in coins. E. H. Grandin was added to the defense team, and J. W. Wiley acted as interpreter.
On January 22, eleven government witnesses testified. The testimony tended to prove that: the Spray and Lucinda had collided; Jackalow, brandishing a hatchet, had refused to allow anyone else aboard; Capt. Webb had taken Jackalow aboard his ship to Newark; Jackalow had applied for lodging in a cellar in Newark; Jackalow had given two different names for himself in Egg Harbor when relating the fate of the Leetes; he had bought supplies in New York City and Brooklyn. At the close of evidence, the government had examined 17 witnesses, half the number for which it had issued subpoenas.
On January 23, six government witnesses testified. The testimony tended to prove that: Jackalow had offered $60 for a boat, intending to catch bluefish; two witnesses had pursued Jackalow after the account of the Leetes' death was published; Jackalow was found on the Newark Plank Road; Jackalow had then claimed to be an East Indiaman named Sam Patch; the bags of coins had been found on Jackalow.
On January 24, 13 government witnesses testified. The testimony tended to prove that: Jackalow was found with $393; someone heard a "cry of murder on the Sound" on March 15; blood was found on the Spray in Jersey City. Jackalow also sought to compel the attendance of Bayard Taylor. Wiley, the interpreter, could barely understand Jackalow because his language was "not pure Chinese."
On January 25, five government witnesses testified, including Dr. Quidor and the Leetes' mother and sister. Quidor testified that he had discovered blood on a ball of twine, although it had been painted over with vermilion.
On Monday, January 28, the government examined one last witness and rested its case. The witness testified to what transpired before U.S. Commissioner Vroom after Jackalow's arrest.
Jackalow's case
thumb|right|Bayard Taylor testified to having seen Jackalow in Japan.
Still on January 28, Jackalow's defense opened with Taylor's evidence. He testified to having seen a person on the Perry Expedition in Japan who "resembled [Jackalow] very much, and he thought it was the same man." Supposedly, Jackalow had been brought to the United States by Commodore Perry aboard the USS Mississippi.
At this point, Grandin moved for a judgment of acquittal for lack of jurisdiction. Because the incident took place between Norwalk and Hell Gate, Grandin argued that venue was improper in the District of New Jersey, as opposed to the Southern District of New York or District of Connecticut. Grandin also argued that the Long Island Sound was not on the "high seas" and thus that the indictment was defective. In rebuttal, Dutcher cited authorities that the Sound was "an arm of the sea." The following day, Dutcher, followed by U.S. Attorney Cannon, argued that the Sound was "uninclosed waters of the ocean outside the jaws of land." In particular, Cannon cited the Amistad case (1841) and noted that the words "out of the jurisdiction of any particular State" had been removed in 1820. Voorhees was given rebuttal.
Judge Dickerson stated that he was of the opinion that the Long Island Sound was not on the high seas. Rather than halt the trial, Dickerson proposed to have the jury return a special verdict, and, if Jackalow was convicted, to argue a motion for arrest of judgment before a "full bench" (i.e. Dickerson plus Justice Grier riding circuit) at the next term in March, and, if the panel was divided, to certify the question to the Supreme Court by certificate of division.
"[W]ithout a formal opening," Voorhees called two more witnesses that day, "but nothing was elicited from them."
Closing arguments and instructions
The defense rested on January 30. Dutcher delivered the closing argument for the prosecution on the robbery charges, Grandin for the defense. On January 31, Grandin concluded his argument, and Voorhees followed; the murder charge had not been tried. Cannon delivered the prosecution's rebuttal. Cannon concluded his "most able argument" the next day, February 1.
Judge Dickerson instructed the jury to consider the two robbery charges only: "If the robbery was an after thought after the murder, it would be nothing more than larceny. If the murder was committed with the intention of taking the goods, then it was robbery." And, Dickerson instructed, "[i]f they found the prisoner guilty, then they must also fix the locality of the robbery." The jury left the courtroom at 4 pm.
Verdict
At 12 pm on February 2, the jury found Jackalow guilty on the first robbery count and not guilty on the other counts in the indictment. As for the location, the jury found that the Spray "at that time was lying on the waters adjoining the State of Connecticut, between Norwalk Harbor and Westchester county, in the State of New-York, and at a point five miles eastward from Lyon's Point, one and a half miles from the Connecticut shore at low water mark." The special verdict did not determine whether the place of the murder was Connecticut, New York, or the high seas.
One juror explained that he considered only the taking of Leete's coat, and not their money, to have been proven. The value of the coat had been proven to be approximately $1.
Grandin moved to set aside the verdict. The question of jurisdiction was set for argument before the full bench at the upcoming March term.
Certificate of division
Jackalow's post-trial motion was argued on April 4 before Judge Dickerson and Justice Grier. Anthony Q. Keasbey, Cannon's successor as U.S. Attorney, appeared for the United States; Grandin for Jackalow. Grandin put forward various reasons to arrest the judgment:
The argument concluded on April 6. Dickerson persisted in his view that there was no jurisdiction, but Grier disagreed. The court certified the question to the Supreme Court by a certificate of division.
While the certificate was pending, a body believed to be that of Elijah Leete was discovered off the Norwalk Islands on August 21. "It had evidently been a long time in the water, and the body had on thick clothing and oil cloth pants."
Oral argument
thumb|left|Reverdy Johnson volunteered to argue for Jackalow.
The case was called before the Supreme Court on March 17, 1862. Attorney General Edward Bates announced that he was delegating the argument to U.S. Attorney Keasbey. Jackalow's attorney was not present, and, by letter, requested a postponement. No postponement was forthcoming, and Reverdy Johnson volunteered to argue for Jackalow.
The case was argued on March 18. Keasbey made an "able and exhaustive argument" for the United States. According to The New York Times, Johnson argued for Jackalow, although the United States Reports state that "no counsel appeared for Jackalow." The opinion was to be delivered the following Monday, as the Court was to adjourn for the term on Tuesday.
Opinion
thumb|right|Justice Samuel Nelson delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court.
Article Three provides that "the Trial of all Crimes, except in Cases of Impeachment, shall be by Jury; and such Trial shall be held in the State where the said Crimes shall have been committed; but when not committed within any State, the Trial shall be at such Place or Places as the Congress may by Law have directed." art. III, § 2, cl. 3. Pursuant to the latter clause, the 1820 piracy statute provided that offenders of that statute could be tried in the "Circuit Court of the United States for the district into which he shall be brought, or in which he shall be found."Act of May 15, 1820, ch. 113, § 3, 3 Stat. 600, 600. Further, more generally, § 14 of the Crimes Act of 1825 provided that "the trial of all offences which shall be committed upon the high seas or elsewhere, out of the limits of any state or district, shall be in the district where the offender is apprehended, or into which he may first be brought."Crimes Act of 1825, § 14, 4 Stat. 115, 118.
Justice Samuel Nelson, for the unanimous Court, noted that, under Article Three, the New Jersey circuit court's jurisdiction depended on two conjunctive propositions: first, that Jackalow's crime was not committed within any State; and second, that Jackalow was first apprehended in New Jersey.Jackalow, 66 U.S. at 486. Citing United States v. Dawson (1854), the Court also noted that the Vicinage Clause required that crimes be tried in the district where committed, if and only if the crime was committed within a U.S. state. Further, the Court noted that, with the "high seas" crimes created by the Crimes Act of 1790 and Crimes Act of 1825, "the question presented in this case could not arise, as the offence could not be committed within the limits of the State."Jackalow, 66 U.S. at 486–87. But, because offenses committed in "any open roadstead, or in any haven, basin, or bay, or in any river where the sea ebbs and flows" are not committed on the "high seas," the Court held, these offenses must be prosecuted in conformity with the restrictions of the venue and vicinage clauses.Jackalow, 66 U.S. at 487.
The Court noted that the jury was not asked to return a special verdict that decided whether Jackalow's crime was committed within a state; instead, Judge Dickerson had himself decided that the crime was committed within New York. Although the Court expressed no opinion on the boundary of New York, it noted that "two of the eminent judges of the highest court of the State of New York entertained different opinions on this question." Instead, the Court prescribed the following procedure:
Thus, the Court directed the circuit court to set aside the special verdict and grant a new trial.Jackalow, 66 U.S. at 488.
Aftermath
Jackalow's fate
At the time the Court's opinion was announced, Jackalow was in the Mount Holly Jail in Burlington County, New Jersey. The New York Times misinterpreted the Court's opinion as having "decided that the State of New-York has no jurisdiction over the waters of Long Island Sound, where the murders were committed, and has advised the United States Circuit Court for New-Jersey to proceed with the case." Thus, the Times predicted that Jackalow would be sentenced and that his counsel would attempt a motion for a new trial "upon the ground of the illegality of the verdict." Next, the Times falsely reported that Jackalow had been sentenced to death, and then that Judge Dickerson had "decided not to pass the sentence of death."
On March 24, 1863, at the Court's suggestion, the government filed a nolle prosequi motion and Jackalow was discharged. Jackalow was admonished to leave the country and never return, and he complied. Three years after Jackalow's first trial, the government was unable to locate witnesses for a retrial and persisted in  Justice Grier, again riding circuit, reportedly stated: "If the Supreme Court of the United States can't make up its mind whether the place where the murder was committed was within the jurisdiction of the states or on the high seas, I am not going to come so near committing judicial murder as to set twelve men guessing at it."
That April, Voorhees filed a writ of attachment against Jackalow for unpaid attorney's fees, and the Leetes' executors were said to be contemplating similar action. The $389 that Jackalow was carrying at the time of his arrest eventually went to his lawyers.
As a precedent
The rule of Jackalow generally remains good law, but to obtain reversal of a criminal conviction for failure to submit the issue of venue to the jury, venue must have been "in issue" and the defendant must have timely objected. Lower courts differ over the precise contours of when venue is "in issue." Because the government need only prove venue by a preponderance of the evidence, and because the jury often implicitly finds facts establishing venue by convicting the defendant, such errors are often harmless.
Analysis
Mark Lender cites Jackalow, decided during the American Civil War, as evidence that, "even amid the emotion of war," Judge Dickerson and Justice Grier "still preferred jurisprudence grounded in established procedures." Lender also argues that "Jackalow ... provided something of a perspective on the nature of federal jurisprudence in a time of extraordinary national crisis" by providing "generally fair and efficient proceedings" to "controversial defendants."
In part, Jackalow "attracted considerable attention" because "[w]ith the nation at war, the federal government properly was concerned with its authority at sea and the safety of American shipping, even though the case was not directly related to the rebellion."
References
Notes
Citations
'''Bibliography
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:Criminal cases in the Taney Court
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three venue case law
Category:United States piracy case law
Category:Vicinage Clause case law
Category:1862 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Jackson" ==> """
United States v. Jackson, 390 U.S. 570 (1968), was a United States Supreme Court decision that ruled part of the Federal Kidnapping Act unconstitutional..
 Background 
In the wake of the Lindbergh kidnapping Congress decided to adopt a federal kidnapping statute. It was designed to allow federal authorities to step in during kidnappings. Congress believed that federal agents would be more effective than local authorities. The act held that anyone who knowingly transports any person who is unlawfully kidnapped and held for ransom shall be punished by death if the kidnapped person is not liberated unharmed and the jury recommends it.
On October 10, 1966 a federal grand jury in Connecticut returned an indictment charging the defendant under the Act. The District Court for the District of Connecticut dismissed this count of the indictment, holding that the Federal Kidnapping Act is unconstitutional because it makes the risk of death the price for asserting the right to a jury trial.
 Opinion of the Court 
The decision of the court was delivered by Justice Stewart. The court partially agreed with the District Court. The court objected to the fact the Act stated the defendant "shall be punished...by death...". Under the law the trial judge is obliged to sentence the defendant to death if the jury recommends it. Sentencing in American courts has long been the right of the sitting judge and not the jury. While the jury may make recommendations the court found that the Congress has overstepped when it gave that power solely to the jury.
The court also objected, as the District Court had, that the Act could punish a defendant for asserting their right to a jury trial. Under the Act, a defendant who pleads guilty cannot be sentenced to death, since no jury has the chance to recommend the death penalty. However, if the defendant attempted an acquittal by going to trial, he would be risking his life if the jury found him guilty. The majority found that the "inevitable effect of any such provision is, of course, to discourage assertion of the Fifth Amendment right not to plead guilty and to deter exercise of the  Sixth Amendment right to demand a jury trial."
However, the majority disagreed with the District Court’s assertion that the Federal Kidnapping Act fails entirely because its penalty clause is deficient. The court determined that the part of the Act which details punishment is severable from the rest of the act. The judgment of the District Court was reversed and sent back for further proceedings.
 Dissent 
Justice White dissented, with Justice Black joining. While he agreed that some defendants would be coerced by the law, Justice White argued that because not every defendant would be coerced by the law it should not be ruled unconstitutional. He argues that pleas of guilt should be carefully examined before being accepted to make sure that they have been not coerced by the threat of capital punishment.Jackson, 390 U.S. at 591-92 (White, J., dissenting).
 Subsequent developments 
The Court revisited the issue of the Federal Kidnapping Act in Brady v. United States, in which the Court reinforced its decision that not all guilty pleas entered under the Act were invalid..
 See also 
Brady v. United States
Federal Kidnapping Act
 References 
External links
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment jury case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "United States v. Janis" ==> """
United States v. Janis, 428 U.S. 433 (1976), was a Supreme Court Case that found Max Janis and Morris Levine guilty of illegal bookmaking activities in Los Angeles in a 5-3 ruling. The two were arrested for the crime in November 1968. Appealing on the grounds of unconstitutionally seized evidence, Janis and Levine were heard by the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals in 1973. The case was ultimately heard by the Supreme Court in 1975, and the two were found guilty in 1976. More importantly, the case established that the exclusionary rule does not apply to civil cases where evidence is unconstitutionally seized by a state officer but used by a federal institution.
Background
In Los Angeles in 1968, Officer Leonard Weissman of the Los Angeles Police Department obtained a warrant authorizing the search for bookmaking paraphernalia in two apartments in the city. These apartments respectively belonged to Morris Levine and Max Janis. Officer Weissman had been conducting surveillance on the two men from September 14 through November 30 of 1968, during which time he suspected the two of illegal bookmaking. 
Upon the search, the officer confiscated $4,940 in cash, bookmaking records, and arrested the two men. The bookmaking records seized were a five-day sample of the men's income from the business. He later contacted a revenue agent in the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to analyze these records.
The Assessment
Because Janis and Levine never filed tax returns from the income received during the period they were under Weissman's surveillance, the IRS agent made an assessment congruent to 4401 of the Internal Revenue Code. The section indicates that any unauthorized wager (i.e. those accepted in illegal bookmaking) shall have a 2% excise tax placed on them.  Thus, a two percent tax was placed on the estimated income of Levine and Janis. This income was derived from multiplying the average income from the aforementioned five-day sample by 77 – the number of days the two men were under Weissman's surveillance. When all computations were made, the IRS made an assessment of $89,026.09 against the two men. 
Acting under 26 U.S.C. 6331, which gives the IRS the power to levy property from those who evade taxes, the original $4,940 was seized from Janis and Levine by the IRS as a part of the much larger assessment. 
Upon being charged of violating gambling laws in Los Angeles Court, Levine and Janis appealed. They moved to suppress the warrant, or void it on the grounds that it was not constitutional. Ironically, the same judge that handed out the warrant was the one that heard the appeal for the warrant suppression. The Janis counsel held that Officer Weissman's affidavit was not convincing enough to warrant the search.  They cited Spinelli v. United States, a case decided just before the issuing of the warrant that set precedent on how these warrants were to be approved.
The Faulty Warrant
Joining with Aguilar v. Texas, a case that established "hearsay" information was not enough to produce a warrant, a two-pronged test was established in 1969, known as the “Aguilar-Spinelli test”.  The test required two crucial pieces of information: one being that the information supporting the necessity of the warrant is reliable and credible, and the other being that the circumstances of the surveillance must be made clear to the judge.  
Janis and Levine appealed on the grounds that the former, in that the affidavit supporting the warrant was inadequate.
Both the District Court and the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals held that the affidavit contained insufficient information and the evidence obtained by the warrant was therefore illegal. The government submitted a counterclaim to these rulings but it was quickly dismissed. Based on this, the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Logic of the Supreme Court
The Court started by recognizing the central issue it faced. This issue was not question of illegally obtained evidence procured with a faulty warrant. The Court had already spoken several times on this issue and other issues related to the Fourth Amendment. Instead, the general question asks that if evidence seized by a state officer (Officer Weissman of the LAPD), but used by a federal department (the IRS) is admissible in a civil case - that being the one revolving around the tax assessment against Janis. 
The Court states that there are two separate pieces to the entire case. The first of these is the "refund suit". Max Janis appealed his conviction and wanted a refund of the $4,940 taken from him. The second part of the case is a “tax collection suit”. This is the government's counterclaim to recollect the taxes, which was quickly shot down by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. 
The Court much discussed the “burden of proof”, or the need someone bears of proving themselves innocent. It was found that, since he was the original defendant, Janis carried this burden of proof. In his appeal, he needed to prove to the Court that the tax assessment made on him was incorrect. If this could not be done, Janis needed to provide what the correct assessment should have been. The Supreme Court felt he failed to prove his case. Logic would then take the side of the government and declare the tax assessment just. However, the true predicament of the case is that the government failed to prove their case either. The assessment made by the IRS was found to be “naked” because of the issue of the faulty warrant. 
To determine which side was innocent and which was guilty, the Court first went through a lengthy history of the Fourth amendment. They established the fact that there is a solid argument for both sides; on one hand the lower courts ruled that the evidence had been illegally obtained, and thus the assessment this evidence yielded is not valid. On the other hand, the government makes a convincing case that the assessment was legal, even if the evidence was obtained with a faulty warrant. As the Court puts it, the officer that obtained the evidence and the agency that analyzed it (the IRS) are two separate “sovereigns”. The Court closely notes that Janis cited several instances where the exclusionary rule has been extended to civil cases, however all of these instances were “intrasovereign”, not “intersovereign”. Compton v. United States was cited, a case in which the Fourth Circuit Court determined that the fact that evidence is seized illegally by the police is irrelevant to a tax assessment made by the IRS. This case was strikingly similar to the one at hand and provided key case law for the decision.
Opinions of the Court
Majority Opinion
The majority opinion was written by Justice Harry A. Blackmun. Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, along with Justices White, Powell, and Rehnquist joined in the majority opinion.  The Supreme Court came to the conclusion that the use of this evidence seized unconstitutionally by a state officer does not “outweigh the societal costs imposed by the exclusion.” Therefore, they do not think it is fair to exclude the evidence from a federal institution, like the IRS. They believe this because it “falls outside the offending officer’s zone of primary interest.” In their concluding statement, the Court said “There comes a point at which courts, consistent with their duty to administer the law, cannot continue to create barriers to law enforcement in the pursuit of a supervisory role that is properly the duty of the Executive and Legislative Branches. We find ourselves at that point in this case.”   In other words, they feel that extending the exclusionary rule to civil proceedings that include separate sovereigns is unfair in the name of justice. No concurring opinions were written for the case.
Dissenting Opinion
Both Justice Brennan and Justice Stewart wrote dissenting opinions. Justice Marshall joined Brennan's dissent, making the 3rd Justice to disagree with the ruling.  The dissent of Justice Brennan and Marshall essentially argued that the exclusionary rule should be supreme since it is such a vital concept of the Fourth amendment. They felt the court continued to exhibit a “business of slow strangulation of the rule.”  
Justice Stewart's dissent argued a similar point, just in a different way. He cited Elkins v. United States, in which the Supreme Court ditched the “silver platter doctrine”. This doctrine was an aspect of the exclusionary rule after it was created, but before the landmark case of Mapp v. Ohio, in which illegally seized evidence by a state officer could be used in a federal civil proceeding. Stewart's citation of Elkins made the point that an exception should not be made just because two different sovereigns are involved. Nonetheless, he was the only Justice that felt this way on the issue.
References
. 
. 
. 
.
External links
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:Los Angeles Police Department
"""

From "United States v. Jicarilla Apache Nation" ==> """
United States v. Jicarilla Apache Nation, 564 U.S. 162 (2011), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the fiduciary exception to attorney–client privilege does not apply to the general trust relationship between the United States and Indian tribes.United States v. Jicarilla Apache Nation United States Supreme Court, Syllabus p. 2,
"Held: The fiduciary exception to the attorney-client privilege does not apply to the general trust relationship between the United States and the Indian tribes."
 Background 
In 2001, the Jicarilla Apache Nation sued the federal government for breach of trust, claiming that the United States government had mismanaged the financial interests and funds held in trust for the tribe. The tribe sought access to attorney-client communications about the trust operation. The Court of Federal Claims (CFC) granted this motion in part, holding that the documents fell within the fiduciary exception to attorney-client privilege. 
The Federal Circuit Court of Appeals agreed with the CFC, claiming that the trust relationship between the Jicarilla Apache Nation and the United States government was sufficiently similar to a private trust. As such, they argued, the federal government's fiduciary obligation was greater than the attorney-client privilege.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court, in an opinion penned by Justice Alito, overturned the lower courts' rulings, and held that the fiduciary exception to attorney-client privilege does not apply to the trust relationship between the United States and Indian tribes. The government's trust obligations to the tribe are primarily established through statute, not federal law. Additionally, the Court argued, the United States acts not as a traditional trustee would act--obligated to the interests of its beneficiary--but instead as a sovereign within its rights to execute federal law towards its own interests. 
 References 
External links
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States attorney–client privilege case law
"""

From "United States v. John (1978)" ==> """
United States v. John, 437 U.S. 634 (1978), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that lands designated as a reservation in Mississippi are "Indian country" as defined by statute, although the reservation was established nearly a century after Indian removal and related treaties. The court ruled that, under the Major Crimes Act, the State has no jurisdiction to try a Native American for crimes covered by that act that occurred on reservation land.United States v. John, . 
 Background 
 History 
thumb|left|200px|alt=map of original Choctaw territory in Mississippi|Original Choctaw territory in Mississippi
The Choctaw lived in Mississippi and other areas of the Southeast since well before the Revolutionary War, and were recognized by their treaty with the United States in 1786.  When Mississippi became a state in 1817, the Choctaw still held three-quarters of the land in the state. There was pressure from European Americans on the federal government and state to open these lands for white settlement. Federal policy at that time was to encourage the removal of the Choctaw and other Native Americans to Indian Territory west of the Mississippi River, in what became present-day Oklahoma.  In 1820 and again in 1830, the tribe signed two treaties ceding almost all of their land in Mississippi to the United States.
By 1835, most of the tribe had been removed to the Indian Territory, but many members stayed in Mississippi.Rowland L. Young, Supreme Court Report  (1978). In the 1890s the federal government became aware that not all the Choctaw had left. By 1916, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) began to set aside funds to provide for some of the needs of the tribe.  
In the 1930s, the Franklin D. Roosevelt administration encouraged the revival of Native American tribes with the passage of the Indian Reorganization Act. In 1939 Congress authorized funds to provide a reservation for what was to become the federally recognized Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians.Young, supra at 1425. In 1944, the Secretary of the Interior set aside  as an Indian reservation.Young, supra at 1425.
 Major Crimes Act 
thumb|left|200px|alt=photograph of Chief Crow Dog|Crow Dog
Because Native American tribes were considered sovereign, crimes committed by Indians against Indians were not subject to federal or state jurisdiction, but were handled by tribal law. In 1881, a Brulé Sioux named Crow Dog shot an killed another Indian, Spotted Tail, on the Great Sioux Reservation in South Dakota. Crow Dog was tried in federal court for murder, found guilty, and was sentenced to hang. He petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus to the Supreme Court.
In Ex Parte Crow Dog, the Supreme Court found that the federal government did not have jurisdiction to try the case.  Crow Dog was ordered released, having made restitution under tribal law to Spotted Tail's family, as was considered acceptable within the tribe.
In response to Ex Parte Crow Dog, Congress passed the Major Crimes Act in 1885.Major Crimes Act of 1835, Mar. 3, 1885,  (codified as amended as  et seq.  The Act provided that the federal government had exclusive jurisdiction over certain Indian on Indian crimes when the crimes were committed in "Indian country." et seq.; Allison M. Dussias, Heeding the Demands of Justice: Justice Blackmun's Indian Law Opinions  (1995). In 1886, the Act was upheld by the Supreme Court in United States v. Kagama.
 Procedural history 
In October 1975, Smith John and his son, Harry Smith John were indicted for assault with intent to commit the murder of Artis Jenkins.Young, supra at 1425; Dussias, supra at 88. All of the parties were Choctaw, and the assault occurred on the reservation.  Both John and his son were tried in the Federal District Court and convicted of simple assault.Dussias, supra at 88. John was sentenced to 90 days in jail and a $300 fine.Young, supra at 1425. 
Subsequent to that trial, John and his son were indicted by a state grand jury in Leake County, Mississippi for aggravated assault, based on the same facts.Young, supra at Dussias, supra at 88. John objected to state jurisdiction, which was denied. He was convicted and sentenced to two years in the state prison.Young, supra at 1425.
John appealed both convictions. In May 1997, the Mississippi Supreme Court determined that the Indian title to the land was extinguished under the removal treaties.  Under the treaties, the Mississippi Constitution, and Mississippi statutes, the Choctaw who remained in the state after removal became citizens of the United States and Mississippi, and thus subject to state law. Because of this, the state ruled that the reservation land in Mississippi is not sovereign "Indian country."  Following this ruling, the Fifth Circuit Court came to the same conclusion. It reversed the federal conviction on the grounds that the district court lacked jurisdiction.Young, supra at 1425. The United States appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari to hear the cases.
 U.S. Supreme Court 
 Arguments 
 United States 
The United States was represented by H. Bartow Farr III.  The United States argued that the reservation land, where the crime was committed, was undisputably land purchased by the federal government in 1939 and held in trust from 1944 as an Indian reservation for the Mississippi Choctaw tribe.  By the plain text of the statute, this gives the U.S. District Court jurisdiction, since the lands were "within the limits of [an] Indian reservation."  Even if, for the sake of argument, the United States had relinquished jurisdiction following the Indian Removal Act, Congress has plenary power under the U.S. Constitution's Indian Commerce Clause to alter treaty terms and reassert jurisdiction.  Finally, Congress has the right to assert jurisdiction over federal land under the Property Clause of the Constitution.Pet'r's Br., available at 1978 WL 207092 (U.S.) (Appellate Brief).
 State of Mississippi 
The State of Mississippi was represented by Carl F. Andre.  Mississippi argued that the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek ended the federal oversight of Choctaw Indians who remained in the state after 1833. The state claimed that "Mississippi Choctaw citizens did not become a tribe, did not live on a reservation in Indian country, and did not become wards of the federal government as a result of the Indian Reorganization Act (1934) and a proclamation of the Department of Interior (1944)."  Since they are not tribal members, the provisions of the Major Crimes Act do not apply, and the state has jurisdiction.Br. of Miss., available at 1978 WL 223443 (U.S.) (Appellate Brief).
 Smith John 
John was represented by Richard B. Collins. John argued that Mississippi could not rely on the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek, as the entire treaty, with the exception of the land cessation, had been breached by the government in other actions. The superseding treaty of 1855 rendered the 1830 treaty irrelevant.Br. of John, available at 1978 WL 223444 (U.S.) (Appellate Brief).
 Amicus curiae 
Amicus curiae briefs were filed in support of John and the United States by the Association on American Indian Affairs and the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians. No briefs were filed in support of Mississippi.
 Opinion of the Court 
thumb|right|200px|alt=photograph of Justice Harry Blackmun|Justice Harry Blackmun, author of the unanimous opinion Justice Harry Blackmun delivered the opinion of a unanimous court. Blackmun noted that the definition of Indian country in the statute included three separate types of land, and reservation land was applicable to this case.John, 437 U.S. at 648.  The test for determining if land was reservation land was if the land in question “had been validly set apart for the use of the Indians as such, under the superintendence of the Government.”John, 437 U.S. at 649 (internal citations omitted); Leonhard, supra at 681.  Blackmun observed that Congress declared that the lands were held in trust for the Mississippi Choctaw in 1939, and that this was further clarified in 1944 when the land was declared to be their reservation.John 437 U.S. at 649-50; Young, supra at 1425; Leonhard, supra at 681; Dussias, supra at 88.  
He said that the reliance of both Mississippi and the Fifth Circuit that the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek ended the status of the Mississippi Choctaw as Indians was misplaced, as the Indian Commerce Clause still granted Congress the authority to deal with them.John, 437 U.S. at 650; Warren Stapleton, Indian Country, Federal Justice: Is the Exercise of Federal Jurisdiction Under the Major Crimes Act Constitutional?  (1997). Since the land in question is an Indian reservation, § 1153 applies. The federal government has exclusive jurisdiction over the crime in question, and the State of Mississippi is without jurisdiction.Dussias, supra at 88. The ruling reversed and remanded the decision of the Fifth Circuit, and reversed the decision of the Mississippi Supreme Court.John 437 U.S. at 654; Young, supra at 1425.
 Subsequent developments 
Nearly a decade later the Mississippi Choctaw tribe litigated an Indian adoption case, Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians v. Holyfield, under the recently passed Indian Child Welfare Act.Solangel Maldonado, Race, Culture, and Adoption: Lessons from Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians v. Holyfield  (2008). That act gave tribal courts exclusive jurisdiction on adoptions in which the child's parents lived on a reservation. The Mississippi Supreme Court had denied the tribal court's jurisdiction and found for the Holyfields, non-Choctaw who had adopted a child removed from the family. The tribe took it to the U.S. Supreme Court and won; this ruling gave federally recognized Native American tribes more control over the future of their children whose parents lived on reservations.Maldonado, supra at 12-14. 
The John decision has also influenced decisions on other civil issues in the late 20th century, such as taxation.  In two Supreme Court cases from Oklahoma dealing with state taxation of Indians, the Court referred to its decision in John to declare that trust land was classified as being in "Indian country", where the state had no authority to tax Indians.Judith V. Royster, Decontextualizing Federal Indian Law: The Supreme Court's 1997-98 Term  (1999).
 See also 
 List of Choctaw Treaties
 Footnotes 
 References 
External links
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Native American criminal jurisdiction case law
Category:Native American history of Mississippi
"""

From "United States v. Johns" ==> """
United States v. Johns, 469 U.S. 478 (1985), was a United States Supreme Court criminal law case holding that a three-day delay in searching a motor vehicle under government control did not violate the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Background
Johns involved a United States Customs drug smuggling investigation in Arizona where Customs officers followed two pickup trucks to a remote desert airstrip, and set up surveillance. Two small airplanes landed and departed. The officers walked up on the trucks and could smell marijuana. In the back of the trucks were what obviously were bales of marijuana wrapped in dark green plastic bags and sealed with tape. Several men were arrested at the scene. Johns and another were the pilots, and they were arrested when they landed. The trucks were not searched at the scene. Instead, they were removed to a Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) warehouse in Tucson. Three days later, the officers took samples of the marijuana.
The district court ordered suppression of the evidence because of the unreasonableness of the delay, and the government appealed. The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed, holding that the search of the vehicles three days later was unreasonable under United States v. Ross (1982).. 
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court reversed in an opinion by Justice O'Connor. In resisting the government's petition for certiorari, the defendants raised a separate ground to sustain the judgment below. They argued that the officers lacked probable cause for the arrest before they saw the distinctive packaging of the marijuana bales. The Court dealt with that issue first and held that, while the officers on the ground could not see all that transpired between the airplanes and the trucks parked nearby, the obvious smell of the marijuana when they approached the trucks gave them probable cause before they even saw the distinctive packaging. This probable cause thus extended to both the vehicles and the packages under Ross.
Turning to the central issue of the case, the Court held that the three-day delay in conducting the search was not unreasonable. First, the Court noted that "our previous decisions indicate that the officers acted permissibly by waiting until they returned to DEA headquarters before they searched the vehicles and removed their contents... . There is no requirement that the warrantless search of a vehicle occur contemporaneously with its lawful seizure." Second, while Ross suggests that a vehicle search should occur immediately or shortly after seizure, it does not require any such limitation on a vehicle search. In fact, a second search of the vehicle in Ross occurred at the stationhouse after the first search on the street. The Court stated that it is inconsistent with the rationale of the automobile exception to make such a limitation. Third, the Court said that requiring an immediate search on the spot at the time of seizure would not further any privacy interests. The Court has consistently permitted delayed searches where the seizure was based on probable cause. Once the vehicle is seized, exigent circumstances for the search are no longer required if it existed at the time of seizure.
See also
Exclusionary rule
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 469
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Cannabis in Arizona
Category:Drug Enforcement Administration litigation
"""

From "United States v. Johnson (1863)" ==> """
United States v. Johnson, 68 U.S. (1 Wall.) 326 (1863), was a United States Supreme Court case.
Background
Johnson and others (respondents) claimed title to a tract of land under the Mexican government.  Their grantor, Chaves, had received a deed in 1845 from Pio Pico, a Mexican governor of California. The deed recited that "the necessary steps and investigations were previously taken and made in conformity with the requirements of laws and regulations."The title of Chaves was found among the archives. The deed of Governor Pico was authenticated below by proof of his handwriting, and that of his secretary, who witnessed it. On the 8th May, 1846, the espediente
a term of the Mexican land law, referred to in the case's text as an "expedient":
"When complete, an expedient usually consists of the petition the diseno annexed; a marginal decree approving the petition, the order of reference to the proper officer for information; the report of that officer in conformity to the order; the decree of concession, and the copy, or a duplicate of the grant. These several papers, -- that is, the petition with the diseno annexed, the order of reference, the informe, the decree of concession, and the copy of the grant, appended together, in the order mentioned, -- constitute a complete expedient within the meaning of the Mexican law." -- United States v. Knight's Admr., 1 Black, 245.
was laid before the Departmental Assembly, and was ordered to be referred to the Committee on Vacant Lands. As a house had been built on the land by a community of priests, of the mission of St. Antonio, the committee recommended that "the expedient be remitted to the authorities of that jurisdiction to be reported on, and to the person in charge of San Antonio, in order that he may say in what condition that house was at the time the grant was made, so that it might be valued, and that community be indemnified, to avoid questions relative to the expedient, to the end that, after these proceedings are concluded, the respective approval may be given."
Some of the deeds through which the claimants based their title had slight irregularities in various signatures.  With these documents and this evidence, Johnson and the other claimants having presented their petition to the Board of Commissioners established by the act of March 3d, 1851, "to ascertain and settle private land claims in the State of California," and that board having confirmed it, the United States took the case by appeal into the District Court, which court having also confirmed it, the case came to the Supreme Court: the question being whether the petition for confirmation of the claim was rightly granted and affirmed.
Procedural posture
Appellant United States challenged a decision from the District Court of the United States for the Southern District of California, which affirmed a decision from the Board of Commissioners in favor of respondents, several claimants to California land who claimed title under the Mexican government through a common grantor.
The issue was whether the petition for confirmation of the claim was rightly granted and affirmed.  The grantor's title, which was not disputed before the Commissioners or the district court, was first objected to on appeal to the court. The government contended that the governor and secretary should have been called as the proper witnesses to authenticate their own acts.
Opinion of the court
The court affirmed. It was not the duty of counsel representing the government to urge microscopic objections against honest claimants and urge the forfeiture of property for some oversight of the Commissioners in not requiring proof according to the strict rules of common law.
1. Objections to Mexican grants ought not to be taken as if the case was pending on a writ of error, with a bill of exceptions to the admission of every item of testimony offered and received below.
2. When there is any just suspicion of fraud or forgery, the defence should be made below, and the evidence to support the charge should appear on the record.
3. The want of approval of a grant by the Departmental Assembly does not affect its validity.
References
External links
Category:1863 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
"""

From "United States v. Johnson (1899)" ==> """
United States v. Johnson, 173 U.S. 363 (1899), was a United States Supreme Court case.
 Background 
Johnson, while the U.S. District Attorney for the Southern District of New York, was claiming extra compensation as for special services in a suit to condemn lands for a mortar battery upon direction of the Attorney General at the request of the Secretary of War. He had presented two bills totaling $6,500, which the Attorney General approved and allowed, by which the Accounting Officers of the Government refused to pay.
 Opinion of the Court 
In this refusal they were upheld by the Supreme Court. While the Act of March 2, 1889, 40 U.S.C.A. § 256 (which requires that all legal services connected with the procurement of title should be rendered by U.S. District Attorneys) was in force at the time the direction by the Attorney General was given to Johnson in 1891, the Supreme Court, nevertheless, made no reference to that Statute in the Opinion, but based its conclusions upon the Statute of August 1, 1888, 40 U.S.C.A. § 257, which required the Attorney General upon request of the appropriate officer of the Department "to cause proceedings to be commenced for condemnation", and upon the general statute prescribing it to be the duty of the United States District Attorney to prosecute all civil actions in which the U.S. is concerned. 28 U.S.C.A. § 485.
The Court stated the question as follows:
The controlling question, therefore, in the present case is whether Johnson was Under a duty imposed upon him as district attorney to perform the services for which he here claims special compensation. If such was his duty as defined by law, then he is forbidden by statute from receiving any special compensation on account of such services; this for the reason that no appropriation for such compensation has been made by any statute explicitly stating that it was for such additional pay, extra allowance or compensation. Rev.St. §§ 1764, 1765 [5 U.S.C.A. §§ 69, 70]. On the other hand, if his duties as district attorney did not embrace such services as he rendered, and for which he here claims special compensation, then he is entitled to be paid therefor without reference to the regular salary, pay, or emoluments attached to his office.
Basing its opinion upon which it referred to as the "clear and explicit" language of the Statute (page 378 of 173 U.S., page 432 of 19 S.Ct., 43 L.Ed. 731) and upon its previous holdings in Gibson v. Peters, 150 U.S. 342, 14 S.Ct. 134, 37 L.Ed. 1104, and upon the Opinions of the Attorney General contained in 7 Op.Atty.Gen. 84;
"A contrary construction would lay the foundation for extra compensation to district attorneys in almost every case in which they appear in civil actions" [173 U.S. 363, 19 S.Ct. 433, 43 L.Ed. 731].
9 Op.Atty.Gen. 146,
United States v. Johnson, 173 U.S. page 380, 19 S.Ct. 433, 43 L.Ed. 731:  "When a duty is enjoined upon him by the law of his office, and not merely by the request of a department, he is bound to perform it, and take as compensation what the law gives him. That is his contract; and if it be a bad one for him he has no remedy but resignation. The subject is not open to a new bargain between him and any other officer of the government. All criminal prosecutions and all civil suits in which the United States are a party of record fall within this principle."
and 19 Op.Atty.Gen. 121,
See also 2 Op.Atty.Gen. 318, 319; 8 Op.Atty.Gen. 399; 5 Op.Atty.Gen. 261, 263.
and the views of the "second comptroller of the treasury" in Cousar's Digest 12, the Court came to the conclusion that Johnson "was under a duty, as district attorney, to represent the United States in the condemnation proceedings."
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 173
 References 
 Further reading 
This discussion is adapted from:  United States v. 1,960 Acres of Land, 54 F. Supp. 867, 877-878 (D. Cal. 1944)
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1899 in United States case law
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States District Court for the Southern District of New York
"""

From "United States v. Johnson (1911)" ==> """
In United States v. Johnson, 221 U.S. 488 (1911), the United States Supreme Court ruled that the misbranding provisions of the Pure Food and Drug ActPure Food and Drug Act, ch. 3915, 34 Stat. 768 (1906) (current version as amended at 21 U.S.C.S. §§ 301-392 (1985)). The regulation has been amended in part by Pub. L. 101-629, 104 Stat. 4511 (1990). of 1906 did not pertain to false curative or therapeutic statements but only false statements as to the identity of the drug.
In 1912, Congress responded with the Sherley Amendments, which addressed the perceived lack of enforcement of fraud related to therapeutic claims;: The Act was amended to prohibit false and fraudulent claims of health benefits but enforcement under the amendment required proof of fraudulent intent, a difficult standard. The misbranding amendment required a curative or therapeutic product to bear a label with a quantity or proportion statement for specified narcotic substances:
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:1911 in United States case law
Category:Food and Drug Administration
"""

From "United States v. Johnson (1943)" ==> """
United States v. Johnson, 319 U.S. 302 (1943), was a United States Supreme Court case.
Background
The tenant brought suit against the landlord, alleging violation of the Emergency Price Control Act of 1942,56 Stat. 23 and demanding treble damages and reasonable attorney fees. The landlord filed a motion to dismiss, challenging the constitutionality of the Act. The government intervened and filed a brief in support of the constitutionality of the Act.  The district court dismissed the tenant's complaint on the grounds that the Act and the promulgation of the regulation under it were unconstitutional because Congress unconstitutionally delegated legislative power. 
Before entry of the order dismissing the complaint, the government filed a motion to reopen the case on the ground that it was collusive and did not involve a real case or controversy. The affidavit of the plaintiff, submitted by the Government on its motion to dismiss the suit as collusive, shows without contradiction that he brought the present proceeding in a fictitious name; that it was instituted as a "friendly suit" at appellee's request; that the plaintiff did not employ, pay, or even meet, the attorney who appeared of record in his behalf; that he had no knowledge who paid the $15 filing fee in the district court, but was assured by appellee that as plaintiff he would incur no expense in bringing the suit; that he did not read the complaint which was filed in his name as plaintiff; that in his conferences with the appellee and appellee's attorney of record, nothing was said concerning treble damages and he had no knowledge of the amount of the judgment prayed until he read of it in a local newspaper. Appellee's counter-affidavit did not deny these allegations. It admitted that appellee's attorney had undertaken to procure an attorney to represent the plaintiff and had assured the plaintiff that his presence in court during the trial of the cause would not be necessary. It appears from the district court's opinion that no brief was filed on the plaintiff's behalf in that court.
The Government's motion was denied.  The Government appealed to the Supreme Court under § 2 of the Act of August 24, 1937, 50 Stat. 752, 28 U.S.C. § 349a, and assigns as error both the ruling of the district court on the constitutionality of the Act, and its refusal to reopen and dismiss the case as collusive.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court vacated and ordered dismissal of the suit, holding that the suit was collusive because it was not in any real sense adversary. In so holding, the court noted that the tenant had no active participation in the suit, exercised no control in the case, was only nominally represented by counsel, and his counsel was selected by the landlord's counsel.
Excerpts
"Even in a litigation where only private rights are involved, the judgment will not be allowed to stand where one of the parties has dominated the conduct of the suit by payment of the fees of both. Gardner v. Goodyear Dental Vulcanite Co., 131 U.S. Appendix, ciii."
"Here an important public interest is at stake—the validity of an Act of Congress having far-reaching effects  [*305]  on the public welfare in one of the most critical periods in the history of the country. That interest has been adjudicated in a proceeding in which the plaintiff has had no active participation, over which he has exercised no control, and the expense of which he has not borne. He has been only nominally represented by counsel who was selected by appellee's counsel and whom he has never seen. Such a suit is collusive because it is not in any real sense adversary. It does not assume the "honest and actual antagonistic assertion of rights" to be adjudicated—a safeguard essential to the integrity of the judicial process, and one which we have held to be indispensable to adjudication of constitutional questions by this Court. Chicago & Grand Trunk Ry. Co. v. Wellman, 143 U.S. 339, 345; and see Lord v. Veazie, 8 How. 251; Cleveland v. Chamberlain, 1 Black 419; Bartemeyer v. Iowa, 18 Wall. 129, 134-35; Atherton Mills v. Johnston, 259 U.S. 13, 15. Whenever in the course of litigation such a defect in the proceedings is brought to the court's attention, it may set aside any adjudication thus procured and dismiss the cause without entering judgment on the  [**1077]  merits. It is the court's duty to do so where, as here, the public interest has been placed at hazard by the amenities of parties to a suit conducted under the domination of only one of them. The district court should have granted the Government's motion to dismiss the suit as collusive. We accordingly vacate the judgment below with instructions to the district court to dismiss the cause on that ground alone. Under the statute, 28 U. S. C. § 401, the Government is liable for costs which may be taxed as in a suit between private litigants; costs in this Court will be taxed against appellee."
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1943 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Johnson (1944)" ==> """
United States v. Johnson, 323 U.S. 273 (1944), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court declined to permit a prosecution in Delaware of defendants charged with violating the Federal Denture Act by sending denture in the mail from Illinois to Delaware, where they were received by a person not licensed to practice dentistry in Delaware. The Act prohibited the use of the mails or any instrumentality of interstate commerce "for the purpose of sending or bringing into" a state or territory any denture which had been cast by a person not licensed to practice dentistry in the state into which the dentures were sent. The Act contained no specific venue provision, and the government contended that venue was therefore proper in the district where the transportation of the dentures began, the district in which it ended, or any district through which the dentures passed. The Court, adverting to "the serious hardship of defending prosecutions in places remote from home ... as well as the temptation to abuses ... in the administration of criminal justice,"United States v. Johnson, . held that the sender could only be prosecuted in the district in which he mailed the dentures, adding that venue for the receiver would be limited to the district in which the dentures were delivered. It distinguished statutes which merely prohibited "transportation" of articles through the mails barring interstate commerce on the ground that the language of the Denture Act focused on the "sending or bringing into" a state or territory of the dentures.
"Questions of venue in criminal cases ... are not merely matters of formal legal procedure. They raise deep issues of public policy in the light of which legislation must be considered." Johnson, 323 U.S. at 276.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1944 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
"""

From "United States v. Johnson (1946)" ==> """
United States v. Johnson, 327 U.S. 106 (1946), was a United States Supreme Court case.
Procedural background
The case was decided alongside United States v. Sommers et al. Respondents in both cases were convicted of violations of penal provisions of the Revenue Acts and for conspiracy.  The Seventh Circuit reversed. The Supreme Court reversed and remanded to the circuit court of appeals. That court remanded the case to the district court to permit a motion for a new trial on the ground of newly discovered evidence. That motion was made and denied. The circuit court of appeals affirmed. Respondents petitioned this Court for certiorari, but the petition was dismissed on motion of their counsel.
After obtaining a second remand from the circuit court of appeals on the ground of still further newly discovered evidence, respondents filed in the district court an amended motion for a new trial. That motion was denied. The circuit court of appeals reversed. The Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Petitioners contended that their convictions were improper because they were based on perjured testimony.
Opinion of the court
The Supreme Court agreed, holding that the district court properly found that there was no prejudiced testimony. According to the Court, the appellate court improperly substituted its own finding that the challenged witness's original testimony was unerringly false and that the trial court's contrary conclusion amounted to an abuse of discretion. The court concluded that no reviewable issue of law was presented and that the appeal should have been dismissed as frivolous.
External links
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
"""

From "United States v. Johnson (1966)" ==> """
United States v. Johnson, 383 U.S. 169 (1966), is a United States Supreme Court case.United States v. Johnson, .
 Background 
Former Congressman Thomas Francis Johnson was convicted in the United States District Court for the District of Maryland on seven counts of violating the federal conflict of interest statute, 18 USC 281, and on one count of conspiring to defraud the United States in violation of 18 USC 371. At the trial, there was evidence admitted, as well as argument by counsel, relating to the authorship, content, and motivation of a speech which the defendant allegedly made on the floor of the House of Representatives in pursuance of a conspiracy designed to give assistance, in return for compensation, to certain savings and loan associations which had been indicted on mail fraud charges.
The Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit set aside the conviction on the conspiracy count, holding that the government's allegations with respect to the defendant's having conspired to make this speech were barred by Article I Section 6 of the United States Constitution, which provides that Senators and Representatives shall not be questioned in any other place for any speech or debate in either House; and the Court of Appeals, finding that the evidence adduced under the unconstitutional aspects of the conspiracy count had infected the entire prosecution, ordered a new trial on the other counts.
 Opinion of the Court 
On certiorari, the United States Supreme Court affirmed. In an opinion by Harlan, J., it was held that
(1) the prosecution on the conspiracy count, being dependent upon an intensive inquiry with respect to the speech on the floor of the House, violated the speech or debate clause of Article I section 6, so as to warrant the granting of a new trial on the conspiracy count, with all elements offensive to the speech or debate clause to be eliminated, and
(2) there was no occasion to review the Court of Appeals' assessment of the record with respect to its holding that the defendant was entitled to a new trial on the other counts.
 Dissent 
Warren, Ch. J., joined by Douglas and Brennan, JJ., concurred in holding (1), supra, but dissented from holding (2), supra.
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:Speech or Debate Clause case law
Category:United States federal public corruption crime case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1966 in United States case law
Category:Political scandals in Maryland
Category:Congressional scandals
"""

From "United States v. Johnson (1968)" ==> """
United States v. Johnson, 390 U.S. 563 (1968), was a United States Supreme Court case.
 Background 
Defendants were indicted under the federal civil rights statute (18 USC 241) for a conspiracy to injure and intimidate three African Americans in the exercise of their right to patronize a restaurant under Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Defendants were outsiders not connected with the restaurant. The District Court granted a motion to dismiss the indictment on the ground that 207(b) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 makes the provision for relief by injunction the exclusive remedy under the Act.  (269 F Supp 706)
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Douglas reversed for a 5-3 majority. He held that the provisions of 207(b) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 making the remedies provided in Title II of the Act the exclusive means of enforcing rights based on such part do not preclude a criminal prosecution of the defendants under 18 USC 241, since the exclusive-remedy provision applies only to enforcement of substantive rights to public accommodations against proprietors and owners, and does not purport to deal with outsiders who use violence against those who assert their rights under the Act.
 Dissent 
Justice Stewart dissented on the ground that the plain language of the exclusive remedies clause clearly precludes a criminal prosecution for interfering with rights secured by Title II of the Act.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:United States racial desegregation case law
"""

From "United States v. Johnson (1982)" ==> """
United States v. Johnson, 457 U.S. 537 (1982), was a United States Supreme Court case.
 Background 
United States Secret Service agents arrested a suspect at his home without an arrest warrant. Before trial, the defendant sought to suppress his oral and written statements as fruits of an unlawful arrest not supported by probable cause. The United States District Court found the arrest to be proper and admitted the evidence, and a jury then convicted the defendant of a federal crime.  The Ninth Circuit affirmed the judgment of conviction.
While the defendant's petition for rehearing was pending before the Court of Appeals, the United States Supreme Court decided Payton v. New York, , in which it was held that the Fourth Amendment prohibits the police from making a warrantless and nonconsensual entry into a suspect's home to make a routine felony arrest.  The Court of Appeals granted the defendant's petition for rehearing, withdrew its prior opinion, and on the strength of Payton v. New York reversed the judgment of conviction. The government petitioned for rehearing, arguing that the principles of Payton should not apply retroactively to an arrest that had occurred before Payton was decided. The Court of Appeals disagreed, denied the petition for rehearing, and amended its opinion to clarify that Payton did apply retroactively.
 Opinion of the Court 
On certiorari, the United States Supreme Court affirmed 5-4. In an opinion by Blackmun, J., it was held that the rule announced in Payton v. New York applies to a case which was pending on direct appeal when Payton was decided, Payton not having applied settled precedent to a new set of facts, not having announced an entirely new and unanticipated principle of law, nor having held either that the trial court lacked authority to convict the defendant nor that the Fourth Amendment immunized his conduct from punishment.
Brennan, concurring, expressed the view that the court's decision left undisturbed the Court's retroactivity precedents as applied to convictions final at the time of decision.
White wrote the dissent, expressing the view that retroactive application of a new constitutional doctrine is appropriate when that doctrine's major purpose is to overcome an aspect of the criminal trial that substantially impairs its truth-finding function and so raises serious questions about the accuracy of guilty verdicts in past trials and that new extensions of the exclusionary rule do not serve this purpose and will not generally be applied retroactively, and that there was nothing extraordinary about the ruling in Payton to justify an exception to this general rule.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1982 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Johnson (1987)" ==> """
United States v. Johnson, 481 U.S. 681 (1987), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court barred the widow of a serviceman killed while piloting a helicopter on a United States Coast Guard rescue mission from bringing her claim under the Federal Tort Claims Act (the "FTCA" or the "Act").United States v. Johnson, . The decision was based upon the Supreme Court's holding in Feres v. United States (1950): "[T]he Government is not liable under the Federal Tort Claims Act for injuries to servicemen where the injuries arise out of or are in the course of activity incident to service."
Background
Lieutenant Commander Johnson, a Coast Guard helicopter pilot stationed in Hawaii, was dispatched along with his crew, to search for a vessel in distress.  Because of inclement weather and poor visibility, Johnson "requested radar assistance from the Federal Aviation Administration ("FAA"), . . . the FAA controllers assumed positive radar control over the helicopter. Shortly thereafter, the helicopter crashed into the side of a mountain and . . . all the crew members, including Johnson, were killed in the crash."
Johnson's widow and personal representative of his estate brought a wrongful death action against the government pursuant to the FTCA. Plaintiff alleged that Johnson's death was due to the negligence of the FAA flight controllers. The government filed a motion to dismiss, claiming that the plaintiff was barred from recovering damages from the federal government, because Johnson died while performing his military duties.
The district court granted the motion, based solely on the Supreme Court's decision in Feres. The Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit reversed, noting that the action did not involve military service.
Johnson v. United States, 749 F.2d 1530, 1539 (11th Cir. 1985), affirmed on rehearing, 779 F.2d 1492 (11th Cir. 1986), rev'd, . The court noted that:
The complaint in this case alleges that plaintiff's decedent was killed because civilian FAA air traffic controllers negligently guided the helicopter he was piloting into a mountain. There is absolutely no hint in the scant record before this court that the conduct of any alleged tortfeasor even remotely connected to the military will be scrutinized if this case proceeds to trial. Nor is there a suggestion that examining the conduct of a civilian would in any way implicate the military services. Since the prosecution of plaintiff's claim cannot conceivably involve or compromise a military relationship or, for that matter, the military discipline structure, the prosecution of plaintiff's claim will not encroach upon the rationale which "serves largely if not exclusively as the predicate for the Feres doctrine."
Johnson, 749 F.2d at 1539 (footnote omitted) (quoting in part Hunt v. United States, 636 F.2d 580, 599 (D.C. Cir. 1980)).
The court determined that since the alleged tortfeasors were civilian employees of the government, rather than military employees, judicial second-guessing of the civilian's conduct would not adversely affect military discipline.
The Eleventh Circuit's original opinion antedated the Supreme Court's opinion in United States v. Shearer (1985). The Eleventh Circuit therefore granted the government's petition for rehearing en banc to reconsider Johnson's case in light of the Supreme Court's upcoming decision in Shearer; by the time consideration had occurred, Shearer had been decided. In a per curiam opinion on rehearing, a majority of the Eleventh Circuit concluded that Shearer "reinforced the analysis set forth in the panel opinion."
Majority Opinion
The Supreme Court, in a 5–4 decision authored by Justice Powell, reversed, holding that the cause of action was barred by Feres. The opinion indicates that Stencel required the reversal.Id. at 688-89. The Court stated that, "[t]his Court has emphasized three broad rationales underlying the Feres decision. See Stencel Aero Engineering Corp. v. United States . . . ." Id. The Court's opinion then restated the three rationales offered in Stencel:Although Shearer stated that the first two reasons were "no longer controlling," the Court cited Shearer in support of the third reason, and simply ignored that portion of Shearer that seemed to negate the first two reasons.
1. the distinctively federal relationship between soldier and government would make the application of state law inappropriate;
2. the VBA was intended to be the exclusive remedy for injuries incident to military service; and 
3. judicial second-guessing of military acts and decisions would have an adverse effect on military discipline. 
The Court then found each of the three Stencel reasons for the Feres bar applicable to Johnson. Since decedent's death-producing injuries had been incident to his military service, the first reason applied. Because his widow had applied for and received compensation for her husband's death pursuant to the Veterans' Benefits Act, the second reason applied. As for the third reason, the Court wrote:
Even if military negligence is not specifically alleged in a tort action, a suit based upon service-related activity necessarily implicates the military judgments and decisions that are inextricably intertwined with the conduct of the military mission. Moreover, military discipline involves not only obedience to orders, but more generally duty and loyalty to one's service and to one's country. Suits brought by service members against the Government for service-related injuries could undermine the commitment essential to effective service and thus have the potential to disrupt military discipline in the broadest sense of the word.
Dissent
Justice Scalia, with three Justices joining, filed a dissenting opinion. He concluded that Feres had been "wrongly decided," but noted that since "[w]e have not been asked by the plaintiff to overrule Feres, we need not resolve whether considerations of stare decisis should induce us, despite the plain error of the case, to leave bad enough alone."
Rather, Justice Scalia would have declined to apply Feres to a case in which the allegedly negligent actors were civilian employees of the government. He conceded that the limitation it sought was more a product of pragmatism than logical symmetry: "We confess that the line between FTCA suits alleging military negligence and those alleging civilian negligence has nothing to recommend it except that it would limit our clearly wrong decision in Feres and confine the unfairness and irrationality that decision has bred. But that, we think, is justification enough." As the dissent noted, the Court itself had disavowed the reasons originally offered in Feres and substituted as the only rationale (until Johnson resurrected the other two) the after-discovered military discipline concern. Justice Scalia concluded that none of the reasons that the Court has asserted, from Feres through Shearer, persuasively supported the Feres bar.
He further disagreed with the majority opinion in that it did not regard the Congressional failure to amend the FTCA in the years since Feres as bespeaking to congressional acquiescence in the Court's interpretation of the Act:
We cannot take comfort, as the Court does from Congress' failure to amend the FTCA to overturn Feres. The unlegislated desires of later Congresses with regard to one thread in the fabric of the FTCA could hardly have any bearing upon the proper interpretation of the entire fabric of compromises that their predecessors enacted into law in 1946. And even if they could, intuiting those desires from congressional failure to act is an uncertain enterprise which takes as its starting point disregard of the checks and balances in the constitutional scheme of legislation designed to assure that not all desires of a majority of the Legislature find their way into law.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States tort case law
"""

From "United States v. Johnson (2000)" ==> """
United States v. Johnson, 529 U.S. 53 (2000), was a United States Supreme Court case.
Johnson was sentenced in federal court for multiple violations of federal criminal provisions.  He was sentenced terms of imprisonment for the violations and, in addition, a three-year mandatory term of supervised release for the drug possession offenses.  After he had served 2½ years in federal prison, two of his convictions, not including the drug possession convictions, were declared invalid; as a result, he had served too much prison time, which resulted in his being eligible for immediate release.
He argued that his time in federal prison should be credited against his three years of supervised release. The District Court denied relief, and explained that (1) pursuant to 18 USCS 3624(e), the supervised release commenced upon the accused's actual release from incarceration, not before, and (2) granting the accused credit would undermine the United States Congress's aim of using supervised release to assist convicted felons in their transitions to community life. However, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit (1) accepted the accused's argument that his term of supervised release commenced when his lawful term of imprisonment expired, and (2) reversed the decision of the District Court (154 F3d 569).
Opinion of the court
A unanimous U.S. Supreme Court, per Justice Kennedy, reversed the original decision. Relying heavily upon the actual language in 18 U.S.C. § 3624(e), the Court found that a period of supervised release cannot commence until the prisoner is actually released from incarceration.  The Court construed the supervised release statute to unambiguously dictate the commencement of supervision upon release from custody. The Supreme Court found no need to resort to other subsections of the statute because:
1) the statute was unambiguous:  a supervised release term did not commence until an accused was "released from imprisonment," and the ordinary and commonsense meaning of "release" was to be freed from confinement; 3624(e) also provided that (a) a term of supervised release came after imprisonment, once the prisoner was released by the Bureau of Prisons to the supervision of a probation officer, and (b) supervised release did not run while an individual remained in the custody of the Bureau.
2) the same terminology was not used in the different subsections;
3) there was no express reference between the relevant statutory subsections.
Congress intended supervised release conditions to assist individuals in their transition to community life. Supervised release serves a rehabilitative end distinct from those served by incarceration. Id. at 59."United States v. Johnson." Oyez, www.oyez.org/cases/1999/98-1696. Accessed 31 Jan. 2023.
When Congress provides exceptions in a statute, it does not follow that courts have authority to create others. The proper inference... is that Congress considered the issue of exceptions and, in the end, limited the statute to the ones set forth. Id. at 58.
However, Justice Kennedy noted that the inmate could seek equitable relief in the district court pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3583(e)(2) (modification of conditions of supervised release) or 18 U.S.C. § 3583(e)(1) (trial court may terminate supervised release after expiration of one year if warranted by the defendant's conduct).
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:United States sentencing case law
"""

From "United States v. Jones (1883)" ==> """
United States v. Jones, 109 U.S. 513 (1883), is an important decision by the United States Supreme Court which provides the power to take private property for public uses, in the exercise of the right of eminent domain, to the government of the United States.  However, once the government exercises of the right of eminent domain and after a fair determination of the amount of compensation, any unforeseen damage to the property as a result of activities prior to the purchase but realized only afterwards is to be compensated by the government per any legislative decree.United States v. Jones, .
Background
In the mid-1800s, there were efforts to establish a navigable shipping route between Lake Michigan and the Mississippi River.  One of those efforts was to improve navigation on the Fox and Wisconsin Rivers and in constructing a canal to unite the rivers.  In 1846, the United States government ceded land to the State of Wisconsin for the purpose of implementing this plan.  The project was awarded to a corporation known as the Green Bay and Mississippi Canal Company.  There were several delays in the project and construction of several of the dams were plagued with issues.  In 1870, the government had grown weary of the delays and, in July, 1870, the United States Congress passed an act "for the improvement of water communication between the Mississippi River and Lake Michigan by the Wisconsin and Fox Rivers;" which authorized the government to exercise of the right of eminent domain to take back the property ceded in 1846, and any other property necessary to complete the project.United States v. Jones, 109 U.S. at 514.
The amount of compensation for the land to be claimed by its eminent domain was determined and the property became the property of the US government in 1872.  After 1872, severe floods destroyed property on lands which had not been claimed by the US government.  These floods were a result of the construction of dams by the Green Bay and Mississippi Canal Company prior to United States ascertaining the property.  The property owners sued the United States government for damages caused by the floods and the case was heard in Wisconsin state courts.United States v. Jones, 109 U.S. at 515-17.
The case was set for a jury trial. The United States objected to the case claiming the state court had no jurisdiction to try a cause in which the United States were a party. These objections were overruled and the trial resulted in a verdict for the property owners for $10,000.United States v. Jones, 109 U.S. at 517-518.  The government appealed to the Wisconsin Supreme Court, where the verdict was affirmed.  Following the decision by the Wisconsin Supreme Court, the US government appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
Decision
The case was submitted to the United States Supreme Court on October 11, 1883, and Justice Stephen Johnson Field delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court which affirmed the Wisconsin Supreme Court.
The Court based its opinion on a bill which was passed by Congress and approved on March 3, 1875, which provides that the value of any property ascertained through the right of eminent domain will be determined by the laws of the State wherein the property lay.  The provisions of the act of 1875, with reference to the property overflowed by dams constructed in the improvement of the navigation of Fox and Wisconsin rivers, that the compensation to be made shall be ascertained in the mode and manner prescribed by the laws of the State, and constitute a sufficient waiver of the United States general immunity of process. Thus, the Court determined that the US government must provide compensation according to the laws of Wisconsin.United States v. Jones, 109 U.S. at 520-521.
In 1874, the Wisconsin Legislature passed a law providing for ascertaining the compensation to be made for damages caused to lands by their being overflowed or otherwise injured or taken by the United States.  This Wisconsin law provides that the US government is liable for any damages resulting from the property.  The Court determined that this law applied to the US government. Therefore, the Court determined that the proceeding in the Wisconsin state courts were valid and upheld the verdict by the jury which awarded the property owners compensation from the US government.
Significance
Federal Courts have cited the Jones decision in over 600 decisions as a guideline on applying the US government power and obligation under the Fifth Amendment to take private property for public uses, generally termed the right of eminent domain.  It has also been cited to stress a common lesson, caveat emptor or “let the buyer beware”, even when the government is the buyer.
The Fox–Wisconsin Waterway was completed in 1876, but after the completion of the Illinois and Michigan Canal.  As the Illinois and Michigan Canal became the primary passageway between Lake Michigan and the Mississippi River, use of the Fox–Wisconsin Waterway was never substantial and it slowly died out, and by 1951, the passage was closed.
 References 
External links
Category:1883 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Fox–Wisconsin Waterway
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States federal jurisdiction case law
"""

From "United States v. Jones (2012)" ==> """
United States v. Jones, 565 U.S. 400 (2012), was a landmark United States Supreme Court case in which the court held that installing a Global Positioning System (GPS) tracking device on a vehicle and using the device to monitor the vehicle's movements constitutes a search under the Fourth Amendment.US v. Jones, 565 US 400 (2012).
In 2004 Antoine Jones was suspected by police in the District of Columbia of drug trafficking. Investigators asked for and received a warrant to attach a GPS tracking device to the underside of Jones's car but then exceeded the warrant's scope in both geography and length of time. The Supreme Court ruled unanimously that this was a search under the Fourth Amendment, although they were split 5-4 as to the fundamental reasons behind that conclusion. The majority held that by physically installing the GPS device on Jones's car, the police had committed a trespass against his "personal effects". This trespass, in an attempt to obtain information, constituted a search per se.
Background
Police investigation and criminal trial
Antoine Jones owned a nightclub in the District of Columbia; Lawrence Maynard managed the club. In 2004, a joint Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and Metropolitan Police Department task force began investigating Jones and Maynard for narcotics violations. During the course of the investigation, police installed a Global Positioning System (GPS) device on Jones's wife's Jeep Grand Cherokee. They had received a valid warrant from a judge, but that warrant only covered the District of Columbia and only for a limited time period.Maynard, 615 F.3d at 566 ("The police had obtained a warrant to install the GPS device in D.C. only, but it had expired before they installed it — which they did in Maryland.") The GPS device tracked the vehicle's movements 24 hours a day for four weeks, and in the states surrounding the District of Columbia.Maynard, 615 F.3d at 555 ("...tracking [Jones's] movements 24 hours a day for four weeks (sic) with a GPS device [the police] had installed on his Jeep...") This exceeded both the time limit and the geographic react of the original warrant. The FBI arrested Jones under conspiracy to distribute narcotics charges in late 2005, based on data about the locations to which the vehicle was tracked, and he filed a motion to suppress the GPS data.
Jones was tried in criminal court in late 2006, and a federal jury deadlocked on the conspiracy charge and acquitted him of multiple other counts. The government retried Jones, and in early 2008 the jury returned a guilty verdict on one count of conspiracy to distribute and to possess with intent to distribute five or more kilograms of cocaine and 50 or more grams of cocaine base.Maynard, 615 F.3d at 549 ("the Government filed another superseding indictment charging Jones, Maynard, and a few co-defendants with a single count of conspiracy to distribute and to possess with intent to distribute five or more kilograms of cocaine and 50 or more grams of cocaine base.  A joint trial of Jones and Maynard began in November 2007 and ended in January 2008, when the jury found them both guilty.") He was sentenced to life in prison.United States v. Jones, Petition for a Writ of Certiorari p. 2, "respondent was convicted of conspiracy to distribute five kilograms or more of cocaine and 50 or more grams of cocaine base, in violation of 21 U.S.C. 841 and 846. The district court sentenced respondent to  ."
Appeal
Jones argued that his criminal conviction should be overturned because the use of the GPS tracker violated the Fourth Amendment's protection against unreasonable search and seizure.Maynard, 615 F.3d at 555 ("Jones argues his conviction should be overturned because the police violated the Fourth Amendment prohibition of unreasonable searches by tracking his movements 24 hours a day for four weeks with a GPS device they had installed on his Jeep without a valid warrant.") In 2010, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit agreed with Jones and overturned his conviction, holding that the police action was a search because it violated Jones's "reasonable expectation of privacy."Maynard, 615 F.3d at 555 ("As explained below, we hold Knotts does not govern this case and the police action was a search because it defeated Jones‘s reasonable expectation of privacy.")Recent Case: D.C. Circuit Deems Warrantless Use of GPS Device an Unreasonable Search, 124 Harv. L. Rev. 827 (2011). The D.C. Circuit then denied prosecutors' petition for rehearing en banc.<ref>[https://harvardlawreview.org/wp-content/uploads/pdfs/vol126_united_states_v_jones.pdf The Supreme Court, 2011 Term — Leading Cases], 126 Harv. L. Rev. 226 (2012).</ref>
The Circuit Court's decision was the subject of significant legal debate. In 2007, Judge Richard Posner of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit had reached the opposite conclusion on whether GPS tracking by police was a search under the Fourth Amendment.Recent Case: Seventh Circuit Holds That GPS Tracking is Not a Search, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 2230 (2007). 
Federal prosecutors appealed the Circuit Court decision. In June 2011, the Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve two questions The first question was "Whether the warrantless use of a tracking device on respondent's vehicle to monitor its movements on public streets violated the Fourth Amendment." The second question was "Whether the government violated respondent's Fourth Amendment rights by installing the GPS tracking device on his vehicle without a valid warrant and without his consent."United States v. Jones, Docket, Certiorari granted (June 27, 2011).
Oral argument
Deputy Solicitor General Michael DreebenUnited States v. Jones (Oral Argument Transcript) p. 1. began his argument on behalf of federal prosecutors by noting that information that is visible to anyone in the public, such as a driver's movements on public roads, is not protected by the Fourth Amendment.United States v. Jones (Oral Argument Transcript) p. 3. Dreeben cited United States v. Knotts (1983) as an example in which police were allowed to use a device known as a "beeper" that enabled tracking a car from a short distance away. Chief Justice John Roberts distinguished the present case from Knotts, saying that using a beeper still took "a lot of work" whereas a GPS device allows the police to "sit back in the station ... and push a button whenever they want to find out where the car is."United States v. Jones (Oral Argument Transcript) p. 4.
Justice Antonin Scalia then directed the discussion to whether installing the device was an unreasonable search. Scalia argued that "when that device is installed against the will of the owner of the car on the car, that is unquestionably a trespass and thereby rendering the owner of the car not secure in his effects... against an unreasonable search and seizure."United States v. Jones (Oral Argument Transcript) p. 7. Dreeben argued that it may have been a trespass by police, but in the 1984 precedent United States v. Karo (a case involving a similar trespass) the Supreme Court ruled that it "made no difference because the purpose of the Fourth Amendment is to protect privacy interests and meaningful interference [with possessions], not to cover all technical trespasses."United States v. Jones (Oral Argument Transcript) p. 8.
Justice Samuel Alito stated that people's use of technology is changing what the expectation of privacy is for the courts. "You know, I don't know what society expects and I think it's changing. Technology is changing people's expectations of privacy. Suppose we look forward 10 years, and maybe 10 years from now 90 percent of the population will be using social networking sites and they will have on average 500 friends and they will have allowed their friends to monitor their location 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, through the use of their cell phones. Then — what would the expectation of privacy be then?"United States v. Jones (Oral Argument Transcript) p. 44.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor noted that "What motivated the Fourth Amendment historically was the disapproval, the outrage, that our Founding Fathers experienced with general warrants that permitted police indiscriminately to investigate just on the basis of suspicion, not probable cause, and to invade every possession that the individual had in search of a crime." She then asked, "How is this different?"United States v. Jones (Oral Argument Transcript) p. 20.
Opinion of the Court
175px|thumb|Justice Antonin Scalia delivered the opinion of the 5-4 majority.
On January 23, 2012, the Supreme Court held that "the Government's installation of a GPS device on a target's vehicle, and its use of that device to monitor the vehicle's movements, constitutes a 'search'" under the Fourth Amendment.Jones, 565 U.S. at 404. Some journalists and commentators interpreted this ruling as a requirement that all GPS data surveillance requires a search warrant, but this ruling was narrower and applied only to the circumstances of the police investigation of Jones, particularly regarding location data when driving a vehicle.
It can be said that all nine justices unanimously considered the police's actions in Jones to be unconstitutional. Importantly, however, they were split 5-4 on the reasoning for that conclusion. Furthermore, the justices were of three different opinions with respect to the breadth of the judgment.
Majority opinion
Justice Antonin Scalia authored the majority opinion. He cited a line of cases dating as far back as 1886 to argue that a physical intrusion, or trespass, into a constitutionally-protected area – in an attempt to find something or to obtain information – was the basis, historically, for determining whether a "search" had occurred under the meaning of the Fourth Amendment.Jones, 565 U.S. at 405. Scalia conceded that in the years following Katz v. United States (1967) – in which electronic eavesdropping on a public telephone booth was held to be a search – the vast majority of search and seizure case law had shifted away from that approach founded on property rights, and towards an approach based on a person's "expectation of privacy".Jones, 565 U.S. at 405-06. However, he cited a number of post-Katz cases including Alderman v. United StatesAlderman v. United States, . "[W]e [do not] believe that Katz, by holding that the Fourth Amendment protects persons and their private conversations, was intended to withdraw any of the protection which the Amendment extends to the home . . . ." and Soldal v. Cook CountySoldal v. Cook County, . "[Katz established that] property rights are not the sole measure of Fourth Amendment violations. . . . [it did not] snuf[f] out the previously recognized protection for property." to argue that the trespassory approach had not been abandoned by the Court.Jones, 565 U.S. at 407-08. In response to criticisms within Alito's concurrence, Scalia emphasized that the Fourth Amendment must provide, at a minimum, the level of protection as it did when it was adopted. Furthermore, a trespassory test need not exclude a test of the expectation of privacy, which may be appropriate to consider in situations where there was no governmental trespass.Jones, 565 U.S. at 411-12.
In the present case, the Court concluded that government's installation of a GPS device onto the defendant's car (his "personal effects") was a trespass that was purposed to obtain information, so it was a search under the Fourth Amendment. Having reached the conclusion that this was a search under the Fourth Amendment, the Court declined to examine whether any exception exists that would render the search "reasonable", because the government had failed to advance that theory in the lower courts. 
Also left unanswered was the broader question surrounding the privacy implications of a warrantless use of GPS data absent a physical intrusion – as might occur, for example, with the electronic collection of GPS data from wireless service providers or factory-installed vehicle tracking and navigation services. The Court left these matters to be decided in some future case, saying, "It may be that achieving the same result through electronic means, without an accompanying trespass, is an unconstitutional invasion of privacy, but the present case does not require us to answer that question."Jones, 565 U.S. at 412.
Concurring opinions
Justice Sotomayor
175px|left|thumb|Justice Sonia Sotomayor was the sole voice against warrantless GPS surveillance, whether long- or short-term, both on the basis of property and privacy rights.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor was the fifth justice to concur with Scalia's opinion, making hers the decisive vote.Jones, 565 U.S. at 413 (Sotomayor, J., concurring).  "As the majority's opinion makes clear", she noted, "Katzs reasonable-expectation-of-privacy test augmented, but did not displace or diminish, the common-law trespassory test that preceded it".Jones, 565 U.S. at 414 (Sotomayor, J., concurring). She agreed with Alito's expectation of privacy reasoning with respect to long-term surveillance, but she went a step further by also disputing the constitutionality of warrantless short-term GPS surveillance. Even during short-term monitoring, she reasoned, GPS surveillance can precisely record an individual's every movement, and hence can reveal completely private destinations, like "trips to the psychiatrist, the plastic surgeon, the abortion clinic, the AIDS treatment center, the strip club, the criminal defense attorney, the by-the-hour motel, the union meeting, the mosque, synagogue or church, the gay bar and on and on."Jones, 565 U.S. at 415 (Sotomayor, J., concurring). Sotomayor added:
Sotomayor distinguished the present case from Knotts, reminding that Knotts suggested that a different principle might apply to situations in which every a person's movement was completely monitored for 24 hours.
Justice Alito
175px|thumb|Justice Samuel Alito and three others concurred, but only on the basis of privacy rights, and only against long-term GPS surveillance.
In his concurring opinion, Justice Samuel Alito wrote with respect to privacy: "short-term monitoring of a person’s movements on public streets accords with expectations of privacy" but "the use of longer term GPS monitoring in investigations of most offenses impinges on expectations of privacy."Jones, 565 U.S. at 430 (Alito, J., concurring). Alito argued against the majority's reliance on trespass under modern circumstances. Specifically, he argued that the common law property-based analysis of a "search" under the Fourth Amendment did not apply to such electronic situations as the one that occurred in this case.Jones, 565 U.S. at 419-20 (Alito, J., concurring). He further argued that following the doctrinal changes in Katz, a technical trespass leading to the gathering of evidence was "neither necessary nor sufficient to establish a constitutional violation".Jones, 565 U.S. at 423 (Alito, J., concurring, quoting United States v. Karo, ).Justice Scalia countered this quote from Karo (that "[trespass is] neither necessary nor sufficient...") by calling it "irrelevant" – Karo contemplated a seizure, not a search, and trespass has no bearing on the constitutionality of a seizure. Jones, 565 U.S. at 408, n.5. In his concurring opinion Alito outlined that long-term surveillance can reveal everything about a person:
 Minority opinions 
Following the privacy-based approach most commonly used post-Katz, the four-justice minority were instead of the opinion that the continuous monitoring of every single movement of an individual's car for 28 days violated a "reasonable expectation of privacy", and thus constituted a search. Alito explained that before GPS and similar electronic technology, month-long surveillance of an individual's every move would have been exceptionally demanding and costly, requiring a tremendous amount of resources and people. As a result, society's expectations were, and still are, that such complete and long-term surveillance would not be undertaken, and that an individual would not think it could occur to him or her.United States v Jones (Opinion) Alito's concurrence, p. 13.
With regard to continuous monitoring for a short period, the minority relied on the Knotts precedent and decline to find a violation of the expectation of privacy. In Knotts, a short-distance signal beeper in the defendant's car was tracked during a single trip for less than a day. The Knotts Court held that a person traveling on public roads has no expectation of privacy in his movements, because the vehicle's starting point, direction, stops, or final destination could be seen by anyone else on the road.United States v. Knotts, .
Impact and subsequent developments
Walter E. Dellinger III, the former U.S. Solicitor General and the attorney who represented Jones, said the decision was "a signal event in Fourth Amendment history."Bravin, Jess, "Justices Rein In Police on GPS Trackers", The Wall Street Journal, January 24, 2012. Retrieved 2012-01-24. He also said the decision made it more risky for law enforcement to use a GPS tracking device without a warrant. FBI director Robert Mueller testified in 2013 that the Jones decision had limited the Bureau's surveillance capabilities.
Criminal defense attorneys and civil libertarians such as Virginia Sloan of the Constitution Project praised the ruling for protecting Fourth Amendment rights against government intrusion through modern technology. The Electronic Frontier Foundation, which filed an amicus brief arguing that warrantless GPS tracking violates reasonable expectations of privacy, praised Sotomayor's concurrence for raising concerns that existing Fourth Amendment precedents do not reflect the realities of modern technology.
The Supreme Court remanded the case to the district court to determine whether Jones's criminal conviction could be restored based on the other evidence collected, and without that evidence ruled unconstitutional by the Supreme Court. During the original investigation, the police obtained cell site location data via a process enabled by the Stored Communications Act. Judge Ellen Segal Huvelle ruled in late 2012 that the government could use the cell site data against Jones.The Supreme Court's 2018 decision in Carpenter vs. United States held that Police must obtain a search warrant prior to obtaining cellular location information. A new criminal trial began in early 2013 after Jones rejected a plea bargain of 15 to 22 years in prison. In March 2013, a mistrial was declared with the jury evenly split. The Government planned for a fourth trial but in May 2013 Jones accepted a plea bargain of 15 years with credit for time served.
In October 2013, the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit addressed the unanswered question of whether warrantless use of GPS devices would be reasonable — and thus lawful — under the Fourth Amendment if police have probable cause to justify the search., quoting United States v Jones (Opinion) Majority p. 5. United States v. Katzin was the first relevant appeals court ruling in the wake of Jones'' to address this topic. The court held that a warrant was indeed required to deploy GPS tracking devices, and further, that none of the narrow exceptions to the Fourth Amendment's warrant requirement (e.g. exigent circumstances) were applicable.
References
Further reading
United States v. Jones: GPS Monitoring, Property, and Privacy Congressional Research Service
External links
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:Surveillance
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Global Positioning System
Category:Legal history of the District of Columbia
"""

From "United States v. Jordan" ==> """
United States v. Jordan, 113 U.S. 418 (1885), was a Supreme Court of the United States case regarding an Act of Congress that involved tax refunds. Specifically, it provided for the refunding to the persons therein named of the amount of taxes assessed upon and collected from them contrary to the provisions of the regulations therein mentioned.  In other words, pay to each of such persons the sum set opposite his name, each of them is entitled to be paid the whole of that sum, and no discretion is vested in the Secretary of the Treasury or in any court to determine whether the sum specified was or was not the amount of a tax assessed contrary to the provisions of such regulations..
On the 29 July 1882, an Act of Congress was passed, 22 Stat. 723, c. 359, providing
This was followed by the names of 81 persons, and the specification of a sum of money opposite each name.
The Secretary of the Treasury sent the Commissioner of Internal Revenue the following letter on June 19, 1873, which is referred to in the act of Congress:
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
WASHINGTON, June 19, 1873
SIR: I have considered the claim of William Gosling and others, applicants for refunding taxes alleged to have been illegally collected, included in schedule No. 243, from your office, and am of opinion that under the existing laws, the taxes paid by these parties were legally paid, and should not be refunded. But I fully recognize the hardship of the case, and desire that such claimants may receive relief from Congress. I have therefore to suggest that you will, in your next annual report or on any other occasion which you may deem more fitting, recommend the passage of a special act authorizing the refunding of all taxes paid by residents of the insurrectionary states which, under department circular of June 21, 1865, should not have been collected, such refunding to be made whether the tax in question was collected before or after the issue of the circular.
I am, very respectfully,
WILLIAM A. RICHARDSON
Secretary of the Treasury
The brief for the United States stated that the payment was refused by the accounting officers of the Treasury on the grounds that the statute authorized payment of only
The view taken by the Treasury officers was that the annual income tax for the year 1863, under the Act of July 1, 1862, became, by the statute, due and payable May 1, 1864, before the assessment division that comprised Rutherford County was established, and under the Treasury regulations of June 21, 1865, in circular No. 16, which required collection only of the first taxes due after the establishment of assessment divisions. That sum was collected contrary to the provisions of those regulations, and was to be refunded, though it was collected before the date of the circular. The Treasury officers decided, however, that the money, paid for the special income tax under the joint resolution of July 4, 1864, and which, by law, did not become due until October 1, 1864, after the establishment of such assessment division, was not collected contrary to the provisions of those regulations, and should not be refunded.
The Court of Claims held that the statute did not admit of that interpretation, nor leave open any question for the court or for the accounting officers of the Treasury, except the identity of the claimants with the persons named in it, and that its language, taken together, was too clear to admit of doubt, that Congress undertook, as it had a right to do, to determine not only what citizens of Tennessee by name should have relief, but also the exact amount that should be paid to each one of them. We concur in this view. The act authorized and directed the Secretary of the Treasury to pay to the several persons named the respective sums named.
The court found that it was not an improper inference from the language of the statute that Congress intended to refund the taxes covered by the recommendation of the Secretary of the Treasury, in his letter of June 19, 1873. That letter covers taxes described as those that under the circular "...should not have been collected," though collected before it was issued. Congress may therefore have included some taxes collected before the circular was issued, but that it thought should not have been, or ought not to have been collected, in the sense intended by the Secretary.
The judgment of the Court of Claims was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Jorn" ==> """
United States v. Jorn, 400 U.S. 470 (1971), was a United States Supreme Court decision clarifying when a criminal defendant may be retried after a mistrial. In this case, where a trial judge abruptly declared a mistrial to prevent the prosecution's witness from incriminating himself, a second trial was barred by the Double Jeopardy Clause.
Jorn was charged with numerous counts of assisting in the preparation of fraudulent income tax returns. He was tried in the United States District Court for the District of Utah. Among the government's witnesses were five taxpayers whom Jorn had allegedly assisted in preparing fraudulent returns. As the first of these witnesses was called, the trial judge became concerned the witness was about to incriminate himself, and refused to allow the witness to testify until the same had consulted an attorney. Upon learning that all five witnesses were in the same situation, the judge discharged the jury and aborted the trial. The case was then set for retrial before a different jury, but Jorn argued that retrial was forbidden by double jeopardy.
The question of when a retrial is permitted after a mistrial is flexible and depends on the circumstances of the case. Here, the trial judge had acted sua sponte, abruptly discharging the jury without input from either the prosecution or defense. The Court used the framework of United States v. Perez to evaluate this action, asking whether there was "manifest necessity" to declare the mistrial. Here, the Court concluded, "the trial judge here abused his discretion in discharging the jury," suggesting instead the possibility of a continuance. Justice Harlan pointed out the potential injustice of subjecting the defendant to a second trial, writing, "Reprosecution after a mistrial has unnecessarily been declared ... subjects the defendant to ... personal strain and insecurity."
In conclusion, since there was not "manifest necessity" for the trial judge to declare the mistrial, Jorn could not be reprosecuted.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 400
 References 
External links
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1971 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Ju Toy" ==> """
United States v. Ju Toy, 198 U.S. 253 (1905), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Supreme Court conceded its right to judicial review over immigration matters.Sucheng Chan, "Struggles for Civil, Political, Economic, and Social Rights," in Asian American Studies Now, ed. Jean Yu-wen Shen Wu and Thomas C. Chen (New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 2011), 219. The case held that "a citizen of Chinese parentage seeking admission to the United States" could be excluded by the administrative immigration authorities, even when being denied a hearing before a judicial body on the question whether they were indeed a citizen.Thomas Reed Powell, "Judicial Review of Administrative Action in Immigration Proceedings," Harvard Law Review 22, no. 5 (1909): 360. The Court determined that refusing entry at a port does not deny due process and held that findings by immigration officials are conclusive and not subject to judicial review unless there is evidence of bias or negligence.Richard Evelyn Byrd, "The Decay of Personal Rights and Guarantees," The Yale Law Journal 18, no. 4 (1909): 356. This case marked a shift in the court in respect to habeas corpus petitions and altered the judicial landscape for citizens applying for admission into the United States as well as for those facing deportation.
History
The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 prohibited the immigration of Chinese laborers for a period of ten years and restricted all Chinese immigrants from obtaining naturalized citizenship, while at the same time allowing "merchants, teachers, students, travelers, and diplomats" to be exempt from these exclusions.Erika Lee, "The Chinese Exclusion Example: Race, Immigration and American Gatekeeping, 1182-1924," Journal of American Ethnic History 21, no. 3 (2002): 36. Chinese in the United States before the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act was passed were able to return without impediment to the United States if they "obtained a certificate before their departure and could produce this document upon their return". In 1888, Congress passed the Scott Act which revoked the right of Chinese laborers to re-enter the United States after visiting China. The Scott Act was renewed with the passing of the Geary Act in 1892 which also "required all alien Chinese then residing in the United States to register" and those caught without their registration form on their person could potentially be arrested or deported.  The combination of these acts increased the restrictions on and exclusion of Chinese and Chinese Americans. As a result the Chinese combatted discrimination and exclusion through the judicial system, often via petition of habeas corpus, and many Chinese found relief through the judicial system until the United States v. Ju Toy decision.Sucheng Chan, "Struggles for Civil, Political, Economic, and Social Rights," in Asian American Studies Now, ed. Jean Yu-wen Shen Wu and Thomas C. Chen (New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 2011), 218.
Ju Toy was a Chinese man who had been born in the United States and was not subject to the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act nor the Scott Act of 1888.Richard Evelyn Byrd, "The Decay of Personal Rights and Guarantees," The Yale Law Journal 18, no. 4 (1909): 255.  Ju Toy visited China and returned to San Francisco on the steamship Doric, but on his return Ju Toy was denied permission to land and was ordered to be deported by immigration officials even though he was not an immigrant. Ju Toy then sued out of a writ of habeas corpus from a Federal District Court. The Federal District Court ruled that Ju Toy was a person native to the United States and ordered his release. The Government appealed and the case was brought to the Supreme Court and heard for arguments on April 3, 1905.
Ruling
Justice Holmes delivered the majority opinion on May 8, 1905. The majority held that the petition for habeas corpus should have been denied because it alleged nothing except citizenship and since it "disclosed neither abuse of authority nor the existence of evidence not laid before the Secretary"..  The Supreme Court maintained that while the acts of Congress give no authority to exclude citizens, the acts grants administrative officials the power to determine finally whether or not a given person is a citizen. Holmes argued that even if Ju Toy was a native American, he could not get any relief from the Courts since the findings of the immigration officials were conclusive and not subject to judicial review.Richard Evelyn Byrd, "The Decay of Personal Rights and Guarantees," The Yale Law Journal 18, no. 4 (1909): 256. The Supreme Court determined that refusing entry at a port does not deny due process since due process can be given without a judicial trial for citizens applying for admission.Lucy E. Salyer, Laws as Harsh as Tigers: Chinese Immigrants and the Shaping of Modern Immigration Law (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995), 113. Therefore Ju Toy could not obtain reprieve from the judicial system and was subject to be deported to China.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Brewer with Justice Peckham dissented. Justice Day also dissented. The dissent argued that Ju Toy had been judicially determined to be a "free-born American citizen" and has been guilty of no crime since returning to one's native land is not a crime for citizens. Brewer contested that allowing a citizen, guilty of no crime, to be deported without a trial by jury, and without judicial examination, strips him of all his rights which are given to a citizen.
Significance
Prior to US v. Ju Toy, many Chinese employed the judicial system to "temper the effects of exclusion", but after the Ju Toy decision, the Chinese lost an important measure to resisting exclusion, since they could no longer use courts in the same way to review the administrative decisions that denied them entry.Lucy E. Salyer, Laws as Harsh as Tigers: Chinese Immigrants and the Shaping of Modern Immigration Law (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995), 116. As a result of the decision, as well as the legislation passed in the United States, China launched a dramatic boycott of American goods in protest, a sign that the struggle over Chinese exclusion had not ended.Lucy E. Salyer, Laws as Harsh as Tigers: Chinese Immigrants and the Shaping of Modern Immigration Law (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995), 139. After the decision, the Court received much criticism, especially regarding the Court's serious departure from constitutional principles. Some of the greatest criticism surrounded Holmes' contention that due process did not require a judicial trial for citizens applying for admission.Lucy E. Salyer, Laws as Harsh as Tigers: Chinese Immigrants and the Shaping of Modern Immigration Law (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995), 114. In prior cases, the Court had made distinctions between the constitutional rights of aliens and of citizens, "holding that aliens could not use the Constitution to shield themselves from administrative actions". With the decision of Ju Toy, the Court blurred the distinction between alien and citizens and determined that both are subject to the same bureaucratic discretion and authority.  This decision placed alleged citizens on the same level in admission proceedings before the Bureau of Immigration.Lucy E. Salyer, Laws as Harsh as Tigers: Chinese Immigrants and the Shaping of Modern Immigration Law (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995), 209.
However, even though discomfort with the decision persisted, the Court's basic holding endured, and Federal courts no longer had to investigate the right of a petitioner to enter the United States, accepting the Bureau of Immigration's investigation as final and refusing to hear new evidence. The Ju Toy decision also granted immigration officials the power to determine whether an individual applying for admission to their own country was in fact a citizen authorized to enter through the port, since due process could be satisfied by summary administrative proceedings.Lucy E. Salyer, Laws as Harsh as Tigers: Chinese Immigrants and the Shaping of Modern Immigration Law (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995), 171. After United States v. Ju Toy, the number of habeas corpus petitions filed by Chinese in the Northern District of California plummeted from 153 cases in 1904, to 32 in 1905 and to 9 in 1906.Lucy E. Salyer, Laws as Harsh as Tigers: Chinese Immigrants and the Shaping of Modern Immigration Law (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995), 170. The Ju Toy decision also led the district court in San Francisco to often dismiss Chinese petitions for habeas corpus, unless "there was evidence that the officials had taken unlawful or arbitrary action". This decision curtailed Chinese access to courts concerning admission decisions, allowing the Bureau of Immigration to create their own admission proceedings, yet deportation decisions still rested with the judicial courts.Lucy E. Salyer, Laws as Harsh as Tigers: Chinese Immigrants and the Shaping of Modern Immigration Law (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995), 115.
In 1917, Congress removed the provision "allowing Chinese a judicial hearing in deportation cases". This allowed for immigration officials to arrest Chinese for deportation under general immigration laws and use their own judicial system, unless the deportable offense came solely under the Chinese Exclusion Act, in which case a judicial hearing was still required. In 1910, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals extended the ruling in Ju Toy to allow the bureau complete control over the deportation of alleged citizens as well. These combined actions stemming from the Ju Toy decision provided the Immigration Bureau with the authority over all immigration matters and led to the creation of the American contemporary immigration judicial system.
However, the Court came to a different conclusion in 1922, that habeas corpus petitioners are entitled to a de novo judicial hearing to determine whether they are U.S. citizens.  In Ng Fung Ho v. White, the Court held that to deport a detainee who claimed U.S. citizenship "obviously deprives him of liberty," and that "[j]urisdiction in the executive to order deportation exists only if the person arrested is an alien. The claim of citizenship is thus a denial of an essential jurisdictional fact."
References
External links
Category:History of San Francisco
Category:Law in the San Francisco Bay Area
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1905 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Chinese-American culture in California
"""

From "United States v. Kagama" ==> """
United States v. Kagama, 118 U.S. 375 (1886), was a United States Supreme Court case that upheld the constitutionality of the Major Crimes Act of 1885.. This Congressional act gave the federal courts jurisdiction in certain Indian-on-Indian crimes, even if they were committed on an Indian reservation. Kagama, a Yurok Native American (Indian) accused of murder, was selected as a test case by the Department of Justice to test the constitutionality of the Act.
The importance of the ruling in this case was that it tested the constitutionality of the Act and confirmed Congress's authority over Indian affairs. Plenary power over Indian tribes, supposedly granted to the U.S. Congress by the Commerce Clause of the Constitution, was not deemed necessary to support the Supreme Court in this decision. Instead, the Court found the power in the tribes' status as dependent domestic nations, which allowed Congress to pass the Dawes Act the following year. The case has been criticized by legal scholars as drawing on powers that are not granted to Congress by the Constitution, but it remains good law.
Background
Crow Dog and the Major Crimes Act of 1885
thumb|right|150px|alt=an Indian, facing right|Crow Dog
In 1881, a Brulé Lakota Sioux named Crow Dog killed his government-installed chief.,   36 (2006).  Crow Dog was detained and tried for murder.Joseph D. Matal, A Revisionist History of Indian Country, 14  283, 303 (1997).  However, he contended that the United States held no jurisdiction on the reservation. The Supreme Court agreed, confirming Crow Dog's assertion that they lacked jurisdiction because the crime occurred in Indian country between two Indians.  In the opinion issued by Justice Stanley Matthews for the Supreme Court in Ex parte Crow Dog in 1883,Ex parte Crow Dog, ; , at 39–42; Matal, at 303. the Court implied that if Congress intended to exert legislative authority over these tribes they must pass an explicit law granting jurisdiction to the federal courts over Indian-on-Indian crime in Indian country, and then the Court would confirm its constitutionality.Sidney L. Harring, The Story of United States v. Kagama, in  150 (Carole Goldberg, Kevin K. Washburn, & Phillip P. Frickey, eds., 2011); , at 39–42.
In response, Congress debated the need and importance of teaching Indians regard for the rule of law. Further, it was argued that if an Indian committed a crime he could be tried under the laws of the United States., at 44–45.  Congress ultimately passed an addendum to the Indian Appropriations Act of March 3, 1885, more commonly known as the Major Crimes Act,Major Crimes Act of 1885, Mar. 3, 1885,  (codified as amended at  et seq.). claiming exclusive jurisdiction of the federal government to prosecute Indians for seven major crimes anywhere in the nation, if the land is in Indian country, including Indian reservations.Matal, at 303.  The seven original crimes included in the 1885 act (the list is now 15 crimes) were murder, manslaughter, rape, assault with intent to kill, arson, burglary, and larceny.Harring, at 150.
Hoopa Valley Reservation
thumb|left|250px|alt=a river flowing through a valley|Trinity River near reservation
The Hoopa Valley Reservation was created by executive order in 1864.1  815 (Charles J. Kappler, ed. 1904); Harring, at 152.  At the time the reservation was formed, three unique bands of Indian tribes lived on different parts of the Klamath River, each with its own language.  The Yurok lived on the Lower Klamath, the Karuk occupied the Upper Klamath and the Hupa lived at the confluence of the Trinity and Klamath Rivers in Humboldt County, California. The reservation was supposed to be a home for other tribes within the region.Harring, at 152.
The tribes living along the river had long-established rules for property rights and ownership, including how property was to be passed down from one generation to the next. In some cases, families owned lands that were located a substantial distance from their "home" village.
In charge of the reservation was the Indian agent, Major Charles Porter, who by commanding the local military garrison (Fort Gaston) on the reservation was charged with the de facto responsibility for the people on the reservation.Harring, at 155.  Without legal authority and against government policy, Porter allotted small parcels of land to the local Indian people, thus upsetting an age-old property rights system among families in the Klamath River Valley.Harring, at 157. On several occasions, Agent Porter had been called out to Kagama and Iyouse's homes to mediate their property dispute. Shortly before the murder, Kagama requested title to the land upon which he built his home.Harring, at 157.
The crime and the path to the Supreme Court
On June 24, 1885, three months after the Major Crimes Act was passed, Kagama and his son Mahawaha went to Iyouse's house, where an argument ensued that resulted in the death by stabbing of Iyouse., at 45. Mahawaha reportedly held Iyouse's wife while Kagama stabbed Iyouse.Harring, at 157. Agent Porter moved quickly to detain both Kagama and Mahawaha on murder charges. He informed both federal and state authorities. The local district attorney declined to prosecute, citing a policy of not prosecuting crimes between Indians.Harring, at 157.  The U.S. Attorney for Northern California forcefully prosecuted the case.Harring, at 157. On October 18, 1885, both Kagama and Mahawaha were taken to San Francisco for trial, after having been indicted for murder.Harring, at 157.  The indictment charged that the crime occurred on the reservation, even though it was later determined at the trial to have occurred outside the reservation boundaries to the north.Harring, at 152.
Because the crime supposedly occurred on the Hoopa Valley Reservation, the U.S. Attorney and the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) fully supported the jurisdictional shift to the federal government and were immediately prepared to prosecute the case in federal courts.  Challenges to the subject matter jurisdiction were heard before the circuit court in early October 1885. Circuit Judge Lorenzo Sawyer and District Court Judge George Sabin heard the challenge but disagreed on the law.  The case received a "certificate of division" resulting in the case being forwarded to the Supreme Court later in October.Harring, at 172.
Since this case challenged the authority of the federal courts to try Indian-on-Indian crime, this case was heard as an interlocutory appeal, meaning that the Supreme Court would have to decide the constitutionality of the claimed jurisdiction before Kagama could be tried for the killing of Iyouse in federal court.Harring, at 172.
Supreme Court
Arguments
Kagama was represented by 27-year-old Joseph D. Redding.  The United States was represented by George A. Jenks, who was an Assistant United States Secretary of the Interior.  Arguments were heard before the Supreme Court on May 2, 1886, only five months after the circuit court delivered a split opinion on the matter of jurisdiction.Harring, at 172.
Jenks urged the court to look to its earlier ruling in Crow Dog, where the Court commented in dicta that Congress possessed the authority to regulate all commerce with Indian tribes, because of the Indian Commerce Clause Art. I, § 8, cl. 3. of the Constitution.  In his listing of precedents, he cited numerous laws passed by Congress regulating Indian commerce;, at 70–71. he did not cite any other case law that supported Congress' authority over internal Indian matters, because there was none.Harring, at 172-72.  Further, Jenks incorporated aspects of the political debate in Congress when the act was passed citing that the U.S. should be able to enforce its laws within its borders, regardless of treaty rights.  The prosecution argued that Congress had the absolute authority to regulate Indians and their affairs.Harring, at 176.
Joseph Redding defended his clients vigorously.  His argument was three-fold.  First he argued that in one hundred years of Indian policy, Congress had never prosecuted Indian-on-Indian crime.Harring, at 177.  Further, the indictment as stated contained no element of commerce and was therefore outside the purview of Congress to legislate such a law., at 69; Harring, at 178.  Finally, he argued that such a profound shift in Indian policy should not be enacted in a law whose heading and body were wholly inconsistent with the intent of the Major Crimes Act.  In effect, he argued that such a law governing a people should be debated in full sight of the American public and on its own merits.Harring, at 178.  Redding argued that Congress could not assert power over sovereign people who, when making treaties to cede land, reserved certain rights to themselves., at 69.  He did not raise the issue that the tribes already did have a system of law that dealt with crimes against another person.Harring, at 178-79.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|upright|alt=a white man in a suit, facing left-front, wearing judicial robes|Justice Miller, author of the opinion
In a unanimous decision issued at the end of May 1886, and authored by Justice Samuel Freeman Miller, the Supreme Court ruled that the Major Crimes Act was constitutional, and, therefore, the case was within the jurisdiction of the federal courts.  Miller dismissed the argument that the Act was proper under the Indian Commerce Clause, noting that the case did not present a commerce issue.,  100 (2006). He held instead that it was necessary since Indians were wards of the United States.Matal, at 303-04. Justice Miller was known for writing opinions that supported federal power over state's rights.  This ruling meant that the federal circuit court's indictment would stand and the case would proceed to trial back in Northern California.United States v. Kagama, .
The opinion drew heavily on the language of the Solicitor General's brief, which by today's standards would be considered by many as racially charged. The language in Miller's opinion is infamous for its description of Indian tribes as weak, degraded and dependent on the federal government for support.  He adopts language from Cherokee Nation v. GeorgiaCherokee Nation v. Georgia, . describing each tribe as a "ward" and in a state of "pupilage."Harring, at 180.
Miller, having dismissed the Indian Commerce Clause as a source of authority, did not cite another constitutional source of the power., at 72–74.  In effect, this decision contended that the U.S. government had supreme authority to enforce laws within its borders, but did not mention where this power was outlined in the Constitution.Harring, at 180.  From the time the crime occurred to the Supreme Court decision, eleven months had passed.
Subsequent developments
Trial of Kagama
The trial was held in San Francisco in September 1886.Pactah Billy's Case, , Sep. 8, 1886, at 5 (via Newspapers.com ); Pactah Billy Freed: Sudden End of the Trial for Murder, , Sep. 10, 1886, at 3 (via Newspapers.com ) (hereinafter cited as Pactah Billy Freed).  The prosecution called four witnesses, including Iyouse's wife and a witness to the murder named "Charlie".  The defense called one witness, John B. Treadwell., at 426; Pactah Billy Freed; see generally The Hoopa Indians: Pactah Billy and Ben Acquitted of Murder Yesterday Morning, , Sep. 10, 1886, at 1.  Treadwell testified that the murder was outside the boundaries of the reservation.Harring, at 180-81; Pactah Billy Freed; see also Saved by a Technicality, , Sep. 10, 1886, at 1 (via Newspapers.com ).  Based on Treadwell's position within the General Land Office, the judge believed him and ordered a directed verdict of not guilty., at 426; Pactah Billy Freed.
Humboldt County Sheriff T. M. Brown stated that he would not arrest Kagama for a crime against another Indian.Pactah Billy Freed. Brown stated that in his 26 years of law enforcement in the area, the state had never prosecuted an Indian for Indian-on-Indian crime.Pactah Billy Freed. Brown also said that Kagama was trustworthy and industrious, while the victim was a "treacherous" blackmailer who had already killed several men.Pactah Billy Freed. The sheriff believed that Kagama did not have any option but to kill the victim.Pactah Billy Freed.
Consequences and criticism of the decision
Kagama was the case that articulated Congress' plenary power over the Native American tribes in the late 19th century., at 100; Michael A. Powell, Crow Dog and the Issue of Tribal Jurisdiction, in  288-90 (Gordon Morris Bakken ed. 2000). It reaffirmed Congress' power to pass legislation, including the Dawes Act, that would take away many of the liberties that Native Americans had been able to hold on to up until that point.David E. Wilkins, Reconsidering the Tribal-State Compact Process 22  474–488 (1994).  19th and early 20th century U.S. lawmakers viewed the American Indians as inferior people who would benefit from being assimilated into the Euro-American culture.,  100 (1992).  The laws that followed the Kagama ruling were attempts to destroy the Native American cultural differences and force these tribes to share the Euro-American culture viewed by these lawmakers to be the superior culture., at 100-02.
The decision has been widely criticized by legal scholars.  David E. Wilkins noted that if the Indian Commerce Clause or Taxation Clause Art. I, § 8, cl. 1. did not contain the authority, and the tribes had not granted it by treaty or consent, then the Major Crimes Act would be unconstitutional and the Court should have declared it void., at 74.  Phillip P. Frickey describes the Kagama decision as "a whirlwind of circular reasoning",Philip P. Frickey, Domesticating Federal Indian Law, 81  31, 34–35 (1996). with the Court justifying congressional power due to the tribe's weakness, which it also noted was due to the tribes dealing with the U.S. government.  Frickey felt the decision was an embarrassment to constitutional theory, to logic, and to humanity.  Robert N. Clinton stated that "[t]his remarkable decision obviously invoked rhetoric of colonial expansion, rather than the rhetoric of American constitutional discourse."Robert N. Clinton, Tribal Courts and the Federal Union  26  841 (1990).  Daniel L. Rotenberg said that Kagama was "one more item on the long litany of injustices to the American Indian."Daniel L. Rotenberg, American Indian Tribal Death-A Centennial Remembrance, 41  409, 423 (1986) . In addition to the law professors, various other authors in law reviews have also been critical of the decision.  Warren Stapleton, in the Arizona State University law journal, has stated that the decision was incorrect and that the Major Crimes Act is in fact unconstitutional.Warren Stapleton, Indian Country, Federal Justice: Is the Exercise of Federal Jurisdiction Under the Major Crimes Act Constitutional? 29  337 (1997) .  In a Comment, the University of Pennsylvania Law Review noted that "the Court promulgated what can be called the 'it-must-be-somewhere' doctrine ..."Comment: Federal Plenary Power in Indian Affairs After Weeks and Sioux Nation, 131  235, 247 (1982) .
Kagama remains good law, being cited in support of the plenary power doctrine as recently as 2004 in United States v. LaraUnited States v. Lara, . by the Supreme Court, and cited in 2015 by the 6th Circuit.NLRB v. Little River Band of Ottawa Indians Tribal Gov't,  (slip op. at 6th Cir. available here). Although one legal scholar, Matthew L.M. Fletcher, states that the apex of the doctrine was reached in 1955, in Tee-Hit-Ton Indians v. United States,Tee-Hit-Ton Indians v. United States, . he also acknowledges that the doctrine is still current law.Matthew L.M. Fletcher, A Short History of Indian Law in the Supreme Court, 40- 3, 4 (2015). In 2010, Pawnee lawyer Walter Echo-Hawk wrote in his book, In the Courts of the Conqueror, that Kagama has been used:
[T]o justify excessive government intrusion into the internal affairs of Indian tribes and to exercise unwarranted control over the lives and property of American Indians in a slide towards despotism ... [T]he creation of frightening, state-run, Orwellian societies on Indian reservations was perfectly legal in the courts of the conqueror, because it was done in the name of guardianship.,  199 (2010).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 118
 List of U.S. Supreme Court Cases involving Indian Tribes
 Outline of United States federal Indian law and policy
Footnotes
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States Native American criminal jurisdiction case law
Category:1886 in United States case law
Category:Criminal cases in the Waite Court
Category:Yurok
Category:History of Humboldt County, California
Category:Native American history of California
"""

From "United States v. Kahriger" ==> """
United States v. Kahriger, 345 U.S. 22 (1953), was a United States Supreme Court ruling that held certain provisions of the Revenue Act of 1951 were constitutional, in particular sections related to an occupational tax on persons involved in gambling..
The Supreme Court ruled that the Congressional purpose of penalizing intrastate gambling under the guise of imposing a tax did not violate the Constitution by infringing the police power reserved to the states. The Court stated: "Unless there are [penalty] provisions extraneous to any tax need, courts are without authority to limit the exercise of the taxing power."Gerald Gunther, Constitutional Law, p. 198-199, Foundation Press, Inc. (11th Ed. 1985).
The Supreme Court also ruled that the 1951 Revenue Act did not violate the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination. However, this holding was later overruled by the Court in Marchetti v. United States..Gerald Gunther, Constitutional Law, p. 198, Foundation Press, Inc. (11th Ed. 1985).
Notes
Further reading
.
.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1953 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Kaiser" ==> """
United States v. Kaiser, 363 U.S. 299 (1960), was an income tax case before the United States Supreme Court.
 Background 
Union and non-union strikers were provided limited financial assistance by a union.
When a non-union taxpayer filed his tax form, he did not include the amount of the assistance in his gross income. The taxpayer paid the additional tax owed and after an administrative rejection of his refund claim, sued for the refund in the United States district court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin.
A jury found that the financial assistance was a gift, excluding it from income under § 102(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, but a judgment notwithstanding the verdict was granted to the government. Then a United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit reversed a district court's grant of a judgment notwithstanding the verdict against respondent taxpayer.
By a divided vote, the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit reversed.   262 F.2d 367. It held alternatively that the assistance was not within the concept of income of § 61 (a) of the Code, and that in any event the jury's determination that the assistance was a gift, and hence excluded from gross income by § 102 (a), had rational support in the evidence and accordingly was within its province as trier of the facts.
The court granted the government's petition for certiorari, because of the importance of the issues presented. 359 U.S. 1010.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court upheld the appellate court's decision but declined to decide whether the assistance was a gift because the government did not object to the jury charge regarding the gift exclusion. The Court held that the proof was adequate to support the conclusion of the jury. The Court held that, in an allocation of power to decide the question, once it has been found that the decision could reasonably be reached on the evidence and the district court's instructions were not overthrown, the Court's reviewing authority was exhausted. The Court held that the jury was empowered to render the verdict that it did.
The United States Supreme Court affirmed the judgment below, six members of the Court agreeing that the jury had properly found that the strike assistance was an excludable gift. There was no opinion by a majority of the court. Brennan, J., announced the judgment of the court and delivered an opinion, sustaining excludability, in which he was joined by Warren, Ch. J., and Black and Douglas, JJ. In a separate opinion, Frankfurter, J., joined by Clark, J., concurred in the result. Douglas, J., filed a separate concurring opinion. Whittaker, J., dissented in an opinion in which he was joined by Harlan and Stewart, JJ
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1960 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Karo" ==> """
United States v. Karo, 468 U.S. 705 (1984), was a United States Supreme Court decision related to the Fourth Amendment protection from unreasonable search and seizure. It held that use of an electronic beeper device to monitor a can of ether without a warrant constituted an unlawful search. However, the Court upheld the conviction of Karo and his accomplices, stating that the warrant affidavit contained enough information not derived from the unlawful use of the beeper to provide sufficient basis for probable cause..
 Background 
Drug Enforcement Administration agents installed an electronic beeper in a can of ether with the consent of the owner, a government informant. The marked can was sold along with a shipment of 50 gallons of ether to the respondents, who intended to use the ether for the extraction and production of cocaine.  Having tracked the can of ether as it was moved between various residences and commercial storage lockers, the federal investigators determined the location of the can and obtained an arrest warrant. Respondent Karo and his accomplices were arrested for possession of cocaine with intent to distribute.
Karo's attorneys petitioned to have various portions of the evidence suppressed because they were the "tainted fruit" of an unlawful search.  In United States v. Knotts,. the Court held that the monitoring of a beeper did not violate the Fourth Amendment when it revealed no information that could not have been obtained through visual surveillance.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court held that the use of the beeper to conduct surveillance on Karo and his accomplices constituted an unlawful search and seizure in violation of the Fourth Amendment. However, they determined that since the affidavit which led to the issuance of the arrest warrant contained a significant amount of evidence not obtained through use of the beeper (such as the smell of ether emanating from the storage locker and visual tracking of the cans of ether in automobiles), the arrest warrant was valid. Thus, Karo's conviction was upheld.
The majority stated that the installation of the beeper in the can of ether did not constitute "search" or "seizure" by definition. Rather, the Fourth Amendment was not implicated until the beeper was turned on and used to track the ether shipment on private property.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 468
 Carpenter v. United States, 585 U.S. ____ (2018) – Supreme Court ruling that the Government's acquisition of a weeks worth location from cell-site records is a Fourth Amendment search.
References
 External links 
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:Drug Enforcement Administration litigation
"""

From "United States v. Kebodeaux" ==> """
United States v. Kebodeaux, 570 U.S. 387 (2013), was a recent case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Sex Offender Notification and Registration Act (SORNA) was constitutional under the Necessary and Proper Clause..
Background
The Sex Offender Notification and Registration Act (SORNA) is a federal law () requiring federal sex offenders to register in the States where they reside, study, and/or work.
The respondent, Anthony Kebodeaux, was convicted by a court-martial of a federal sex offense. After dishonorable discharge from the Air Force, Kebodeaux moved to Texas, where he registered with state authorities as a sex offender. When he moved within Texas, he failed to update his registration and was prosecuted under SORNA. The District Court convicted. He later appealed to the Fifth Circuit, which overturned his conviction under the Wetterling Act, as SORNA had not been passed at the time of his conviction.Syllabus, p. 1
Arguments
Petitioner's argument (U.S.)
Congress has the power to subject a federal sex offender to criminal penalties for failing to register or update said registration (). The appeals court's decision to reverse Kebodeaux's SORNA conviction was based on a mistake in applying pre-SORNA law. Contrary to the court's decision, Kebodeaux could be prosecuted under the Wetterling Act.Petitioner's brief, p.p. 14-15  is constitutional under the Necessary and Proper Clause as a "legitimate" consequence of the conviction under Smith v. Doe.Petitioner's brief, p. 15
Respondent's argument (Kebodeaux)
SORNA was an unlawful expansion of federal authority as it infringed on the states' police power. Kebodeaux's conviction violated limits set by United States v. Comstock.Respondent's brief, p.p. 16-17 Additionally, the Attorney General did not adopt a regulations applying SORNA to pre-enactment offenders until after Kebodeaux's SORNA-related sentence expired.Respondent's brief, p. 18
Decision
Majority opinion
The majority opinion, written by Justice Breyer, ruled that SORNA was constitutional under the Necessary and Proper Clause.Opinion, p. 2 Despite his release before SORNA's enactment, the release was unconditional, as opposed to what the Fifth Circuit said. Additionally, he was still subject to the Wetterling Act, which had similar requirements.Opinion, p.p. 3-4 This was because the crime he committed under the Uniform Code of Military Justice had been designated by the Director of the Bureau of Prisons to fall under the Wetterling Act.Opinion, p. 4 Congress had the power under the Military Regulation and the Necessary and Proper Clauses to apply civil consequences to the UCMJ crime.Opinion, p. 8
Concurrences
Roberts
Chief Justice Roberts wrote a concurrence where he argued that the Court's opinion, with its discussion of the public safety concerns addressed by SORNA, could lead "incautious readers" to surmise the Court was endorsing a non-existent federal police power, citing United States v. Morrison.Roberts, C.J., concurring in judgment, p.p. 3-4
Alito
Justice Alito also wrote a concurrence. In it, he argued that the fact that sex offenses under the UCMJ are usually only tried by military tribunals,  convicted offenders might not register with the State in which they resides.Alito, J., concurring in judgment, p. 2
Dissenting opinions
Scalia
Justice Scalia joined in Parts I, II, and III-B of Justice Thomas's dissent, but not Part III-A. He stated this was because he did not believe that what is necessary and proper to enforce a statute under an enumerated power is not necessary and proper to the execution of that power citing Gonzales v. Raich. Scalia stated that the Opinion did not declare that the Wetterling Act, on which they based their application to Kebodeaux, was necessary and proper, or that SORNA was designed to execute the preceding act.Scalia, J., dissenting
Thomas
Justice Thomas wrote the main dissent. He argued that SORNA was an unconstitutional usurpation of State police power.Thomas, J., dissenting, p. 1 This was because SORNA failed the legitimate use test Chief Justice John Marshall set forth in McCulloch v. Maryland.Thomas, J., dissenting, p. 4 Additionally, since Kebodeaux had completed his sentence, he was exempt from coverage under the Military Regulation Clause.Thomas, J., dissenting, p. 6 Thomas further argued that the decision in this case violated the precedent set by United States v. Comstock.Thomas, J., dissenting, p. 14
Subsequent history
The Fifth Circuit affirmed the conviction per curiam.
Notes
References
Petitioner's brief
Respondent's brief
External links
United States v. Kebodeaux on SCOTUSblog
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "United States v. Kirby" ==> """
United States v. Kirby, 74 U.S. (7 Wall.) 482 (1868), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that statutes must be constructed reasonably.
 Facts 
In 1868, Farris, who was a carrier of the mail, was indicted for murder in the Circuit Court of Gallatin County, Kentucky. The state court judge issued a bench warrant to Kirby, the sheriff of Gallatin County, who seized Farris and brought him before the state court.
However, the federal government then obtained an indictment from a grand jury charging Sheriff Kirby with "knowingly and willfully obstructing or retarding the passage of the mail", a federal offense under an Act of March 3, 1825. The question of "whether the arrest of the mail-carrier upon the bench warrant from the Circuit Court of Gallatin County was, in the circumstances, an obstruction of the mail within the meaning of the Act of Congress," was certified to the US Supreme Court.
 Holding 
Mr. Justice Field, for a unanimous court, answered the certified question in the negative by applying the cardinal rule "that all laws should receive a sensible construction," and that literal interpretations which "lead to injustice, oppression, or an absurd consequence" should be avoided. The Court concluded that "The reason of the law in such cases should prevail over its letter", and therefore ruled that the law could not be applied to the sheriff's actions.
See also
Letter and spirit of the law
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 74
External links
Category:1868 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:History of Kentucky
Category:Criminal cases in the Chase Court
"""

From "United States v. Klein" ==> """
United States v. Klein, 80 U.S. (13 Wall.) 128 (1871),. was a landmark United States Supreme Court case stemming from the American Civil War (1861–1865).
 Background 
On December 8, 1863, President Abraham Lincoln issued a proclamation offering a pardon to any person who had supported or fought for the Confederate Army, with full restoration of property rights, subject only to taking an oath of allegiance. The United States Congress had passed an act in 1863 that permitted an owner of property confiscated during the war to receive the proceeds from the sale of the confiscated property.
 Case 
Based on the statute and the President's proclamation, V.F. Wilson took the oath of allegiance and honored it until his death on July 22, 1865. John A. Klein, administrator of Wilson's estate, then applied, properly, to the Court of Claims to recover the proceeds of the sale of property seized from Mr. Wilson.
Congress repealed the statute in 1867. The Court of Claims, in 1869, decided that Wilson's estate was entitled to the proceeds from the sale of his property. Then, in 1870, Congress passed a law that prohibited the use of a presidential pardon as the basis for claiming sale proceeds, and further said that acceptance of such a pardon was evidence that the person pardoned did provide support to the South and was ineligible to recover sale proceeds. The United States appealed to the Supreme Court, based on the 1870 statute, which provided that since Wilson had accepted a Presidential pardon, his estate was not entitled to the sale proceeds.
 Decision 
In 1871, the Supreme Court ruled that the 1870 statute was unconstitutional and that Congress had exceeded its power by invading the province of the judicial branch by prescribing the rule of decision in a particular cause. The Court also ruled that Congress had impermissibly infringed the power of the executive branch by limiting the effect of a Presidential pardon.
Broadly speaking, Klein stands for the proposition that the legislative branch cannot impair the exclusive powers of another branch. Put another way, Klein recognizes and supports the fundamental value of separation of powers defined by the Constitution. Specifically, Klein means that Congress may not direct the outcome of a case by prescribing the rule of decision, nor may Congress impair the power and effect of a Presidential pardon. Read more broadly, Klein suggests, but does not state, that Congress may not use the Exceptions Clause to cripple the Court's ability to be the final arbiter of what the Constitution means; this conclusion is strengthened by the Court's holdings in City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U.S. 507, and especially Dickerson v. United States, 530 U.S. 428.
The essence of the argument is one of separation of powers: that the Constitution vests the judicial power in the judicial branch, and that neither the legislative nor the executive branch may interfere with the functioning of the judiciary. When Congress passed a law that had the effect of prescribing the rule of decision in a particular cause, Congress "inadvertently passed the limit which separates the legislative from the judicial power." Klein, 80 U.S. at 147. As the Court says: "It is the intention of the Constitution that each of the great co-ordinate departments of the government — the Legislative, the Executive, and the Judicial — shall be, in its sphere, independent of the others." Id.
Justice Samuel F. Miller dissented, but only because he believed the respondent was not entitled to the property under the acts passed by Congress and the President's pardons. He wrote specifically (and since his opinion was joined by Justice Joseph P. Bradley, the decision of the Court in this respect was unanimous) that he agreed that "the act is unconstitutional, so far as it attempts to prescribe to the judiciary the effect to be given to an act of pardon or amnesty by the President. This power of pardon is confided to the President by the Constitution, and ... the legislative branch of the government cannot impair its force or effect in a judicial proceeding." Klein, 80 U.S. (13 Wall.) at 148.
Subsequent case law
In Robertson v. Seattle Audubon Society, 503 U.S. 429 (1992), environmental groups filed separate lawsuits against the United States Forest Service and alleged that harvesting timber in forests home to an endangered owl violated several federal statutes. While litigation was pending, Congress passed compromise legislation that prevented harvesting in certain areas, but it also stated, "Congress hereby determines and directs that management [of the forests] according to subsections (b)(3) and (b)(5)... is adequate consideration for the purpose of meeting the statutory requirements that are the basis for [the two cases,]" which were identified by name and caption number. The Court of Appeals held that to be an unconstitutional intrusion on the judiciary's authority, based on Klein because it directed a particular result in both cases. The Supreme Court reversed and upheld the statutes because it found that they had amended the applicable law.
In Bank Markazi v. Peterson, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), the Supreme Court upheld a law that abrogated all defenses of a party (Bank Markazi) in a single case, identified by docket number, and directed that if certain criteria relating to ownership of a bank account were met, the money in the account would be used to pay compensation previous awarded by the courts against the bank. The bank argued that the court should rely on Klein to find that Congress had unconstitutionally directed the outcome of the case. The majority opinion found that more recent case law, particularly Robertson v. Seattle Audubon Society, has reduced the precedent value of Klein, but the court clarified the role that Klein still has in American jurisprudence:
In Patchak v. Zinke, 138 S. Ct. 897 (2018), the Supreme Court upheld a statute that stripped the federal courts of jurisdiction over claims related to a particular governmental decision to take particular piece of land into trust for the benefit of a Native American Tribe. The result of the statute was to terminate a particular, pending case in favor of the government. There was no majority opinion, but Justice Thomas, for a plurality, opined that Klein did not apply because Congress changed the law, requiring the court to apply the new law to the pending case. The plurality read Congress's power under the Exceptions Clause of the Constitution broadly, suggesting that Congress has nearly unlimited power to strip jurisdiction from the federal courts, even if the result is to terminate a pending case in favor of an identifiable party. In dissent, Chief Justice Roberts opined that not every statutory change "changes the law" within the meaning of Klein and that the Exceptions Clause does not permit Congress to withdraw jurisdiction to intervene in a particular pending case in a way that cuts out the role of the judiciary. Patchak v. Zinke, 138 S. Ct. 897 (2018).
References
 Further reading 
Zoldan, Evan (2017). The Klein Rule of Decision Puzzle and the Self-Dealing Solution. Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 74: 2133.
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:1872 in United States case law
Category:Exceptions Clause case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Two case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States clemency case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "United States v. Knotts" ==> """
United States v. Knotts, 460 U.S. 276 (1983), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the use of an electronic surveillance device..  The defendants argued that the use of this device was a Fourth Amendment violation. The device in question was described as a beeper that could only be tracked from a short distance. During a single trip, officers followed a car containing the beeper, relying on beeper signal to determine the car's final destination. The Court unanimously held that since the use of such a device did not violate a legitimate expectation of privacy there was no search and seizure and thus the use was allowed without a warrant.Knotts, 460 U.S. at 285. It reasoned that a person traveling in public has no expectation of privacy in one's movements. Since there was no search and seizure there was not a Fourth Amendment violation.
Background
Minnesota law enforcement agents suspected that one of the defendants was purchasing chloroform for the manufacture of methamphetamine, an illegal drug, and arranged with the manufacturer to have a radio transmitting beeper placed within the drum of chloroform the next time it was purchased. Following the purchase, the drum was placed into a vehicle driven by another defendant.  Police followed the defendants' vehicle after the purchase, maintaining visual contact for most of the journey, however they had to use the beeper to find the cabin where the defendants stopped. The cabin was owned by Leroy Carlton Knotts, the respondent in this case. Following visual surveillance of his cabin, the authorities acquired a warrant to search the premises, and used the evidence found therein to convict Knotts.Knotts, 460 U.S. at 278–79.
Decision
The Court ruled that a "person traveling in an automobile on public thoroughfares has no reasonable expectation of privacy in his movements from one place to another.”Knotts, 460 U.S. at 281. Such information—the starting point, the stops one made, as well as the final destination—was voluntarily conveyed to anyone.Knotts, 460 U.S. at 282. There was no search and seizure and hence no Fourth Amendment violation because this information could be gathered by the public through observation.Knotts, 460 U.S. at 282, 285.  The police used visual surveillance to gather the majority of this information, just because the final location of the automobile was learned through the use of the beeper and not visually, did not make the surveillance illegal. There was no indication that the beeper was used to gather information from within the private area of Knotts' cabin.Knotts, 460 U.S. at 284–85.
Recent development
Nearly three decades later, the Court decided United States v. Jones (2012), a case concerning the federal government's installation of a Global Positioning System (GPS) tracking device on a suspect's vehicle and its use to continuously monitor that vehicle's location for 28 days. The Court voted 9–0 against the government. The five justice majority opinion was based exclusively on a finding of trespass in the GPS installation. Because of the trespass, it was unnecessary to consider whether there was a violation of an expectation of privacy based on using the GPS for long term, continuous surveillance. However in the two concurring opinions, five of the Court's justices did find that there was a violation of such an expectation. Sotomayor's concurrence, p. 4; Alito's concurrence, p. 13. It is likely that in an identical, but with an absence of trespass, case, they would be a majority ruling against the government. This ruling would narrow Knotts' broad rule that one does not have an expectation of privacy when traveling public streets, by excluding long-term surveillance.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 460
Olmstead v. United States (1928)
Kyllo v. United States (2001)
Katz v. United States (1967)
United States v. Garcia (2d Cir. 2007)
United States v. Pineda-Moreno (9th Cir. 2010)
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Methamphetamine in the United States
Category:Pagers
Category:1983 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Kozminski" ==> """
United States v. Kozminski, 487 U.S. 931 (1988), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and involuntary servitude.United States v. Kozminski, 487 U.S. 931, 934 (1988). 
Ike and Margarethe Kozminski and their son John were accused of enslaving two men on their farm. 
A federal jury convicted the husband and wife of holding the men against their will and conspiring to do so, and John was convicted on the conspiracy charge. The case was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court held that the jury had been improperly instructed as to the nature of involuntary servitude under existing law and remanded the case for a new trial.Kozminski, 487 U.S. at 953. The defendants eventually pleaded guilty to misdemeanor violations of labor law.James Dickson, 1983: Slavers arrested, Red Berenson inducted into Hall of Honor, and Hands-On Museum celebrates first birthday, The Ann Arbor News (Oct. 19, 2010). Archived from the original on March 6, 2022
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 487
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Thirteenth Amendment case law
Category:1988 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. La Vengeance" ==> """
United States v. La Vengeance, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 297 (1796), was a 1796 decision of the United States Supreme Court which found that a proceeding by the United States to forfeit a vessel is a cause of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction.  Specifically, "[a]n injunction to enforce the forfeiture of a vessel, for an illegal exportation of arms and ammunition, is a civil cause of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction. The courts will take judicial notice of a geographical fact."Reports of cases ruled and adjudged in the several courts of the United States, and of Pennsylvania: held at the seat of the federal government, Volume 3 (Banks Law Pub. Co., 1905) pg. 297 
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Ellsworth Court
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:1796 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Lara" ==> """
United States v. Lara, 541 U.S. 193 (2004), was a United States Supreme Court landmark case which held that both the United States and a Native American (Indian) tribe could prosecute an Indian for the same acts that constituted crimes in both jurisdictions.  The Court held that the United States and the tribe were separate sovereigns; therefore, separate tribal and federal prosecutions did not violate the Double Jeopardy Clause.United States v. Lara,  (hereinafter cited as Lara).
In the 1880s, Congress passed the Major Crimes Act, divesting tribes of criminal jurisdiction in regard to several felony crimes.  In 1990, the Supreme Court ruled in Duro v. Reina that an Indian tribe did not have the authority to try an Indian criminally who was not a member of that tribe.  The following year, Congress passed a law that stated that Indian tribes, because of their inherent sovereignty, had the authority to try non-member Indians for crimes committed within the tribe's territorial jurisdiction.
The defendant, Billy Jo Lara, was charged for acts that were criminal offenses under both the Spirit Lake Sioux Tribe's laws and the federal United States Code. Lara pleaded guilty to the tribal charges, but claimed double jeopardy against the federal charges. The Supreme Court ruled that double jeopardy did not apply to Lara since "the successive prosecutions were brought by separate and distinct sovereign bodies".,  (2008).
 Background 
 History 
thumb|left|alt=1892 Map of Spirit Lake Reservation|1892 Map of Spirit Lake Reservation, then known as Devil's Lake Reservation
The Sioux people consist of three main groups, the Lakota in the west, the Western Dakota in the center, and the Eastern Dakota in the east. In the east, the Santee was originally from the Minnesota area. The Chippewa or Ojibwe people were also from the same general area. The two tribes had been at war from at least 1736,  (1990); ,  xvi, 15 (2011). and by 1750 the Chippewa had forced the Santee to the west into the prairie., at 37; , at xvi-xvii, 15. The war between the tribes continued until at least the 1850s., at 77. Only after 1862, when the Santee rose up against the whites and were subsequently removed to the Dakota Territory, did the fighting cease., at 77. In 1872, the Sisseton and Wahpeton bands of the Santee signed a treaty that resulted in their moving to the Spirit Lake Reservation.
 Major Crimes Act 
thumb|right|200px|alt=photograph of Chief Crow Dog|Crow Dog
Originally, crimes committed by Indians against Indians were not subject to federal or state jurisdiction, but were handled by tribal law.  In 1881, a Brulé Lakota named Crow Dog shot and killed another Indian, Spotted Tail, on the Great Sioux Reservation in South Dakota. Crow Dog was tried in federal court for murder, found guilty, and sentenced to hang.  He petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus to the Supreme Court, and in Ex parte Crow DogEx parte Crow Dog, . the Supreme Court found that the federal government did not have jurisdiction to try the case.  Crow Dog was ordered released, having made restitution under tribal law to Spotted Tail's family.
In response to Ex Parte Crow Dog, Congress passed the Major Crimes Act in 1885.Major Crimes Act of 1835, March 3, 1885,  (codified as amended as  et seq.).  The Act provided that the federal government had exclusive jurisdiction over certain Indian-on-Indian crimes when the crimes were committed in "Indian country." et seq.; Allison M. Dussias, Heeding the Demands of Justice: Justice Blackmun's Indian Law Opinions  (1995).  In 1886, the Act was upheld by the Supreme Court in United States v. Kagama.United States v. Kagama, .
 Duro v. Reina 
In 1990, the Supreme Court held in Duro v. ReinaDuro v. Reina, . that an Indian tribe did not have jurisdiction to try an Indian of another tribe.Duro, 495 U.S. at 694; , at 45. Tribal leaders urged Congress to fix the problem that the Duro decision created., at 47. In 1991, Congress amended the Indian Civil Rights ActIndian Civil Rights Act of 1968, April 11, 1968,  (codified as amended at ). (ICRA) to recognize that Indian tribes had inherent power to exercise criminal jurisdiction over all Indians., at 47; , at 187. This legislation became known as the "Duro fix",Alex Tallchief Skibine, United States v. Lara, Indian Tribes, and the Dialectic of Incorporation  47 (2004–2005) (hereinafter cited as Skibine, Dialectic; Elizabeth Burleson, Tribal, State, and Federal Cooperation to Achieve Good Governance,  (2007); ,  (2010). and was based on tribal sovereignty rather than a federal delegation of power.,  (2005).
 Arrest 
Billy Jo Lara was an enrolled member of the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians located in northern North Dakota near the Canada–U.S. border.Skibine, Dialectic, at 51. The Spirit Lake Reservation is approximately  south of the Turtle Mountain Indian Reservation. Lara had married a member of the Spirit Lake Santee tribe and had resided on the Spirit Lake Reservation with her and their children until he was banished from the reservation due to several serious misdemeanors.,  (2007); , at 153. Lara returned to the reservation, where he was arrested and charged with public intoxication. After the arrest, Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) officer Bryon Swan took Lara to the police station where Lara was informed of a Sioux order excluding him from the reservation. Lara then struck Swan, who as a BIA officer was considered both a tribal officer and a federal law enforcement officer.United States v. Lara, 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20182 (D.N.D. 2001) aff'd, 294 F.3d 1004 (8th Cir. 2002) on rehearing en banc, 324 F.3d 635 (8th Cir. 2003) rev'd, 541 U.S. 193 (2004) and rev'd, 324 F.3d 635 (8th Cir. 2003) rev'd, 541 U.S. 193 (2004).
 Procedural history 
 Trial courts 
Following his arrest, the tribal court of the Spirit Lake Sioux Tribe charged Lara with assaulting the arresting officers, along with four other charges.MacKenzie T. Batzer, Trapped in a Tangled Web United States v. Lara: The Trouble with Tribes and the Sovereignty Debacle  (2005); ,  (2009). Lara pleaded guilty to the tribal charge of "violence to a policeman". Soon after, federal prosecutors charged Lara with assault on a federal officer and a federal grand jury indicted him.Batzer, at 295. Lara moved to dismiss the charge based on double jeopardy and other constitutional grounds.Will Trachman, Tribal Criminal Jurisdiction After U.S. v. Lara: Answering Constitutional Challenges to the Duro Fix,  (2005); Skibine, Dialectic, at 51; , at 781. The Federal District Court, with Magistrate Judge Alice R. Senechal sitting by consent, denied the motions and Lara entered a conditional guilty plea, reserving the right to appeal.Lara, 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20182 at *1. Senechal noted that two other trial courts in the circuit had already ruled that double jeopardy did not apply, that the ICRA only recognized the inherent sovereignty of the tribes and did not delegate prosecutorial power to the tribe. She further noted that another circuit court had ruled the same way.Lara, 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20182 at *3. Lara also argued that the Petite doctrine, if applied, would preclude his prosecution, and that since it was never applied to federal prosecutions following convictions in tribal court, it discriminated against Indians.Lara, 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20182 at *3-4. Senechal denied this motion, noting that Lara had shown no examples of other races not being prosecuted for like offenses.Lara, 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20182 at *4.
 Court of Appeals 
Lara appealed the denial of his motion to dismiss to the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals, arguing that the Tribal Court obtained its authority from the ICRA, an act of Congress, and that both the Tribal Court and the Federal Court derived their power from the same sovereign. A three-judge panel of the Circuit Court affirmed the decision of the District Court, holding that the tribe derived its power from its own retained sovereignty that was separate from the sovereignty of the United States.United States v. Lara, 294 F.3d 1004 (8th Cir. 2002) on rehearing en banc, 324 F.3d 635 (8th Cir. 2003) rev'd, 541 U.S. 193 (2004) (hereinafter cited as Lara I). The Eighth Circuit's panel noted that in the Duro decision, the Supreme Court had observed that Congress could address the jurisdictional system, which Congress did.Lara I, 294 F.3d at 1006. When Congress amended the ICRA, they were addressing a federal common law issue, not a constitutional issue, and were within their authority to recognize the sovereignty of the tribes.Lara I, 294 F.3d at 1006. The panel then affirmed the trial court on the Petite claim.Lara I, 294 F.3d at 1007. Judge Hansen dissented, believing that the tribe drew its authority to try Lara from the federal government.Lara I, 294 F.3d at 1007–10. (Hansen dissenting).
Lara then requested a rehearing en banc by the full court. The request was granted, and the full court reversed the decision of the three-judge panel, ordering that the federal indictment be dismissed on the grounds of double jeopardy.United States v. Lara, 324 F.3d 635 (8th Cir. 2003) (en banc) rev'd, 541 U.S. 193 (2004) (hereinafter cited as Lara II). While the court noted that the Fifth Amendment allowed prosecution by two separate sovereigns, such as the federal government and a state government, it found that an Indian tribe derived its authority to prosecute offenders from the ICRA, which was federal law. The court noted that in previous Supreme Court rulings, the determination of tribal jurisdiction was based on the tribal membership of the individual, not on his race as an Indian.Lara II, 324 F.3d at 637-38. This meant that double jeopardy attached.Lara II, 324 F.3d at 641. The United States then appealed to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari to hear the case.Lara, 541 U.S. at 193.
 Supreme Court 
 Arguments 
 United States 
Solicitor General Ted Olson argued that Congress, in response to the Duro decision, acted to "recognize and affirm" the Indian tribe's inherent power to enforce its criminal laws against Indians of other tribes.Br. of United States 11-12, 17-18. Olson noted that the United States v. WheelerUnited States v. Wheeler, . decision clearly stated that a tribe could prosecute a tribal member for a crime and that the Federal government could subsequently prosecute for the same criminal acts without invoking double jeopardy if the actions of the accused violated Federal law.Br. of United States 15-16. Olson noted that the legislative history of the Duro fix bill clearly indicated that Congress intended to restore, not delegate, authority to prosecute non-member Indians by a tribe.Br. of United States 18-19. The government argued that the limitation in Duro was a statutory limitation of the tribe's sovereignty, not a constitutional limit, and that Congress had the authority to remove that limitation.Br. of United States 23-26. He noted that a tribe's sovereignty has allowed prosecution of non-member Indians for centuries, until it was limited by Congress.Br. of United States 31 n. 11. The United States was supported by amicus briefs filed by the State of Washington and seven other states, the State of Idaho and five other states, the National Congress of American Indians,Br. of Nat'l Cong. of Am. Indians. and eighteen Indian tribes.
 Lara 
Alexander F. Reichert was appointed by the Supreme Court to argue the case for Lara. Reichert argued that an Indian tribe had no inherent sovereignty in regards to non-member Indians, but only the power that Congress decided to give the tribe, citing Duro, Wheeler, and Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian TribeOliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe, . to support his argument.Br. of Lara 1-2. He stated that it was the place of the Supreme Court, not Congress, to determine the inherent sovereignty of the tribe.Br. of Lara 6. Lara argued that since the tribe had no such inherent sovereignty, it could only prosecute a non-member Indian based upon federal sovereignty, which would make a subsequent Federal prosecution a violation of the prohibition of double jeopardy.Br. of Lara 8-12; Skibine, Dialectic, at 51. It was noted that members of Indian tribes were at the same time United States citizens, and protected under the constitution in the same manner as any other citizen.Br. of Lara 13-15. Reichert stated that Duro was decided as a constitutional issue, not as a matter of common law, and it was the Court's place to determine the issue, not the place of Congress.Br. of Lara 19-21. To subject Lara to a prosecution by a tribal court, which was not subject to the Bill of Rights, would deprive Lara of his rights as a United States citizen.Br. of Lara 21-22. Lara's position was supported by amicus curiae briefs filed by the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers,Br. of Nat'l Assoc. of Criminal Defense Lawyers. Lewis County, Idaho, (along with several other counties), the Citizen's Equal Rights Foundation,Br. of the Citizen's Equal Rights Found. and T. Morris, E. Morris, and R. Morris (individual Indians).Br. of Morris.
 Opinion of the Court 
thumb|150px|left|alt=Justice Stephen Breyer portrait|Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the majority opinion in Lara.
Justice Stephen Breyer delivered the opinion of the court on April 19, 2004. Breyer believed that the question the Court needed to answer was whether Congress had the authority to relax restrictions that had been imposed on an Indian tribe's inherent sovereignty.Lara, 541 U.S. at 196; Alex Tallchief Skibine, Redefining the Status of Indian Tribes within Our Federalism: Beyond the Dependency Paradigm  667, 678 (2005–2006) (hereinafter cited as Skibine, Status). He noted that the intent of Congress was clear, not only based on the plain language of the statute, but also from its legislative history.Lara, 541 U.S. at 199.
Breyer stated that the Indian Commerce Clause Art. I, § 8, cl. 3. of the United States Constitution granted Congress "plenary and exclusive" power to legislate in respect to the Indian tribes.Lara, 541 U.S. at 200; Skibine, Formalism, at 437. He noted that the Indian Treaty Clause Art. II, § 2, cl. 2. did not specifically grant Congress the right to legislate, but that treaties made pursuant to the clause could grant Congress the authority to legislate in regards to treaty matters.Lara, 541 U.S. at 201; Skibine, Status, at 678.
These powers included the ability to both restrict tribal powers or to relax such restrictions.Burleson, at 210; Skibine, Status, at 679. Congress has done both, such as in the withdrawal of federal recognition of the Menominee tribe with the Menominee Termination ActMenominee Termination Act of 1954, June 17, 1954, , codified at  (repealed 1973). in 1954, and the Menominee Restoration ActMenominee Restoration Act of 1973, December 22, 1973, , codified at  et seq. to restore tribal recognition and powers.Lara, 541 U.S. at 203. The earlier decisions in Duro, Wheeler, and Oliphant dealt with cases where Congress had restricted a tribe's inherent powers but pointed at nothing in the Constitution or established precedent that prohibits Congress from relaxing such restrictions.Lara, 541 U.S. at 205; Burleson, at 210; Skibine, Status, at 679. The decision in Duro was one of federal common law, and it is clear that Congress has the power to change that law.Lara, 541 U.S. at 207; Skibine, Status, at 678. Since the power exercised by the Spirit Lake Sioux Tribe was that of inherent tribal sovereignty, double jeopardy did not attach.Lara, 541 U.S. at 210; Skibine, Dialectic, at 51; Burleson, at 210; , at 48.
Breyer noted Lara's other arguments, but as the double jeopardy issue was dispositive, he declined to address those issues.Lara, 541 U.S. at 207-09; Skibine, Dialectic, at 52. He did note that "we are not now faced with a question dealing with potential constitutional limits on congressional efforts to legislate far more radical changes in tribal status."Lara, 541 U.S. at 205; Skibine, Status, at 682. The decision allowed both courts to prosecute Lara. Since separate sovereign bodies had filed the charges, double jeopardy did not apply to Lara's case., at 48. The decision of the Eighth Circuit Court was reversed in the 7–2 decision.United States v. Lara,  (accessed on January 13, 2013).
 Concurrences 
thumb|150px|right|alt=Justice Clarence Thomas portrait|Justice Clarence Thomas, author of one of the concurring opinions
 Justice Stevens 
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a concurring opinion that argued that the Indian tribes have a stronger claim on inherent sovereign powers than do individual states. He noted that the Indian tribes governed themselves since before Columbus arrived, and that most states never governed themselves outside of the United States.Lara, 541 U.S. at 210-11 (Stevens concurring).
 Justice Kennedy 
Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote a concurrence which stated that Congress was very careful to base the changes to the statute on inherent tribal powers and not on a delegation of authority.Lara, 541 U.S. at 211 (Kennedy concurring). Kennedy states that is all that is needed to decide the case, but that the Court went further than was necessary when it decided that Congress had the power under the constitution to authorize tribes to prosecute non-member Indians.Lara, 541 U.S. at 211-12 (Kennedy concurring); David M. Schraver & David H. Tennant, Indian Tribal Sovereignty–Current Issues  133, 138-39 (2011–2012); Skibine, Dialectic, at 55. Finally, Kennedy was concerned that the court did not address the question of the Equal Protection Clause.Lara, 541 U.S. at 212-13 (Kennedy concurring); Skibine, Dialectic, at 52 (noting that Lara should have raised these issues in the tribal court). He would have reversed the Eighth Circuit without going into the additional detail.Lara, 541 U.S. at 214 (Kennedy concurring).
 Justice Thomas 
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a concurring opinion stating that it was time to re-examine the entire concept of tribal sovereignty.Lara, 541 U.S. at 214 (Thomas concurring); Schraver, at 156 n.127. He noted that doubtful precedents stated that Congress, and not another part of the government had the power to regulate everything that a tribe could or could not do, which renders tribal sovereignty a "nullity."Lara, 541 U.S. at 215 (Thomas concurring); Schraver, at 138 n.23; Skibine, Status, at 682. Thomas did not believe that Congress has the constitutional authority to set the "metes and bounds of tribal sovereignty."Lara, 541 U.S. at 215 (Thomas concurring) (internal citations omitted); Skibine, Dialectic, at 58. He noted that such authority was not in the Indian Treaty Clause Art. II, § 2, cl. 2. nor the Indian Commerce Clause. Art. I, § 8, cl. 3.
"In [his] view, the tribes either are or are not separate sovereigns, and our federal Indian law cases untenably hold both positions simultaneously."Lara, 541 U.S. at 215 (Thomas concurring). Thomas further questioned the lawAct of March 3, 1871, , codified at . ending the practice of making treaties with the tribes, noting that this was the one clear constitutional provision that provides for dealing with other sovereigns.Lara, 541 U.S. at 215 (Thomas concurring). Thomas noted that a delegation of prosecutorial power is always to an executive branch and that the tribes are not part of any executive branch of the Federal government. Therefore, the case hinges on the tribes' inherent sovereignty, and based on precedent, the tribes possess that power.Lara, 541 U.S. at 216 (Thomas concurring).
 Dissent 
thumb|150px|left|alt=Justice David Souter portrait|Justice David Souter, author of dissenting opinion
Justice David Souter wrote a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justice Antonin Scalia. Souter referenced prior cases dealing with sovereignty and jurisdiction, from the decision made in United States v. Kagama,Kagama, 118 U.S. at 375. to the opinion made in South Dakota v. Bourland.South Dakota v. Bourland, . Souter stated that the decision in this case did not align with precedent established in previous cases.Lara, 541 U.S. at 226-27 (Souter dissenting). Since Duro held that the tribes had lost their inherent sovereignty, the only way for the tribes to regain jurisdiction over non-member Indians would be by the delegation of that jurisdiction by Congress.Lara, 541 U.S. at 227 (Souter dissenting); Skibine, Status, at 678. Bourland was even more specific as to that point.Lara, 541 U.S. at 227 (Souter dissenting). Souter believed that the only two ways that the tribes could regain their sovereignty would be for Congress to declare that they were independent of the United States, as it did with the Philippines, or for the Court to overturn the concept of a dependent domestic sovereign.Lara, 541 U.S. at 229 (Souter dissenting).
Souter wrote that this dissonance in court decisions will lead to confusion, stating: "And confusion, I fear, will be the legacy of today's decision, for our failure to stand by what we have previously said reveals that our conceptualizations of sovereignty and dependent sovereignty are largely rhetorical."Lara, 541 U.S. at 230 (Souter dissenting); Skibine, Status, at 682. Souter concluded that he would stand by the decisions made in Duro and Oliphant.Lara, 541 U.S. at 230 (Souter dissenting).
 Subsequent developments 
 Release of Lara 
Lara was released from federal prison on August 19, 2005, about a year and four months after the Supreme Court delivered their decision.Federal Bureau of Prisons Inmate Locator: Billy Jo Lara #08061-059. Viewed July 27, 2014.
 Law reviews 
This case has been the subject of numerous law review articles since the decision was made. Points raised include:
 Indians are very integrated across tribal boundaries, intermarrying across tribes and sharing child and medical care services across tribes. Lara was an example of this; he married a Spirit Lake Sioux woman and moved to that reservation before his exclusion by the tribe.Matthew L.M. Fletcher, American-Indian Law: United States v. Lara: Affirmation of Tribal Criminal Jurisdiction Over Nonmember American Indians,  (2004).
 "As 'domestic dependent nations,' Indian tribes possess criminal jurisdiction in Indian Country that is 'complete, inherent, and exclusive,' except as limited by Congress."Fletcher, at 24; ,  (3d ed. 1998).
 The decision enhanced tribal self-determination because tribes could act even in the presence of related federal activity.Skibine, Dialectic, at 49-50. They noted that Lara had been in numerous altercations with the tribal police at Spirit Lake for intoxication, spousal abuse, and resisting arrest. Only when the tribe ran out of options did it issue an exclusion order to bar him from the reservation.Melissa L. Tatum, Symposium: Tribal Sovereignty and United States v. Lara: Symposium Foreward,  (2004); Kevin K. Washburn, Symposium: Tribal Sovereignty and United States v. Lara: Lara, Lawrence, Supreme Court Litigation, and Lessons From Social Movements,  (2004).
The decision limited tribal sovereignty by affirming the ability of Congress to relax or to restrict tribal powers. The opinion of Justice Thomas was especially telling in this, as Thomas had opined that plenary power and tribal sovereignty were mutually exclusive.Lara, 541 U.S. at 193; William Bradford, Symposium: Tribal Sovereignty and United States v. Lara: Another Such Victory and We are Undone: A Call to an American Indian Declaration of Independence,  (2004); Batzer, at 283; Skibine, Dialectic, at 49-50.
 Books and media 
The case has been widely covered in books and news media. Tribal court authority has been altered by the U.S. government for decades, affecting jurisdictional powers. In Justice Thomas's conclusion at the end of this case, he stated, "History points in both directions."Paul McSloy, Ode to Billy Jo, The Supreme Court's latest look into Indian law  , , May 17, 2004. Thomas further stated, "Federal Indian policy, is, to say the least, schizophrenic."McSloy, supra. Thomas's statements directly address the Supreme Court's confusion on both present and future Federal Indian Policy.David Wilkins, Justice Thomas and Federal Indian Law – Hitting His Stride,  (Jose Barreiro & Tim Johnson eds. 2004). As Justice Souter stated in his dissent, this remains "an area peculiarly susceptible to confusion."David Stout, 1 Punch, 2 Prosecutions, No Double Jeopardy, Justices Rule, , April 19, 2004.
 See also 
 Tribal sovereignty in the United States
 Notes 
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:Native American history of North Dakota
Category:Native American tribal police
Category:Dakota
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:United States Native American criminal jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "United States v. Lawrence" ==> """
United States v. Lawrence, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 42 (1795), was a United States Supreme Court case determining that the Supreme Court cannot normally compel a federal trial judge to proceed in a case which he feels is lacking sufficient evidence to proceed. In the case, the court held:
Where a judge of the district court, acting in his judicial capacity, determined that evidence was not sufficient to authorize him to proceed in a case before him, this Court has no power to compel him to decide according to the dictates of any judgment but his own, whatever might be the difference of sentiment entertained by the court.
A motion was made by the Attorney General of the United States (Bradford) for a rule to show cause why a mandamus should not be directed to John Lawrence, Judge of the District of New York, in order to compel him to issue a warrant, for apprehending Captain Barre, commander of the frigate Le Perdrix, belonging to the French Republic..
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 3
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Jay Court
Category:United States evidence case law
Category:1795 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Lee (1882)" ==> """
United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196 (1882), is a 5-to-4 ruling by the United States Supreme Court which held that the Constitution's prohibition on lawsuits against the federal government did not extend to officers of the government themselves. The case involved the heir of Mary Anna Custis Lee, wife of Confederate States of America General Robert E. Lee, who sued to regain control of Arlington House and its grounds. Arlington had been seized by the United States government in 1861 and eventually converted into Arlington National Cemetery. The estate had been sold to pay outstanding taxes, but the lawsuit contested the tax sale as improper. A jury found in favor of the Lees.Chase, 1930, p. 191. The Supreme Court, too, concluded that the tax sale was illegal.Meyer, 1998, p. 140.Amar, 1987, p. 1512.On this point, the Court was unanimous.  See: Grant, 1996, p. 203, note 254. In stripping the federal officers of their sovereign immunity, the Supreme Court agreed that suit against them was proper.Jackson, 1969, p. 96; Stephenson, 2003, p. 74.
The jury verdict returned Arlington to the Lee family, but only temporarily. The family never returned to Arlington, but rather sold the estate to the United States government in 1883 for $150,000 ($ in  dollars).Holt, 2010, p. 336.
Background
History of the Arlington estate
John Parke Custis, son of Martha Washington and stepson of George Washington, purchased  of forest and farm land in 1778 and called it "Arlington."Silber, 2003, p. 125."Arlington National Cemetery," 2009, p. 77. The estate was located directly across the Potomac River from the future site of Washington, D.C., in what was then Alexandria County (now known as Arlington County). John Custis died in 1781, and his son, George Washington Parke Custis, inherited the property. G.W.P. Custis hired George Hadfield, then supervising construction of the United States Capitol, to design and build a two-story Greek Revival house atop the most prominent hill on the property, a mansion Custis named "Arlington House." G.W.P. Custis' daughter, Mary Anna, married Robert E. Lee in 1831. Custis died in 1857, leaving his estate and Arlington House to his daughter.Silber, 2003, p. 126.
Seizure of the estate
In April 1861, Virginia seceded from the United States and Robert E. Lee resigned his commission in the United States Army on April 20, 1861, and joined the military forces of the Confederate States of America. On May 7, troops of the Virginia militia occupied Arlington and Arlington House.Hansen, 2001, p. 69. With Confederate forces occupying Arlington's high ground, the capital of the Union was left in an untenable military position.Chase, 1930, p. 173. Although unwilling to leave Arlington House, Mary Lee believed her estate would soon be taken by federal soldiers. So she buried many of her family treasures on the grounds and left for her sister's estate at Ravensworth in Fairfax County, Virginia, on May 14.McCaslin, 2004, p. 79-80.Atkinson, 2007, p. 25. On May 3, General Winfield Scott ordered Brigadier General Irvin McDowell to clear Arlington and the city of Alexandria, Virginia, of all troops not loyal to the United States.Chase, 1930, p. 175-176. McDowell occupied Arlington without opposition on May 24.Chase, 1930, p. 176.
thumb|left|Union troops pose in front of Arlington House during the American Civil War.
On June 7, 1862, the U.S. Congress enacted the Act for the Collection of Taxes in the Insurrectionary Districts (12 Stat. at L. 422), legislation which imposed a property tax on all land in "insurrectionary" areas of the United States."Arlington," 2000, p. 77. The 1863 amendments to the statute required these taxes to be paid in person.Poole, 2009, p. 54-55. Congress knew that few Confederate sympathizers would appear in person to pay the tax, thus allowing the federal government to seize large amounts of property and auction it off to raise money for the war effort. A tax of $92.07 ($ in  dollars) was levied on the Arlington estate in 1863. But Mary Lee, afflicted with severe rheumatoid arthritis and behind Confederate lines in Richmond, Virginia, gave the payment to her cousin, Philip R. Fendall (who lived in Alexandria). The tax collectors refused to accept his payment.Poole, 2009, p. 55. On January 11, 1864, the entire estate was auctioned off to pay the tax due. (With a 50 percent penalty for nonpayment, the total of tax and fine was $138.11 ($ in  dollars).)Chase, 1930, p. 180. Although the auction was well-attended, the U.S. government was the only bidder and won the property for $26,800 ($ in  dollars) (less than its assessed value of $34,100 ($ in  dollars)).
With local cemeteries in Alexandria County and Alexandria filling rapidly with war dead, Quartermaster General of the United States Army Montgomery C. Meigs proposed using  of the Arlington estate as a cemetery. The first burial there was made on May 13, 1864. United States Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton approved the establishment of a military cemetery on June 15, 1864, creating Arlington National Cemetery.McCaslin, 2004, p. 82. By the end of the war in April 1865, more than 16,000 people had been buried at Arlington. In September 1866, a memorial and a burial vault (containing the remains of 2,111 U.S. and Confederate soldiers who died at the First Battle of Bull Run, Second Battle of Bull Run, and along the Rappahannock River) were buried in Lee's former wildflower garden on the mansion's east side beneath the Civil War Unknowns Monument, a memorial to honor unknown soldiers who had died during the American Civil War.Atkinson, 2007, p. 26.
Suit by Lee's heirs
Robert E. Lee made no attempt to restore his title to Arlington before his death in 1870. Mary Lee died in 1873, having returned to the house a few months before her death. Too upset at its condition, she refused to enter and left after just a few moments.
In April 1874,Chase, 1930, p. 182. Robert E. and Mary Lee's eldest son, George Washington Custis Lee, petitioned Congress for payment for the Arlington estate.Randall, 1913, p. 35. Lee argued that tax sale of the entire property (rather than just that portion needed to pay the tax debt) amounted to confiscation and was unconstitutional. He also argued that the tax collectors' refusal to accept payment made the proceedings null and void. Finally, he asserted that the federal government should only be able to secure a life interest in the property (in other words, seize it only as long as Mary Lee lived) and could not assert title to the estate without the consent of the state of Virginia. He offered not to litigate the seizure of Arlington if paid. Lee's petition was referred to the United States House Committee on the Judiciary on April 6, but it was not acted on.
thumb|left|150px|George Washington Custis Lee in 1865, in his Confederate general's uniform.
In April 1877, Lee filed suit in Alexandria County circuit court to eject the U.S. government from Arlington.Chase, 1930, p. 183. His suit named, among others, Frederick Kaufman (a civilian in the United States Department of War who oversaw Arlington National Cemetery) and R.P. Strong (a U.S. Army officer who supervised the portion of Arlington which had become an Army post).Chase, 1930, p. 183-184. Almost a thousand others were named in the suit, all of them former African American slaves who had been allowed to form a settlement known as Freedmen's Village on part of the estate.Chase, 1930, p. 184. On July 6, United States Attorney General Charles Devens filed a writ of certiorari asking that the case be transferred to the United States Circuit Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, a request which the federal court approved three days later. On July 16, Devens filed a motion to have Lee's suit dismissed on the grounds that the Constitution made the federal government immune to suits at law (unless it gave its consent).Chase, 1930, p. 184-185. Lee filed a demurrer, pointing out that the government had taken the contradictory position of being a private buyer in a tax sale and yet asserting sovereign immunity as if its purchase were a governmental act.Chase, 1930, p. 185. On March 15, 1878, the circuit court held that not only did the court have jurisdiction to decide the issue but that the lawsuit presented a controversy over facts which should be decided by a jury.Chase, 1930, p. 187-188. A jury trial was held January 24–30, 1879, in Alexandria.Chase, 1930, p. 189. The jury found for Lee, concluding that the demand to accept payment only in person violated the Constitution's due process guarantees.
The federal government asked on April 6, 1879, that the jury verdict be set aside on the basis of the Supreme Court's ruling in Carr v. United States, 98 U.S. 433, (a decision handed down on March 3, after the jury's verdict had been reached). Carr v. United States involved a case where the city of San Francisco, California, transferred title to property within the city to the federal government even though a private citizen claimed title to the land. The Supreme Court reaffirmed in Carr that the federal government cannot be sued without its consent, that a suit against an officer or agent of the federal government does not bind the government itself, and that courts do not have jurisdiction over title suits against the federal government's officers and agents.Carr v. United States, 98 U.S. 433. Only when property has been transferred by the courts does a private citizen establish a right to establish or reclaim rights to title. But the circuit court in Lee held that much of the decision in Carr was dicta, and reaffirmed the jury decision.Chase, 1930, p. 192.
Two appeals were made to the U.S. Supreme Court.  The first was by the United States government itself, while the second was made by the government on behalf of Kaufman and Strong.Chase, 1930, p. 193. The question was whether the title actually transferred to the federal government.  If yes, then Lee had no claim; but if not, then Lee had standing to sue to reclaim his title to the land. To determine this, the Supreme Court first had to rule out all other grounds for a suit, and then determine whether the tax sale actually transferred the title.Chase, 1930, p. 193-194.
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice Samuel Freeman Miller wrote the decision for the majority, joined by Associate Justices Stephen Johnson Field, John Marshall Harlan, Stanley Matthews, and Samuel Blatchford. Most of Miller's ruling was technical.Randall, 1913, p. 36.
After reviewing the facts of the case,United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 196-199. Miller presented the two critical questions in the case: 1) Were there other grounds for a suit other than transfer of title in error, and 2) whether the tax sale had actually transferred title.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 199. The members of the Court were agreed that there no errors regarding interpretation of the law by the circuit court, in the jury instructions, or in the documents of the tax sale.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 199-200. But, citing Bennett v. Hunter, 72 U.S. 326 (1869), (which had involved the nearby Abingdon estate); Tacey v. Irwin, 85 U.S. 549 (1873); and Atwood v. Weems, 99 U.S. 183 (1878),  the majority reaffirmed that a tax collector's refusal to accept payment was the equivalent of payment.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 200. The majority considered whether a rule had been properly adopted by the tax commissioners to accept payment only from the title holder him or her self, and found that it had properly been adopted.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 200-202. However, the majority found that denial of a taxpayer's right to pay through an agent was improper:United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 202, citing Hills v. Exchange Bank, 105 U.S. 319 (1881).
...[T]he commissioners, having in the execution of the law acted upon a rule which deprived the owner of the land of an important right, a right which went to the root of the matter, a right which has in no instance known to us or cited by counsel been refused to a tax-payer, the sale made under such circumstances is invalid, as much so as if the tax had been actually paid or tendered.
The government claimed that prior Court rulings on tax payment regulations were not applicable because the 1862 the law specifically required payment to be made in person, but the Court disagreed and distinguished its previous decisions as being based on the 1862 law and its 1863 amendments.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 202-203. The government also claimed that the law did not permit payment to be made between the announcement of the tax sale and the date of the sale if the government were the purchaser.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 203. But the majority pointed out that this created a contradiction: How could the title holder know that the government was the purchaser until the actual purchase had occurred? This made no sense, and subsequently that section of the law was invalid.
thumb|175px|Justice Samuel Miller, who wrote the majority opinion in Lee.
The Court next considered whether payment had been attempted. Relying on Cooley v. O'Connor, 79 U.S. 391 (1870),  the majority noted that nothing in the law or the Constitution indicated that the government's title to land "should have any greater effect as evidence of title than in the case of a private purchaser, nor why it should not be subject to the same rules in determining its validity, nor why the payment or tender of the tax, interest, and costs, should not be made by an agent in the one case as in the other."United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 204. Since there was uncontested evidence that Lee had attempted to make payment in full, the tax should have been considered paid.
But did sovereign immunity bar any challenge to the government's title, once title had been transferred? Justice Miller engaged in a lengthy historical review of the privilege of sovereign immunity, its roots in English and common law, its acceptance in Colonial America, its enshrinement in the Constitution, and its growing acceptance by the courts of the United States.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 205-210. But the Lee lawsuit was against Kaufman and Strong as individuals, not just the United States government. The government argued that title in the Arlington estate was held by the government, not these officers, and thus was immunized against suit.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 110. The Court, citing Meigs v. M'Clung's Lessee 13 U.S. 11 (1815), concluded there was no difference whether the officers were in possession of the land themselves or whether they held the land as agents of the government.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 210-211. The Court relied heavily on Osborn v. Bank of the United States, 22 U.S. 738 (1824), in which officers of the state of Ohio (rather than the state itself) were sued but the actual party affected was the sovereignly immune state.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 212-213. The majority reaffirmed the statement of principle in Davis v. Gray: "Where the State is concerned, the State should be made a party, if it can be done."United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 215, citing Davis v. Gray, 83 U. S. 203 (1872) at 221. The Court agreed that much of the holding in Carr v. United States was dicta, and could not be relied upon by the government.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 216-217.
The government also claimed that since Arlington had been put to a lofty public use (a cemetery and a fort), Lee should not be able to disturb title to it after so long a period of time.  But the Court strongly disagreed, arguing that the Fifth Amendment made no such distinction.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 217-220. In ringing language, the majority upheld Lee's right against deprivation of property without due process of law:United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 220-221.
The defence stands here solely upon the absolute immunity from judicial inquiry of every one who asserts authority from the executive branch of the government, however clear it may be made that the executive possessed no such power. Not only no such power is given, but it is absolutely prohibited, both to the executive and the legislative, to deprive any one of life, liberty, or property without due process of law, or to take private property without just compensation. ... No man in this country is so high that he is above the law. No officer of the law may set that law at defiance with impunity. All the officers of the government, from the highest to the lowest, are creatures of the law, and are bound to obey it. It is the only supreme power in our system of government, and every man who by accepting office participates in its functions is only the more strongly bound to submit to that supremacy, and to observe the limitations which it imposes upon the exercise of the authority which it gives. Courts of justice are established, not only to decide upon the controverted rights of the citizens as against each other, but also upon rights in controversy between them and the government; and the docket of this court is crowded with controversies of the latter class. Shall it be said, in the face of all this, and of the acknowledged right of the judiciary to decide in proper cases, statutes which have been passed by both branches of Congress and approved by the President to be unconstitutional, that the courts cannot give a remedy when the citizen has been deprived of his property by force, his estate seized and converted to the use of the government without lawful authority, without process of law, and without compensation, because the President has ordered it and his officers are in possession? If such be the law of this country, it sanctions a tyranny which has no existence in the monarchies of Europe, nor in any other government which has a just claim to well-regulated liberty and the protection of personal rights.
The decision of the circuit court was affirmed.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 223.
 Dissent 
Associate Justice Horace Gray wrote a dissent, which was joined by Chief Justice Morrison Waite and Associate Justices Joseph P. Bradley, and William Burnham Woods.
Justice Gray extensively reviewed the facts of the case.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 224-226. Then Gray asserted the critical principle in the case: "The sovereign is not liable to be sued in any judicial tribunal without its consent. The sovereign cannot hold property except by agents."United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 226. Like the majority, the dissenters also provided a lengthy history of the right of sovereign immunity, but underscoring the uniform inviolability of the right.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 226-239. Citing United States v. Clarke, 33 U.S. 436 (1834), the dissent reasserted that a lawsuit against the United States must be brought under the explicit authority of an act of Congress or the courts have no jurisdiction over it.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 239. Gray also reviewed the authority of private citizens to bring suit in the United States Court of Claims.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 239-241.
To permit Lee's suit, Gray argued, would open the United States to a multitude of suits over title to land it held.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 242. The cases cited by the majority (such as United States v. Peters, Osborn v. Bank of United States, Meigs v. M'Clung, and Davis v. Gray) were improperly cited, Gray argued, as in each case "either the money was in the personal possession of the defendants and not in the possession of the State, or the suit was to restrain the defendants by injunction from doing acts in violation of the Constitution of the United States."United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 242-243. It was one thing for the Court to eject or dispossess officers or agents of the United States from land or funds; such actions, Gray concluded, continued to immunize the United States government from suits.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 244-248. Carr v. United States reaffirmed this principle, he concluded.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 248. To blur the distinction between officer and state or to assume or imply it without the state's consent, as the majority does, Gray said, would leave the sovereign immunity right in shambles.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 249.
Once the United States asserted that it was a party to the case, Gray concluded, the courts had no jurisdiction and should not have heard the case.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 249-251. Once the United States interposed itself between Kaufman and Strong and the plaintiff, the courts should not have ordered trial to proceed against them, either.United States v. Lee, 106 U.S. 196, 251. Because the courts had no jurisdiction, the dissenters refused to address the issue of the validity of the title.
 Subsequent developments 
thumb|Arlington House at Arlington National Cemetery in 2005.
The U.S. government faced the daunting prospect of having to disinter 17,000 bodies and transfer Arlington back to the Lee family. Additionally, much of the estate had been developed into the new Army post of Fort Myer. After several months of difficult negotiations, Lee and the government settled on a sale price of $150,000 ($ in  dollars). Congress enacted legislation funding the purchase on March 3, 1883; Lee signed over the title on March 31; and the title transfer was recorded on May 14, 1883.
United States v. Lee is one of three important federal sovereign immunity cases, and the most important doctrinally.Sisk, Noone, Steadman, and Lester, 2006, p. 80; Jaffee, 1963, p. 25. The case showed just how sharply divided the Supreme Court was over the scope and legitimacy of sovereign immunity in the United States.Sisk, Noone, Steadman, and Lester, 2006, p. 81. The majority opinion questioned whether sovereign immunity was appropriate in a republic, and suggested that it had been adopted in an unprincipled and careless way by previous court decisions. The decision was the first to refuse to extend sovereign immunity to officers of the state acting as individuals,Durchslag, 2002, p. 53. a principle which would later become known as the "stripping doctrine".Sisk, Noone, Steadman, and Lester, 2006, p. 81-82. The decision also revised the Supreme Court's "nominal party rule," first enunciated in Osborn and Davis.  In those cases, the Court had salvaged federal and state sovereign immunity by creating a bright-line legal fiction that the suits were against government officers in their capacity as individuals and not acting on behalf of the state.  The Court in Lee reaffirmed this "nominal party rule" but only with five votes—which proved to be the last time it was invoked.Jacobs, 1972, p. 16. In Louisiana ex rel. Elliot v. Jumel, 107 U.S. 711 (1882), a majority of the Court upheld the "nominal party rule" but refused to invoke it on a technicality.Durchslag, 2002, p. 54. In New Hampshire v. Louisiana, 108 U.S. 76 (1883), the Court abandoned the "nominal party rule" in favor of a "real party interest test."Durchslag, 2002, p. 55. The Court openly rejected the rule (without necessarily overturning its previous decision) in In re Ayers, 123 U.S. 443 (1887).Durchslag, 2002, p. 57. Nevertheless, the Court did not overturn Lee but rather distinguished it narrowly and continued to affirm its basic principles in Jumel and Ayers.Seamon, 1998, p. 173-174.
United States v. Lee also sharply limited the sovereign immunity doctrine by implying that it could be subordinated to other, more fundamental rights such as the Fifth Amendment's prohibition against "takings" without just compensation and due process.Sisk, Noone, Steadman, and Lester, 2006, p. 82. Justice Miller's ringing endorsement of the rights of individuals is seen as endorsing the concept that, in the United States, the people are the sovereign—not the government.Pfafflin, 1992, p. 657. In Tindal v. Wesley, 167 U.S. 204 (1897), the Supreme Court expressly extended the Lee decision to "takings" suits against states (which had previously been barred by the Court's constitutional interpretations).Rosenblatt, 2000, p. 732; Seamon, 2001, p. 1081.Berger, 2006, p. 543.
Although Lee seemed to invite a full-scale reconsideration of the doctrine of sovereign immunity, subsequent Supreme Court decisions in Larson v. Domestic & Foreign Commerce Corporation, 337 U.S. 682 (1949) and Malone v. Bowdoin, 369 U.S. 643 (1962) sharply limited the impact of the Lee Court's decision.Sisk, Noone, Steadman, and Lester, 2006, p. 82-88.Meyer, 1998, p. 141. Larson and Malone specifically carved out only two areas in which an officer of the United States may be sued: 1) If the officer acts outside her or his legally prescribed scope of authority, or 2) If the officer acts in a way that is unconstitutional.Sisk, Noone, Steadman, and Lester, 2006, p. 89.
At least one legal historian has concluded that Lee also laid an early foundation for the doctrine of executive immunity.Williams, 1997, p. 976.
In many ways, the Lee decision is also more famous for its defense of the rights of citizens than its sovereign immunity jurisprudence. Miller's defense of the rights of the individual ("No man...is above the law...") is considered "elegantly elaborated" by lawyer Lawrence Walsh.Walsh, 1998, p. 1379. Constitutional law scholar Louise Weinberg called the language "ringing".Weinberg, 2001, p. 1171. Another legal scholar called the language "remarkable" and emphatic.
Footnotes
Bibliography
Amar, Akhil Reed. "Of Sovereignty and Federalism." Yale Law Journal. 96:1425 (June 1987).
"Arlington." Encyclopedia of the American Civil War: A Political, Social, and Military History. David Stephen Heidler, Jeanne T. Heidler, and David J. Coles, eds. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2000.
"Arlington National Cemetery." In Encyclopedia of the Veteran in America. William Pencak, ed. Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO, 2009.
Atkinson, Rick. Where Valor Rests: Arlington National Cemetery. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic Society, 2007.
Berger, Eric. "The Collision of the Takings and State Sovereign Immunity Doctrines." Washington & Lee Law Review. 63:493 (Spring 2006).
Chase, Enoch Aquila. "The Arlington Case: George Washington Custis Lee against the United States of America." Records of the Columbia Historical Society. 31/32: 1930.
Durchslag, Melvyn R. State Sovereign Immunity: A Reference Guide to the United States Constitution. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2002.
Grant, Eric. "A Revolutionary View of the Seventh Amendment and the Just Compensation Clause." Northwestern University Law Review. 91:144 (Fall 1996).
Hansen, Harry. The Civil War: A History. New York: Signet, 2001.
Holt, Dean W. American Military Cemeteries. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co., 2010.
Jackson, Percival E. Dissent in the Supreme Court: A Chronology. Norman, Okla.: University of Oklahoma Press, 1969.
Jacobs, Clyde Edward. The Eleventh Amendment and Sovereign Immunity. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1972.
Jaffee, Louis L. "Suits Against Governments and Officers: Sovereign Immunity." Harvard Law Review. 77:1 (1963).
McCaslin, Richard B. Lee in the Shadow of Washington. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2004.
Meyer, Randy L. "The Supreme Court's Analysis in Idaho v. Coeur D'Alene Tribe of Idaho: Is the Young Exception to the Eleventh Amendment Inapplicable to Indian Tribe Claims?" Toledo Law Review. 30:131 (Fall 1998).
Paust, Jordan J. "Non-Extraterritoriality of 'Special Territorial Jurisdiction' of the United States: Forgotten History and the Errors of Erdos." Yale Journal of International Law. 24:305 (Winter 1999).
Pfafflin, James R. Encyclopedia of Environmental Science and Engineering. Florence, Ky.: Taylor & Francis, 1992.
Poole, Robert M. On Hallowed Ground: The Story of Arlington National Cemetery. New York, N.Y.: Walker & Co., 2009.
Randall, J.G. The Confiscation of Property During the Civil War. Indianapolis: Mutual Printing and Lithographing Co., 1913.
Rosenblatt, Lauren E. "Removing the Eleventh Amendment Barrier: Defending Indian Land Title Against State Encroachment After Idaho v. Coeur d'Alene Tribe." Texas Law Review. 78:719 (February 2000).
Seamon, Richard H. "The Asymmetry of State Sovereign Immunity." Washington Law Review. 76:1067 (October 2001).
Seamon, Richard H. "Separation of Powers and the Separate Treatment of Contract Claims Against the Federal Government for Specific Performance." Villanova Law Review. 43:155 (1998).
Silber, Nina. Landmarks of the Civil War. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Sisk, Gregory C.; Noone, Michael F.; Steadman, John Montague; and Lester, Urban A. Litigation With the Federal Government. 4th ed. Philadelphia, Pa.: American Law Institute, 2006.
Stephenson, Donald Grier. The Waite Court: Justices, Rulings, and Legacy. Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO, 2003.
Walsh, Lawrence E. "The Future of the Independent Counsel Law." Wisconsin Law Review. 1998:1379 (1998).
Weinberg, Louise. "Of Sovereignty and Union: The Legends of Alden." University of Notre Dame Law Review. 76:113 (June 2001).
Williams, Glenn T. "Temporary Immunity: Distinguishing Case Law Opinions on Executive Immunity and Privilege as the Supreme Court Tackles an Oxymoron." Nova Law Review. 21:969 (Spring 1997).
For further reading
Gaughan, Anthony J. The Last Battle of the Civil War: United States v. Lee, 1861-1883]. Baton Rouge, Louisiana: Louisiana State University Press, 2011.
External links
Category:1882 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States federal sovereign immunity case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:Lee family residences
Category:Arlington National Cemetery
"""

From "United States v. Lee (1927)" ==> """
United States v. Lee, 274 U.S. 559 (1927), is a significant decision by the United States Supreme Court protecting prohibition laws.  The Court held 1) the Coast Guard may seize, board, and search vessels beyond the U.S. territorial waters and the high seas 12 miles outward from the coast if probable cause exists to believe that the vessel and persons in it are violating U.S. revenue laws, and 2) the Coast Guard's use of searchlights to view contents of a vessel on the high seas does not constitute a search and thus does not warrant Fourth Amendment protections.
Background
On the night of February 16, 1925, a Coast Guard patrol followed a motor boat owned by Lee from the Gloucester, Massachusetts harbor to a region commonly spoken of as Rum Row which was located approximately 24 miles east of Boston Light (a lighthouse located on Little Brewster Island in outer Boston Harbor, Massachusetts).
The patrol approached the motor boat and turned on a searchlight upon reaching the boat.  With the help of the searchlight, the patrol observed Lee with two associates (McNeil and Vieria)The first names of Lee, McNeil and Vieria are not found in the record and 71 cases of grain alcohol.  The three defendants were arrested and transported to Boston where they were indicted for conspiring to violate sections of the Tariff Act of 1922 and National Prohibition Act.
The National Prohibition Act was enacted to support enforcement of the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which established a nationwide prohibition.  The Act provided that "no person shall manufacture, sell, barter, transport, import, export, deliver, or furnish any intoxicating liquor except as authorized by this act." It did not specifically prohibit the use of intoxicating liquors. The act defined intoxicating liquor as any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol.
The Tariff Act of 1922 prohibits the import of liquor into the United States and authorizes the Coast Guard to seize, board, and search any vessel suspected to U.S revenue laws.
U.S. territorial waters are 12 miles outward from any US coast. The motor boat was seized outside of this twelve-mile territory; therefore, Lee and his co-defendants sued for a writ of error claiming the Coast Guard did not have jurisdiction to board their vessel in international waters.  The case was brought before the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit which agreed with the defendants and set aside the conviction.  The government appeals the Appellate Court's decision to the Supreme Court.
Decision
The case was heard before the Supreme Court on March 8, 1927.  On May 31, 1927, Justice Louis Brandeis delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court.  The Court held the Coast Guard has authority to visit, search and seize an American vessel on the high seas beyond the twelve-mile limit when probable cause exists to believe that U.S. laws are being violated; that it has authority also to arrest persons on such vessel when there is reason to believe those persons are engaged in committing a felony.
The Court also held that the use of a searchlight does not constitute a search and thus does not warrant Fourth Amendment protections because the use of a searchlight is comparable to the use of binoculars. The courts have long held that binoculars are not prohibited by the Constitution.
References
External links
Category:1927 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "United States v. Lee (1982)" ==> """
United States v. Lee, 455 U.S. 252 (1982), was a United States Supreme Court case establishing precedent regarding the limits of free exercise of religious conscience by employers.
Background
The appellant, an Amish employer, sued the Federal Government of the United States following an assessment for unpaid Social Security taxes, claiming that the imposition of such taxes violated his freedom of conscience. The District Court had found in favor of the appellant.
Ruling
Chief Justice Warren Burger delivered the opinion of the Court, with Justices Brennan, White, Marshall, Blackmun, Powell, Rehnquist, and O'Connor, joining, and Justice Stevens separately concurring.
The Court's opinion held that the tax imposed on employers to support the social security system must be uniformly applicable to all, except if the United States Congress explicitly provides otherwise. The Court's majority opinion explained its reasoning:
Use as precedent
Lee was cited during oral arguments in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby (2014), a case about how the contraception requirement in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act affected closely held for-profit corporations.
See also
Religious Freedom Restoration Act
 References 
Further reading
External links
Category:1982 in religion
Category:1982 in United States case law
Category:Freedom of religion in the United States
Category:Social Security lawsuits
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "United States v. Leon" ==> """
United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897 (1984), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court established the "good faith" exception to the Fourth Amendment exclusionary rule..
Background
In August 1981, police in Burbank, California received a tip identifying Patsy Stewart and Armando Sanchez as drug dealers. Police began surveillance of their homes and followed leads based on the cars that frequented the residences. The police identified Ricardo Del Castillo and Alberto Leon as also being involved in the operation.
Based on this surveillance and information from a second informant, a detective wrote an affidavit and a judge issued a search warrant. The police conducted the search, but the search warrant was later found to be invalid because the police lacked the probable cause for a warrant to be issued in the first place. The evidence obtained in the search was upheld anyway, because the police performed the search in reliance on the warrant, meaning they acted in good faith. This became known as the good faith exception to the exclusionary rule.
Decision
Majority
The Supreme Court announced its decision on July 5, 1984, with Justice Byron White filing for the 6–3 majority in favor of the United States, with Justice Harry Blackmun writing a concurring opinion.
First, the exclusionary rule is designed to deter police misconduct rather than to punish magistrates and judges for their errors. Only when a warrant is grounded upon an affidavit knowingly or recklessly false has the Court suppressed the evidence obtained as a result. Second, there exists no evidence that judges and magistrates are inclined to ignore the Fourth Amendment of the Constitution and that their actions would require the ultimate sanction of exclusion. Third, there is no evidence that suppression of evidence obtained under a search warrant will have any deterrent effect upon judges and magistrates. Judges and magistrates are not adjuncts to law enforcement officials and as such are neutral and have no stake in the outcome of criminal prosecutions.
The suppression of evidence obtained pursuant to a search warrant should be ordered only on a case-by-case basis and only in those instances where exclusion would promote the purposes of the exclusionary rule. An officer acting in good faith and within the scope of a search warrant should not be subjected to Fourth Amendment constitutional violations. It is the magistrate’s or judge’s responsibility to ascertain whether the warrant is supported by sufficient information to support probable cause. However, the officer’s reliance must be objectively reasonable. Suppression remains an appropriate remedy where the magistrate was misled by information in an affidavit that the affiant knew was false or would have known was false except for his reckless disregard for the truth.
In his concurrence, Justice Blackmun wrote, "If it should emerge from experience that, contrary to our expectations, the good faith exception to the exclusionary rule results in a material change in police compliance with the Fourth Amendment of the Constitution, we shall have to reconsider what we have undertaken here."
Dissent
Justice William Brennan filed a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Thurgood Marshall, arguing that the Fourth Amendment of the Constitution must be read to condemn not only the initial unconstitutional invasion of privacy, but also the subsequent use of any illegally obtained evidence. The exclusionary rule was part and parcel of the Fourth Amendment’s limitation upon governmental encroachment of individual privacy. The Court’s only support for its decision is that even though the costs of exclusion are not very substantial, the potential deterrent effect in these circumstances is so marginal that exclusion cannot be justified. The chief deterrent function of the rule is its tendency to promote institutional compliance with the Fourth Amendment of the Constitution. Justice John Paul Stevens filed a separate dissenting opinion.
Note
Arguing the case for the respondent was former Los Angeles prosecutor and ESPN legal analyst Roger Cossack.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 468
Olmstead v. United States (1928)
Mapp v. Ohio (1961)
Aguilar v. Texas (1964)
Spinelli v. United States (1969)
Illinois v. Gates (1983)
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1984 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Lewis" ==> """
United States v. Lewis, 340 U.S. 590 (1951),United States v. Lewis, 340 U.S. 590 (1951) was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States affirming the claim of right doctrine in income tax law. A lower court had ordered the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to issue a refund to man who, after other litigation found his bonus to have been miscalculated, was forced to return some of his income from a previous year to his former employer. The Supreme Court ruled that because the man had complete control of the money, his tax payment was correct and he could not get a refund—though he could still claim it as a loss on a subsequent tax return.
 Background 
Mr. Lewis was a general manager for the Accurate Spring Manufacturing Company from 1939 until 1945.Lewis v. United States, 91 F.Supp. 1017 (1950) His compensation was a combination of a salary and a bonus, which was calculated as a percentage of the company's profits. As general manager, Lewis controlled the payment of his own bonus, but the amount of the bonus became a point of friction between him and the company's president. After he was fired in 1945, there was a lawsuit between Lewis and the company, with Lewis claiming his last bonus (for 1944) should have been larger, and the company counterclaiming that it should have been lower. The court in that case ruled that Lewis had calculated the bonus based on the company's gross profits, but it should have been calculated based on the net profits; Lewis was thus ordered to pay back about $11,000.
 The case before the Court of Claims 
Since he had already paid taxes for his 1944 income, Lewis sued in the United States Court of Claims to get the IRS to refund the amount he had paid on the $11,000. The government argued that the amount was properly considered income in 1944. He had received the money and treated it as his own, therefore it was income under the ruling of North American Oil Consolidated v. Burnet. The Supreme Court in North American Oil had stated:North American Oil Consolidated v. Burnet, 286 U.S. 417 (1932)
The Court of Claims disagreed, as it had in two similar previous cases, Greenwald v. United States,Greenwald v. United States, 57 F.Supp. 569, 102 Ct.Cl. 272 (1944) and Gargaro v. United States.Gargaro v. United States, 73 F.Supp. 973, 109 Ct.Cl. 528 (1944) The Court observed that in North American Oil, the plaintiff was ultimately allowed to keep the money in question, and so it was not unfair for the government to keep the taxes that were paid. In Greenwald, in Gargaro, and now in Lewis' case, the plaintiffs had ultimately lost money. The Court held that it was unjust for the government to keep the taxes that were paid, and North American Oil did not apply.
 Decision of the Supreme Court 
 Majority opinion 
In an 8–1 decision, the Supreme Court reversed, ruling that the claim of right doctrine from North American Oil applied to situations like Mr. Lewis'. In an opinion by Justice Black, the Court stated:
 Douglas' dissent 
Justice Douglas wrote in dissent that it would be both simpler and more fair to allow taxpayers in Lewis' situation to ask for a refund. It would still be necessary to pay taxes on income when it was received, but a refund could be processed in subsequent years.
 Subsequent developments 
The claim of right doctrine did not leave taxpayers like Lewis completely at a loss, since they would be "entitled to a deduction" in the year they were ordered to repay former earnings. In 1954, Congress would make this part of the Internal Revenue Code in 26 U.S. Code § 1341.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:Taxation in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:1951 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Line Material Co." ==> """
United States v. Line Material Co., 333 U.S. 287 (1948),.  is a decision of the United States Supreme Court limiting the doctrine of the 1926 General Electric decision, excusing price fixing in patent license agreements.. The Line Material Court held that cross-licenses between two manufacturer competitors, providing for fixing the prices of the licensed products and providing that one of the manufacturers would license other manufacturers under the patents of each manufacturer, subject to similar price fixing, violated Sherman Act § 1. The Court further held that the licensees who, with knowledge of such arrangements, entered into the price-fixing licenses thereby became party to a hub-and-spoke conspiracy in violation of Sherman Act § 1.
Background
thumb|right|This is the patented Schultz dropout fuse cutout
All of the defendants in this case are manufacturers of electrical devices, the most important of which for purposes of this case are dropout fuse cutouts, which are devices for breaking electrical power circuits. The defendants engaged in a conspiracy to fix the prices of these devices. Defendant Southern States Equipment Corporation (Southern) acquired Lemmon U.S. Pat. No. 2,150,102, which the dropout fuse cutouts the defendants manufacture are said to infringe. Defendant Line Materials (Line) acquired Schultz U.S. Pat. No. 2,176,227, which is an improvement on the Lemmon patent (it is simpler and cheaper), but its use infringes the Lemmon patent.The defendants' respective market shares of the patented dropout fuse cutouts are: General Electric, 29.2%; Line, 25.4%; Kearney, 18.9%; Southern, 7.9%; Westinghouse, 5.3%; Schweitzer and Conrad, 5.1%; Railway, 3.8%; Matthews, 2%; Porcelain, 1.5%; Royal, 0.5%; Pacific, 0.2%; and Johnson, 0.2%. Line and Southern settled a patent dispute by entering into an agreement under which Southern licensed Line royalty-free under the Lemmon patent, and Line licensed Southern royalty-free under the Schultz patent and authorized Southern to grant sublicenses under the Schultz patent. The agreement also provided that all sublicenses granted by Southern under Line's patents were required to include provisions for minimum prices to be established by Line, and all sublicenses under the Lemmon patent were to include provisions for minimum prices to be fixed by Southern.
After various disputes over the licensing terms, Line, Southern, Kearney, General Electric, Westinghouse, Matthews, Schweitzer and Conrad, and Pacific had a meeting in 1940 at which they agreed upon a "standard" license. Several defendants, particularly General Electric, attempted to design around the patents and thus avoid infringement, but these efforts were unsuccessful. At a further meeting, the defendants concluded that it would be more feasible if Line would be the licensor rather than Southern. Under a new agreement, Line was granted a license under Southern's patents but only for cutouts in which the circuit interruption is caused by a fuse melting. Line also was authorized to grant licenses to third persons to make and sell electrical equipment embodying the inventions of Southern's patents. The new agreement provided that Southern received a license under the Line patents on condition that "the prices, terms and conditions of sale of the Southern Corporation for electric fuse equipment, made and sold under the licenses herein granted, shall . . . be not more favorable to the customer than those established from time to time and followed by the Line Company in making its sales."64 F. Supp. at 974.
Matthews, Railway and Kearney then deposited signed license agreements in escrow. The agreement was not to be effective until three out of five named cutout manufacturers in addition to Line, Southern and General Electric had entered into substantially identical license agreements. The condition of the escrow was satisfied and the license agreements became effective in July 1940. Porcelain and Pacific signed license agreements in November 1940, Schweitzer and Conrad in January 1941, Westinghouse also in January 1941, Johnson in June 1943, and Royal in March 1944. The defendants then adhered to a common price schedule.
It was conceded that each signer of the agreements was aware of the price provisions of the various agreements. Some of the licensees opposed or tried to limit the scope of the price-fixing provisions, but they all, even if reluctantly, acquiesced. The Supreme Court observed:
 Undoubtedly, one purpose of the arrangements was to make possible the use by each manufacturer of the Lemmon and Schultz patents. These patents, in separate hands, produced a deadlock. Lemmon, by his basic patent, "blocked" Schultz' improvement. Cross-licenses furnished appellees a solution.333 U.S. at 297.
The Government sued the defendants for violation of Sherman Act § 1, but the district court dismissed the complaint as to all defendants, concluding that the doctrine of United States v. General Electric Co. (1926) was controlling.
Ruling of the Supreme Court
thumb|200px|right| Justice Stanley Reed delivered the judgment of a closely divided Court
Justice Stanley F. Reed delivered the judgment of a closely divided Court, in an opinion in which he spoke principally for himself. Justice William O. Douglas, with whom Justices Hugo Black, Frank Murphy, and Wiley Rutledge joined, concurred in finding a violation of Sherman Act § 1, but they favored total overruling of the 1926 General Electric case. Justice Harold Burton dissented, joined by Chief Justice Fred Vinson and Justice Felix Frankfurter. Justice Robert H. Jackson having approved the filing of the case when in the Department of Justice took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.
Main opinion (Justice Reed)
Justice Reed began by observing, "General Electric is a case that has provoked criticism and approval," and it received "only bare recognition in Ethyl Gasoline Corp. v. United States." In United States v. Masonite Corp., he noted, the Court found it 'unnecessary to reconsider the rule" because the price fixing occurred on the sale of goods after "the patent privilege was exhausted by a transfer of the articles to certain agents who were part of the sales organization of competitors." Now, in this case the Government asks the Court "to reexamine the rule of the General Electric case."333 U. S. 300–01.
But there are problems of stare decisis. For example, "business arrangements have been repeatedly, even though hesitatingly, made in reliance upon the contractors' interpretation of [General Electrics] meaning." Moreover, "Congress has taken no steps to modify the rule." That legislative inaction "is to be weighed with the counterbalancing fact that the rule of the General Electric case grew out of a judicial determination."333 U. S. 303.
Reed continued:
The writer accepts the rule of the General Electric case as interpreted by the third subdivision of this opinion.See last several paragraphs of this section. As a majority of the Court does not agree with that position, the case cannot be reaffirmed on that basis. Neither is there a majority to overrule General Electric. In these circumstances, we must proceed to determine the issues on the assumption that General Electric continues as a precedent. Furthermore, we do not think it wise to undertake to explain, further than the facts of this case require, our views as to the applicability of patent price limitation in the various situations listed by the Government. On that assumption, where a conspiracy to restrain trade or an effort to monopolize is not involved, a patentee may license another to make and vend the patented device with a provision that the licensee's sale price shall be fixed by the patentee. The assumption is stated in this way so as to leave aside the many variables of the General Electric rule that may arise. For example, there may be an aggregation of patents to obtain dominance in a patent field, broad or narrow. . . .333 U.S. at 304.
Justice Reed therefore considered it appropriate to explain what points "are not contested or are not decided in this case," so that the necessarily narrow nature of the ruling will be understood. First, this is not a monopolization case under Sherman Act § 2; it is a restraint of trade case under Sherman Act § 1. Second, the validity of the patents is not in issue. Nor is the aggregation of patents, by pooling or purchase.333 U.S. at 305.
This left the question for the Court to decide as:
Whether, in the light of the prohibition of § 1 of the Sherman Act, two or more patentees in the same patent field may legally combine their valid patent monopolies to secure mutual benefits for themselves through contractual agreements between themselves and other licensees, for control of the sale price of the patented devices.
Line owned the Schultz patent and had the sole right to sublicense Southern's Lemmon patent, and the Schultz patent could not be practiced without infringing the Lemmon patent. As a result:
The agreement between Southern and Line for Line's sublicensing of the Lemmon patent [combined] in Line's hands the authority to fix the prices of the commercially successful devices embodying both the Schultz and Lemmon patents. Thus, though the sublicenses in terms followed the pattern of General Electric in fixing prices only on Line's own patents, the additional right given to Line by the license agreement . . . between Southern and Line, to be the exclusive licensor of the dominant Lemmon patent, made its price-fixing of its own Schultz devices effective over devices embodying also the necessary Lemmon patent. By the patentees' agreement the dominant Lemmon and the subservient Schultz patents were combined to fix prices. In the absence of patent or other statutory authorization, a contract to fix or maintain prices in interstate commerce has long been recognized as illegal per se under the Sherman Act.333 U.S. at 307.
Justice Reed saw this as creating a dilemma. "Thus, we have a statutory monopoly by the patent, and by the Sherman Act a prohibition not only of monopoly or attempt to monopolize, but of every agreement in restraint of trade. Public policy has condemned monopolies for centuries." These conflicting principles meet in this case:
We are thus called to make an adjustment between the lawful restraint on trade of the patent monopoly and the illegal restraint prohibited broadly by the Sherman Act. That adjustment has already reached the point, as the precedents now stand, that a patentee may validly license a competitor to make and vend with a price limitation under the General Electric case and that the grant of patent rights is the limit of freedom from competition. . . . .333 U.S. at 310.
The Court recognized that the General Electric case holds that a patentee may, under certain conditions, lawfully control the price the licensee of his patent may charge for the patented device, but "no case of this Court has construed the patent and anti-monopoly statutes to permit separate owners of separate patents, by cross-licenses or other arrangements, to fix the prices to be charged by them and their licensees for their respective products." Here, where two patentees combine their patents and fix prices on all devices produced under any of the patents, "competition is impeded to a greater degree than where a single patentee fixes prices for his licensees." That effect makes the case like one in which manufacturers of unpatented goods combine to fix prices.333 U.S. at 311.
The General Electric case gives a patentee a right to license another person to make and sell at a fixed price. It does not confer on a patentee "authority to combine with other patent owners to fix prices on articles covered by the[ir] respective patents," and because "the Sherman Act prohibits agreements to fix prices, any arrangement between patentees [to fix prices] runs afoul of that prohibition, and is outside the patent monopoly."333 U.S. at 312.
Furthermore, there is a hub-and-spoke conspiracy here: "Licensees under the contract who, as here, enter into license arrangements, with price-fixing provisions, with knowledge of the contract, are equally subject to the prohibitions [of the Sherman Act]."333 U.S. at 315.
Concurring opinion (Douglas)
Justice Douglas, with whom Justices Black, Murphy, and Rutledge joined, agreed that the defendants had violated the Sherman Act, but found Justice Reed's "discussion of the problem . . . not adequate for a full understanding of the basic issue presented." They "would be rid of United States v. General Electric Co." entirely.333 U.S. at 316.
In the 1926 General Electric case, the Court followed Bement v. National Harrow Co.,. decided in 1902, and it sustained a price-fixing provision of a license to make and vend the patented invention. "By that decision, price-fixing combinations which are outlawed by the Sherman Act . . . were held to be lawful when the property involved was a patent, Douglas said and the asked, "By what authority was this done?" He said it was not by the patent statutes, for they do not give a right to make "price-fixing combinations." Patents should be treated like any other property. The reason for making an exception for patented good is unsound, he argued:
The Court made an exception in the case of these price-fixing combinations in order to make the patent monopoly a more valuable one to the patentee. It was concerned with giving him as high a reward as possible. It reasoned that, if the patentee could not control the price at which his licensees sold the patented article, they might undersell him; that a price-fixing combination would give him protection against that contingency, and therefore was a reasonable device to secure him a pecuniary reward for his invention. Thus, the General Electric case inverted Cl. 8 of Art. I, § 8 of the Constitution, and made the inventor's reward the prime, rather than an incidental, object of the patent system. In that manner, the Court saddled the economy with a vicious monopoly.333 U.S. at 318.
It is no answer, Douglas insisted, to say "in reply that he, the patentee, has that monopoly anyway—that his exclusive right to make, use, and vend would give him the right to exclude others and manufacture the invention and market it at any price he chose." While that is so, the patentee gets more from a price-fixing agreement than his original patent monopoly. "He then gets not a benefit inherent in the right of exclusion, but a benefit which flows from suppression of competition by combination with his competitors." Douglas explained that he gets the benefit of a license to conspire in restraint of trade:
In short, he and his associates get the benefits of a conspiracy or combination in restraint of competition. That is more than an "exclusive right" to an invention; it's an "exclusive right" to form a combination with competitors to fix the prices of the products of invention. The patentee creates by that method a powerful inducement for the abandonment of competition, for the cessation of litigation concerning the validity of patents, for the acceptance of patents no matter how dubious, for the abandonment of research in the development of competing patents. Those who can get stabilized markets, assured margins, and freedom from price-cutting will find a price-fixing license an attractive alternative to the more arduous methods of maintaining their competitive positions. Competition tends to become impaired not by reason of the public's preference for the patented article, but because of the preference of competitors for price-fixing and for the increased profits which that method of doing business promises.333 U.S. at 319.
Since the Supreme Court, not Congress, created the General Electric doctrine, this Court, "should take the initiative in eliminating it."333 U.S. at 321.
Dissenting opinion (Burton)
Justice Burton, together with Justices Vinson and Frankfurter, "impelled by regard for the soundness, authority, and applicability to this case of the unanimous decisions of this Court in Bement v. National Harrow Co. and General Electric, dissented. In their view, the defendants did not violate the Sherman Act.333 U.S. at 321 (Burton, J., dissenting).
The dissent argued that the licenses in this case were "the only reasonable means for releasing to the public the benefits intended for the public by the patent laws," and this "cross-license between mutually deadlocked complementary patents is, per se, a desirable procedure." In fact, the dissent observed, the price-fixing license in the General Electric case was a cross-license that "contained agreements even more restrictive than the price protection provisions of the cross-licenses involved in the case at bar."333 U.S. at 358-59. The dissent concluded that there was "neither adequate reason nor authority for overruling" the General Electriuc case or for distinguishing it.333 U.S. at 383.
Commentary
● The 1955 Report of the Attorney General's National Committee to Study the Antitrust Laws stated that most members of the committee believed, based on the Line Material case and similar decisions,In particular, , decided the same day as Line Material. that use of price-fixing clauses in patent licenses would be illegal if the result of "any concert or arrangement aimed at or resulting in industry-wide price fixing." 233. The Report amplified this comment:
A number of efforts have been made to overrule the General Electric case. These culminated in the Line Material decision where no majority of the Supreme Court could be obtained either to affirm or overrule General Electric. We are not unmindful of this decision nor the vigorous dissent of four justices in favor of overruling General Electric. We think, however, that in the absence of horizontal agreement among licensees, or any plan aimed at or resulting in industry wide price fixing, licenses with price fixing provisions fall within the orbit of the patent and need not run afoul of the antitrust laws.Report at 235.
● Chicago patent lawyer James Wetzel questioned "whether Line Material has any real meaning," given the subsequent 4-4 failure to overrule General Electric in United States v. Huck Mfg. Co., affirming per curiam 227 F. Supp. 791 (E.D. Mich. 1964). He argues that, in any case, Line Material and Huck failed to rule out patent price fixing or "the right to use that which is reasonably within the reward of the grant of the patent." He therefore recommends that "there should not be any reluctance to use" price-fixing clauses in patent licenses.James M. Wetzel, 
Did Line Material Really Rule Out Patent Price Fixing?, 26  471, 476-77 (1975).
References
External links
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:1948 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Locke" ==> """
United States v. Locke, 529 U.S. 89 (2000), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court unanimously held that certain state regulations regarding oil tankers and oil barges are preempted under the Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution in deference to the extensive body of federal regulations affecting these classes of vessels.
 Background 
The 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill severely affected the environment of Prince William Sound, Alaska, United States. In the wake of that spill, the state of Washington passed a law authorizing the state Office of Marine Safety to regulate certain aspects of tanker and oil barge operations when calling on Washington state ports.  Specifically, the Office of Marine Safety adopted regulations requiring tank vessel operators to submit an oil spill prevention plan for state review and approval. The United States Department of Justice led by Attorney General, Janet Reno filed suit against Washington for adopting rules in an area of law in which the United States Coast Guard had long occupied the field of regulatory activity.  The basis of the suit was that the Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution prohibited states from enacting legislation and rules in fields where the United States Congress intended the Coast Guard to have complete authority, particularly when such regulation could affect interstate and international commerce.
 Opinion of the Court 
The case reached the Supreme Court of the United States on December 7, 1999. The court unanimously held that Congress intended the United States Coast Guard to be the sole national authority regarding the design, construction, maintenance and certain operational requirements of tank vessels.. Following the decision, Washington State withdrew the offending regulations.
 Subsequent developments 
This unanimous decision upheld and expanded previous case law, including Gibbons v. Ogden and Ray v. Atlantic Richfield regarding the federal government's strong role and preemptive powers in regulating interstate commerce. The court found that the states cannot pass laws that interfere with the federal government's authority over interstate commerce when a federal agency is granted exclusive jurisdiction by the United States Congress. 
The Supremacy Clause of the United States Constitution provides that "this Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall be made, under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land."
The Commerce Clause in Article I Section 8 of the United States Constitution provides that  "Congress shall have Power...to regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes."
The previous decisions set the basis for the government to use these enumerated powers as "...necessary and proper..." also stated in the Constitution.
These federal powers are likely to remain in tension with the powers of the states as articulated in the 10th amendment to the United States Constitution as adopted in the Bill of Rights.  The Tenth Amendment provides that, "The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people."
The Court held that "Washington's regulations regarding general navigation watch procedures, crew English language skills and training, and maritime casualty reporting are pre-empted by the comprehensive federal regulatory scheme governing oil tankers; the case is remanded so the validity of other Washington regulations may be assessed in light of the considerable federal interest at stake."Locke, 529 U.S. at 94.  The state of Washington did not pursue the remand back to the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals, but withdrew all of its regulations related to tank vessel oil spill prevention plans.
 See also 
 Federal preemption
 References 
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:Legal history of Washington (state)
Category:2000 in the environment
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:1999 in Washington (state)
Category:2000 in Washington (state)
Category:United States admiralty case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Petroleum transport
"""

From "United States v. Lopez" ==> """
United States v. Alfonso D. Lopez, Jr., 514 U.S. 549 (1995), was a landmark case of the United States Supreme Court concerning the Commerce Clause. It was the first case since 1937 in which the Court held that Congress had exceeded its power to legislate under the Commerce Clause.
The case arose from a San Antonio high school student's challenge to the Gun-Free School Zones Act of 1990 (part of the Crime Control Act of 1990), which banned possession of handguns within  of a school. In a majority decision joined by four other justices, Chief Justice William Rehnquist held that Lopez' possession of the gun was not economic activity and its scope was not sufficiently cabined, and so was outside the broad reach of the Commerce Clause. After the Lopez decision, the Gun-Free School Zones Act of 1990 was amended to specifically only apply to guns that had been moved via interstate or foreign commerce.
In his dissent, Associate Justice Stephen Breyer argued that Congress could regulate handgun possession under the Commerce Clause because gun violence could have a significant effect on interstate commerce by impairing educational environments.
Though it did not reverse any past ruling about the meaning of the Commerce Clause, Lopez raised serious questions as to how far the Court might be willing to go in curbing Congress' powers under the Commerce Clause. The Court would later further limit congressional powers under the Commerce Clause in United States v. Morrison (2000).
Background
Alfonso Lopez, Jr., was a 12th-grade student at Edison High School in San Antonio, Texas. On March 10, 1992, he carried a concealed .38 caliber revolver, along with five cartridges, into the school. The gun was not loaded; Lopez claimed that he was to deliver the weapon to another person, a service for which he would receive $44.Court of Appeals opinion p. 4. School authorities received an anonymous tip that Lopez was carrying the weapon, to which Lopez admitted when confronted. The next day, he was charged with violating the federalInitially Lopez was charged with the state law crime of possession of a firearm on school premises, but these charges were dismissed in favor of the federal charges. Gun-Free School Zones Act of 1990 (the "Act"), .The federal grand jury indicted Lopez on one count of "knowing possession of a firearm at a school zone," in violation of §922(q) of the Act.
Lopez moved to dismiss the indictment on the ground that §922(q) of the Act was "unconstitutional as it is beyond the power of Congress to legislate control over our public schools."514 U.S. at 551. The trial court denied the motion, ruling that §922(q) was "a constitutional exercise of Congress' well defined power to regulate activities in and affecting commerce, and the 'business' of elementary, middle and high schools...affects interstate commerce."514 U.S. at 551-52.
Lopez was tried and convicted. He appealed to the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, claiming that §922(q) exceeded Congress' power to legislate under the Commerce Clause.514 U.S. at 552. The Fifth Circuit agreed and reversed his conviction, holding that "section 922(q), in the full reach of its terms, is invalid as beyond the power of Congress under the Commerce Clause." The Court of Appeals noted that the legislative history of the Act did not justify it as an exercise of the Commerce Clause power of Congress, suggesting that a new version of the Act which recited more of a nexus with interstate commerce might be devised, although what that nexus might be, is difficult to harmonize with the text of the decision, as the Court clearly stated that the situation posed only a "trivial impact" upon commerce."...there was no testimony [before Congressional committees] concerning the effect of [gun] violence on interstate commerce... neither [the House nor the Senate] sponsor had anything to say about commerce in their remarks... Neither [in Maryland v. Wirtz] nor in Wickard v. Filburn has the [Supreme] Court declared that Congress may use a relatively trivial impact on commerce as an excuse for broad general regulation... Indeed, it could not be otherwise as the chain of causation is virtually infinite, and hence there is no private activity, no matter how local and insignificant, the ripple effect from which is not in some theoretical measure ultimately felt beyond the borders of the state in which it took place." Lopez, 2 F.3d at 1361-62.
Justice Harlan's claim of non-triviality was made despite the contention in Wickard v. Filburn stemming from an alleged alteration of national wheat prices caused by harvesting an excess 239 bushels of wheat grown as feed for livestock; relative to 941,970 bushels of wheat produced domestically in 1941.National Agricultural Statistics Service, & Porter, J., Historical track records206–206 (2019). Washington, D.C.; U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service, Agricultural Statistics Board.
The United States government filed a petition for certiorari, whereby the Court has discretion to hear or to decline a particular case, for Supreme Court review and the Court accepted the case.
To sustain the Act, the government was obligated to show that §922(q) was a valid exercise of the Congressional Commerce Clause power,When the power of Congress is challenged, the party asserting the existence of the power — here, the Government — bears the burden of demonstrating that the power exists. i.e. that the section regulated a matter which "affected" (or "substantially affected")There was some question over the wording of the legal test, with the Court eventually opting to include the word "substantially" with "affect(s)." interstate commerce.The Court of Appeals noted how broadly the challenged section of the Act swept by its terms: "[It would] criminalize any person's carrying of an unloaded shotgun, in an unlocked pickup truck gun rack, while driving on a country road that at one turn happens to come within 950 feet of the boundary of... a church kindergarten... even during the summer when the kindergarten is not in session." Lopez, 2 F.3d at 1366.
The government's principal argument was that the possession of a firearm in an educational environment would most likely lead to a violent crime, which in turn would affect the general economic condition in two ways. First, because violent crime causes harm and creates expense, it raises insurance costs, which are spread throughout the economy; and second, by limiting the willingness to travel in the area perceived to be unsafe. The government also argued that the presence of firearms within a school would be seen as dangerous, resulting in students' being scared and disturbed; this would, in turn, inhibit learning; and this, in turn, would lead to a weaker national economy since education is clearly a crucial element of the nation's financial health.
Supreme Court decision
In a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the Court of Appeals. It held that while Congress had broad lawmaking authority under the Commerce Clause, the power was limited, and did not extend so far from "commerce" as to authorize the regulation of the carrying of handguns, of aggregate effect.
Chief Justice Rehnquist, delivering the opinion of the Court, identified the three broad categories of activity that Congress could regulate under the Commerce Clause:
 The use of channels of interstate commerce
 The instrumentalities of interstate commerce, or persons or things in interstate commerce, even though the threat may come only from intrastate activitiesFor instance, Congress can regulate motor vehicles used in interstate commerce or can criminalize theft from interstate shipments, p.xx
 Activities that substantially affect or substantially relate to interstate commerce"Consistent with this structure, we have identified three broad categories of activity that Congress may regulate under its commerce power... First, Congress may regulate the use of the channels of interstate commerce... Second, Congress is empowered to regulate and protect the instrumentalities of interstate commerce, or persons or things in interstate commerce, even though the threat may come only from intrastate activities... Finally, Congress' commerce authority includes the power to regulate those activities having a substantial relation to interstate commerce, i.e., those activities that substantially affect interstate commerce."
He said they had summarily dismissed any consideration of the first two categories and concluded that the resolution of the case depended only on consideration of the third category—regulation of activities that substantially affect interstate commerce. The Court essentially concluded that in no way was the carrying of handguns a commercial activity or even related to any sort of economic enterprise, even under the most extravagant definitions."Where economic activity substantially affects interstate commerce, legislation regulating that activity will be sustained...  [But] this is not an essential part of a larger regulation of economic activity [and is not an activity arising] out of or connected with a commercial transaction which, when viewed in the aggregate, substantially affects interstate commerce...  [Instead,] section 922(q) is a criminal statute that by its terms has nothing to do with "commerce" or any sort of economic enterprise, however broadly one might define those terms... States possess primary authority for defining and enforcing the criminal law... When Congress criminalizes conduct already denounced as criminal by the States, it effects a change in the sensitive relation between federal and state criminal jurisdiction." p. xxy.
The opinion rejected the government's argument that because crime negatively impacted education, Congress might have reasonably concluded that crime in schools substantially affects commerce.
The Court reasoned that if Congress could regulate something so far removed from commerce, then it could regulate anything, and since the Constitution clearly creates Congress as a body with enumerated powers, this could not be so. Rehnquist concluded:
The Court specifically looked to four factors in determining whether legislation represents a valid effort to use the Commerce Clause power to regulate activities that substantially affect interstate commerce:
Whether the activity was non-economic as opposed to economic activity; previous cases involved economic activity
Jurisdictional element: whether the gun had moved in interstate commerce
Whether there had been congressional findings of an economic link between guns and education
How attenuated the link was between the regulated activity and interstate commerce
Although the ruling stopped a decades-long trend of inclusiveness under the commerce clause, it did not reverse any past ruling about the meaning of the clause. Later, Rehnquist stated that the Court had the duty to prevent the legislative branch from usurping state powers over policing the conduct of their citizens. He admitted that the Supreme Court had upheld certain governmental steps towards taking power away from the states, and cited Lopez as a decision that finally stepped in to check the government's authority by defining clearly between state and federal powers.William H. Rehnquist, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States, American Constitutional Interpretation, Third Edition, 2000, Ed. Walter F. Murphy, James E. Fleming, Sotirios A. Barber, and Stephen Macedo, pgs. 639-640
Justice Thomas filed a separate concurring opinion. In it, Thomas describes the importance of maintaining the traditional sense of the word "commerce" as it appears in the Constitution: "...interjecting a modern sense of commerce into the Constitution generates significant textual and structural problems. For example, one cannot replace 'commerce' with a different type of enterprise, such as manufacturing..." Furthermore, Justice Thomas calls for further reevaluation of the "substantial effects" test, arguing that under the Court's understanding, it would allow for Congress to control every aspect of national life: 
Dissenting opinions
Justice Breyer authored the principal dissenting opinion.Justices Stevens, Souter and Ginsburg joined the Breyer dissent in this 5–4 decision. As noted below, Justice Souter and Justice Stevens each wrote an additional individual dissent. He applied three principles that he considered basic:
The Commerce Clause included the power to regulate local activities so long as those "significantly affect" interstate commerce.
In considering the question, a court must consider not the individual act being regulated (a single instance of gun possession), but rather the cumulative effect of all similar acts (i.e., the effect of all guns possessed in or near schools).
A court must specifically determine not whether the regulated activity significantly affected interstate commerce, but whether Congress could have had a "rational basis" for so concluding."[We] judge the connection between a regulated activity and interstate commerce, not directly, but at one remove." p. xx
With these principles in mind, Justice Breyer asked if Congress could have rationally found that the adverse effect of violent crime in school zones, acting through the intermediary effect of degrading the quality of education, could significantly affect interstate commerce. Based on the existence of empirical studies, he answered this question affirmatively."Congress could also have found ... that gun related violence in and around schools is a commercial, as well as a human, problem." p. xx. He pointed out the growing importance of education in the job market, noting that increased global competition made primary and secondary education more important.p. xxy He also observed that US firms make location decisions, in part, on the presence or absence of an educated work force.. yyx
Justice Breyer concluded that it was obvious that gun violence could have an effect on interstate commerce. The only question remaining, then, was whether Congress could have rationally concluded that the effect could be "substantial." Congress could have rationally concluded, in Justice Breyer's judgment, that the linkage from gun violence to an impaired learning environment, and from this impaired environment to the consequent adverse economic effects, was sufficient to create a risk to interstate commerce that was "substantial.""Congress could have [rationally] found that gun related violence near the classroom poses a serious economic threat to [both] ... inadequately educated workers [destined for] ... low paying jobs ... and to ... businesses that might (in today's 'information society') otherwise gain ... an important commercial advantage."p. xx
Congress, in Justice Breyer's view, had a rational basis "for finding a significant connection between guns in or near schools and (through their effect on education) the interstate and foreign commerce they threaten." In his opinion, no more than this was required to find sufficient supporting power for the challenged law under the Commerce Clause, and he consequently believed that the Court of Appeals had erred and should be reversed.
In his dissent, Justice Souter warned that the distinction between "commercial" and "non-commercial" activity was not tenable. He echoed the "rational basis" theme of the Breyer dissent.The question ... is not... whether Congress in fact found that a particular activity substantially affects interstate commerce. The [enactment of the] legislation implies such a finding, and there is no reason to entertain claims that Congress acted ultra vires intentionally. Nor is the question whether Congress was correct in so finding. The only question is whether the legislative judgment is within the realm of reason.... Justice Breyer's opinion demonstrates beyond any doubt that the Act in question passes the rationality review [standard]. p. xxy
Justice Stevens, in his dissent, iterated his agreement with the Breyer dissent that found ample congressional power under the Commerce Clause to regulate the possession of firearms in schools, in the same way that Congress may act to protect the school environment from alcohol or asbestos. He also agreed with Justice Souter's "exposition of the radical character of the Court's holding and its kinship with the discredited, pre-Depression version of substantive due process."p. xxy.
 Aftermath 
Lopez was the first case since 1937 in which the Court held that Congress had exceeded its power to legislate under the Commerce Clause. It raised serious questions as to how far the Court might be willing to go in implementing judicial safeguards against federal encroachments on state sovereignty.Erwin Chemerinsky, Professor of Law and Political Science at the University of Southern California, Florida Law Review, "The Values of Federalism", September 1995, 46 Fla. L. Rev. 499 The precedent takes special significance in cases that the federal government attempts to limit private conduct. The decision sparked a lot of commentary focused on federalism.Lori J. Warner, The Potential Impact of United States v. Lopez on Environmental Regulation, 7 Duke Environmental Law & Policy Forum 321-365, 323 (Spring 1997). For instance, Lawrence Lessig praised the decision as a revival of federalism jurisprudence. The argument can be made that the significant limiting of federal power is necessary to establish a greater threshold for governmental accountability and revitalizes the role of the states in public policymaking. It can also be ascribed to new legislation that makes open carry in schools legal in some Texas jurisdictions.Kristin Collins, J.D., Yale Law School, Cardozo Law Review, April 2005, pg. Lexis
The case has been followed by the Supreme Court in limiting Congress' power under the Commerce Clause in a 1999 case, United States v. Morrison,United States v. Morrison, . and under other enumerated powers in a 2001 case, Solid Waste Agency of Northern Cook County v. United States Army Corps of Engineers ("SWANCC").Solid Waste Agency of Northern Cook County v. United States Army Corps of Engineers, .Lee, Joshua L. (2006) "Note: Federal Wetland Jurisdiction and the Power To Regulate Commerce: Searching for the Nexus in Gerke Excavating" Brigham Young University Law Review 2006: pp. 263-304, page 285, notes 142 & 143
Lopez joined the Marines after his conviction was overturned.
 Revision and re-enactment of law 
Following the Lopez decision, Congress rewrote the Gun Free School Zones Act of 1990 in June 1995 with the necessary interstate-commerce "hook" used in other Federal Gun Laws. This includes an added requirement for prosecutors to prove during each prosecution case that the gun moved in or affected interstate or foreign commerce. The revised Federal Gun Free School Zones Act is currently in effect and has been upheld by several United States Appellate Courts. None of the convictions occurring under the revised law have been overturned as a result of the Lopez decision.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 514
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Wickard v. Filburn, 317 U.S. 111 (1942)
 A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States, 295 U.S. 495 (1935)
 References 
External links
Case Brief for United States v. Lopez at Lawnix.com
"A GUN BAN IS SHOT DOWN" Time Magazine
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1995 in United States case law
Category:United States federal firearms case law
Category:Education in San Antonio
"""

From "United States v. Louisiana (1965)" ==> """
United States v. Louisiana, 382 U.S. 288 (1965), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States regarding the state of Louisiana's entitlement to the lands, minerals and other natural resources underlying the Gulf of Mexico.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 382
External links
Category:1965 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Louisiana
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "United States v. Lovett" ==> """
United States v. Lovett, 328 U.S. 303 (1946), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that Congress may not forbid the payment of a salary to a specific individual, as it would constitute an unconstitutional bill of attainder.
Background
In February 1943, the Democratic chairman of the House Un-American Activities Committee, Martin Dies, gave a speech at the floor on the House of Representatives accusing 39 unspecified government employees of "subversive" activities. An amendment was proposed to defund the salaries of the 39 people whom Dies had "indicted". After some debate, the matter was referred to a special subcommittee of the Appropriations Committee, which held secret hearings chaired by John H. Kerr. The subcommittee created a definition of "subversive" activity and decided that Goodwin B. Watson, William E. Dodd, Jr. and Robert Morss Lovett were guilty of such activity. Despite attempted interventions by many supporters, including noted federal judge Learned Hand (a friend of Lovett's) and Lovett's superior, Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes, the subcommittee recommended that Lovett be removed from office.
Kerr proposed as part of the appropriations bill a section denying the payment of a salary to Watson, Dodd, and Lovett. Although divisive, his measure passed the House. The Senate Appropriations Committee and the full Senate unanimously and repeatedly rejected the measure. However, the House made it clear that they would not approve an appropriations bill without the provision and after five conference reports, the Senate finally acceded and passed a version of the Urgent Deficiency Appropriation Act of 1943 that included Kerr's provision. President Roosevelt signed the bill while simultaneously declaring his belief that Kerr's provision was unconstitutional.
The provision mandated that the three would not receive payment for any work performed after November 15, 1943. Nonetheless, all three continued to work for some time after that date and filed for back pay with the Court of Claims. The three were victorious before the Court of Claims, and the government appealed to the Supreme Court, which heard the cases in a consolidated argument in 1946. The Court heard the case as a seven-member panel, with Justice Jackson recused and Chief Justice Stone having died a month before oral arguments.
Opinion of the Court
The Court, in a decision authored by Justice Hugo Black, ruled unanimously to uphold the decision of the Court of Claims, finding that Kerr's provision was an unconstitutional "bill of pains and penalties" (forbidden under the Bill of Attainder Clause of Article One of the Constitution).United States v. Lovett,  Justice Frankfurter, joined by Justice Reed, concurred in the result. However, he took issue with the Court's characterization of the provision as a bill of attainder and, citing the principle of constitutional avoidance, avoided ruling the provision unconstitutional by concluding that while Kerr's provision "prevented the ordinary disbursal of money to pay respondents' salaries", "[it] did not cut off the obligation of the Government to pay for services rendered".United States v. Lovett,  (Frankfurter, J., concurring) To define what a bill of attainder was for purpose of American law, the Court looked back to Cummings v. Missouri (1867) and Ex Parte Garland (1866). Lovett was the first time since the Reconstruction era that the Supreme Court reexamined its Bill of Attainder jurisprudence, although state and lower federal courts had confronted the issue at various points since.
Subsequent developments
Following the Supreme Court's decision, the Republican-controlled House Appropriations Committee refused to allocate the $2,158 (about $ today) to return the back salary to the three men. However, the full House of Representatives narrowly voted to appropriate the funds and the three men received their money. However, in the same budget in which the entire House authorized the back pay for the three men, it again tried to deny funding for the salary of Edgar Warren, the Director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service; on this issue, Senator William F. Knowland refused to budge on the issue and the House eventually agreed to fund Warren's salary (although he resigned after the appropriation was passed).
 References 
External links
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
"""

From "United States v. Maine" ==> """
United States v. Maine, 469 U.S. 504 (1985), also known as the Rhode Island and New York Boundary Case, was a decision by the U.S. Supreme Court, which held that the Long Island Sound and Block Island Sound in part constitute a juridical bay under Article 7(6) of the Convention on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone, Long Island being an extension of the mainland and the southern headland of the bay, and (b) that the bay closed at the line drawn from Montauk Point at the eastern tip of Long Island to Watch Hill Point on the Rhode Island shore, the waters of the bay west of the closing line being internal state waters, and the waters of Block Island Sound east of that line being territorial waters and high seas. Maine is named in the title of the case because it is the northernmost of the thirteen defendant states with coastline on the Atlantic Ocean in a series of cases related to overlapping claims of state and federal jurisdiction over seas and the seafloor.
The federal government and states didn't agree on who controlled the Long Island and Block Island sounds. The states wanted control to regulate shipping and commerce on the sounds. The key to the case was if Long Island was, for legal purposes, an extension of the mainland or an island. If it were simply an extension of the mainland, as the states argued, then the sounds would legally be inland bays controlled by the states. If it were, for legal purposes, an island, then the sounds would be considered open waters and be under federal control. 
The court ruled in favor of the states, determining that the East River, which separates Long Island from the mainland, was too shallow for safe ship passage until humans widened it. Thus, it was decided that Long Island is not a natural island. Long Island and the adjacent shore also share a common geological history.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 469
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:1985 in Maine
Category:1985 in New York (state)
Category:Internal territorial disputes of the United States
"""

From "United States v. Mandujano" ==> """
United States v. Mandujano, 425 U.S. 564 (1976), was a United States Supreme Court case that determined that it is not necessary to provide full Miranda warnings to a person called to testify before a grand jury; and that false statements given during that testimony may not be suppressed in a subsequent prosecution for perjury..
 Background 
In 1973, Roy Mandujano negotiated with an undercover narcotics officer to purchase an ounce of heroin for six hundred fifty dollars. The transaction was never completed. Mandujano was then called before the grand jury, where he testified regarding his familiarity of the heroin industry in San Antonio, Texas. He was not given Miranda warnings before testifying.
After his testimony, Mandujano was arrested for 1) attempted distribution of heroin and 2) perjury, but the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas suppressed the grand jury statements on the grounds that Mandujano was entitled to Miranda warnings before his testimony.  Thus, the perjury charge was thrown out; however, Mandujano was convicted of the distribution charge. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed the decision to throw out the perjury charges on June 28, 1974.
 Supreme Court Decision 
The decisions by the District Court and Appellate Court to throw out the perjury charges were reversed and remanded by the Supreme Court.  The Supreme Court determined that the grand jury is an integral part of the United States constitutional heritage which was brought with the common law.  Furthermore, the grand jury serves as a barrier to reckless or unfounded charges.  
Miranda warnings are aimed at the evils seen by the Court as endemic to police interrogation of a person in custody.  The Court considers it unlikely that a grand jury will abuse powers as police sometimes do.  Therefore, it is not necessary to provide full Miranda warnings to a person called to testify before the grand jury.  Furthermore, false statements given during that testimony may not be suppressed in a subsequent prosecution for perjury.
However, the Court did not decide whether a suspect questioned before a grand jury had a right to be warned of their Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.  The defendant in this case received such a warning.Mandujano, 425 U.S. at 592, n. 7.
 Fifth Circuit guidance on defining "attempt" 
On August 19, 1974, the Fifth Circuit Court of appeals affirmed Mandujano's conviction of attempted distribution of heroin. This case is worth noting for how the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit summarized approaches to defining what constitutes an "attempt" to commit a crime.Defining Attempts: Mandujano's Error, Duke University, Michael R. Fishman, Criminal Law - Cases and Materials, 7th ed. 2012, Wolters Kluwer Law & Business; John Kaplan, Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder, ,  Attempt has two elements, intent, and some conduct toward completion of the crime).  This opinion by the appellate court was not overturned by the Supreme Court decision.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1974 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Martinez-Fuerte" ==> """
United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 U.S. 543 (1976), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court that allowed the United States Border Patrol to set up permanent or fixed checkpoints on public highways leading to or away from the Mexican border and that the checkpoints are not a violation of the Fourth Amendment..New York Times, 7 July 1976, Vol. CXXV, no. 43,264
 History 
The defendant, Amado Martinez-Fuerte, had agreed to transport two illegal Mexican aliens who had entered the United States through the Port of San Ysidro in San Diego, California. They traveled north and were stopped at a permanent checkpoint on Interstate 5 between Oceanside and San Clemente and then questioned. The two passengers admitted their status, and the defendant was charged with two counts of illegally transporting aliens. He moved to have the evidence suppressed, on the grounds that the checkpoint stop had violated the Fourth Amendment. The motion was denied, and he was convicted of both counts.
 Decision 
The court ruled 7-2 that the internal checkpoints were not a violation of the Fourth Amendment. The court went on to say that it would be impracticable for the officers to seek warrants for every vehicle searched and that to do so would eliminate any deterrent towards smuggling and illegal immigration. The court felt that any intrusion to motorists was a minimal one and that the government and public interest outweighed the constitutional rights of the individual.
The court also ruled that the stops were Constitutional even if largely based on apparent Mexican ancestry:
"As we have noted earlier, one's expectation of privacy in an automobile and of freedom in its operation are significantly different from the traditional expectation of privacy and freedom in one's residence. United States v. Ortiz, 422 U.S. at 422 U. S. 896 n. 2; see Cardwell v. Lewis, 417 U. S. 583, 417 U. S. 590-591 (1974) (plurality opinion)."
"And the reasonableness of the procedures followed in making these checkpoint stops makes the resulting intrusion on the interests of motorists minimal. On the other hand, the purpose of the stops is legitimate and in the public interest, and the need for this enforcement technique is demonstrated by the records in the cases before us. Accordingly, we hold that the stops and questioning at issue may be made in the absence of any individualized suspicion at reasonably located checkpoints. [Footnote 15]"
Thus, a Border Patrol agent that sends a vehicle to secondary does not violate the Fourth Amendment even without probable cause or even reasonable suspicion:
"We further believe that it is constitutional to refer motorists selectively to the secondary inspection area at the San Clemente checkpoint on the basis of criteria that would not sustain a roving patrol stop."  (The court was referring  to the Terry v. Ohio requirement of roving patrol).
"Thus, even if it be assumed that such referrals are made largely on the basis of apparent Mexican ancestry, [Footnote 16] we perceive no constitutional violation. Cf. United States v. Brignoni-Ponce, 422 U.S. at 422 U. S. 885-887. As the intrusion here is sufficiently minimal that no particularized reason need exist to justify it, we think it follows that the Border Patrol officers must have wide discretion in selecting the motorists to be diverted for the brief questioning involved."
 Dissenting opinion 
Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., wrote in his dissent that the decision was a radical new intrusion on citizens' rights and "empties the reasonableness requirement of the Amendment":
"The scheme of the Fourth Amendment becomes meaningful only when it is assured that at some point the conduct of those charged with enforcing the laws can be subjected to the more detached, neutral scrutiny of a judge who must evaluate the reasonableness of a particular search or seizure in light of the particular circumstances. And in making that assessment it is imperative that the facts be judged against an objective standard.... Anything less would invite intrusions upon constitutionally guaranteed rights based on nothing more substantial than inarticulate hunches, a result this Court has consistently refused to sanction."
Part of Justice Brennan's complaint was that it was the ninth decision to rule against Fourth Amendment protections in that term.
 See also 
 Michigan Dept. of State Police v. Sitz (1990)
 Illinois v. Lidster (2004)
 Osete, Jesus A., The Praetorians: An Analysis of U.S. Border Patrol Checkpoints Following "Martinez-Fuerte". 93 Wash. U. L. Rev. 803 (2016). 
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:History of San Diego County, California
Category:United States Border Patrol
Category:Illegal immigration to the United States
"""

From "United States v. Masonite Corp." ==> """
United States v. Masonite Corp., 316 U.S. 265 (1942), is a United States Supreme Court decision. that limited the scope of the 1926 Supreme Court decision in the General Electric case. that had exempted patent licensing agreements from antitrust law's prohibition of price fixing. The Court did so by applying the doctrine of the Court's recent Interstate Circuit. hub-and-spoke conspiracy decision.
Background
thumb|Masonite Corp. hardboard
Masonite Corporation, the principal defendant in this case, and defendants Celotex Corporation, Certain-Teed Products Corporation, Johns-Manville Sales Corporation, Insulite Company, Flintkote Company, National Gypsum Company, Wood Conversion Company, Armstrong Cork Company, and Dant & Russell, Inc. were all competitors engaged in manufacturing and selling building materials, including hardboard. Hardboard is a strong, hard, dense, grainless, synthetic board made from heat and pressure treated wood chips, and is claimed in a Masonite patent.Representative claim 5 of Mason's U.S. Pat. No. 1,663,505 claims: "An article of manufacture consisting of a coherent, grainless, homogeneous, hard, stiff and strong body of wood or woody material, which had been disintegrated into substantially fibrous state, wet, and dried from moist state under consolidating pressure and heat until practically completely freed from moisture, said body being denser than, and comprising practically all the substance of the original wood or woody material." This claim was held valid and infringed in Masonite Corp. v. Celotex Co., 66 F.2d 451 (3d Cir. 1933). Masonite sued Celotex for patent infringement and prevailed. The parties settled the dispute with a 1933 "agency" agreement. Then Masonite sent and proposed the same agreement to others of the defendants, and each executed the agreement between 1933 and 1934. As each agreement was made, Masonite informed the signatory of the existence and terms of each of the agreements that Masonite had previously made with the other companies, and sent copies of the new agreement to those companies that had previously executed similar contracts.316 U.S. at 268-69.
Masonite sent the agency agreement to Insulite, but that company refused to sign; Masonite then sued a dealer who handled Insulite's hardboard, charging infringement of one of Masonite's patents, and Insulite undertook the defense. But Insulite then signed the same agency agreement in 1935. The agency agreements were modified in 1936 and an agreement relating to them was signed by each defendant, so that each party knew at that time that Masonite proposed to make substantially identical agreements with the others. The agreement provided that it should become effective only when all the parties had agreed to it.316 U.S. at 269-70.
The contracts between Masonite and the other defendants each designated the other defendant as an "agent" and appointed it as a "del credere factor" to sell Masonite's hardboard products. The contracts also provided that Masonite would fix uniform prices for itself and the others on hardboard they manufactured and sold:
Masonite agreed to designate from time to time the minimum selling price and the maximum terms and conditions of sale at which the "agent" might sell Masonite's products. The list prices and terms of sale were to be the minimum prices and maximum terms of sale at which Masonite was either offering or making sales to its customers. The right to change the list prices and terms of sale was vested solely in Masonite. . . . It was agreed that Masonite was bound to adhere to the prices, and terms and conditions of sale which it fixed for its "agents." In case the "agent" sold for less than the minimum price, it was obligated to pay liquidated damages at a specified rate.316 U.S. at 270–71.
For hardboard that Masonite manufactured and shipped to the "agents" for disposition to their customers, Masonite "consigned" the product for sale at the price Masonite prescribed, but the "agent" bore the costs once the product left Masonite's plant:
On direct shipments to the "agent," the hardboards "shall be received and held on consignment," and "title thereto shall remain" in Masonite until sold by the "agent." The minimum prices were f.o.b. Masonite's factory, the "agent" paying freight and transportation costs and sales and other taxes. The "agent" also agreed at its expense to carry insurance on all products consigned to it. The "agent's" compensation was fixed by way of specified commissions on each sale.316 U.S. at 270.
The Government sued the defendants for price fixing and other restraints of trade such as tie ins, division of markets, and agreements to suppress the use of other patents. The district court ruled that the defendants' conduct was permissible under United States v. General Electric Co. and dismissed the complaint.40 F. Supp. 852 (S.D.N.Y. 1941).
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|right|200px|Justice Douglas delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court.
Justice William O. Douglas delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court.Justice Owen Roberts and Justice Robert H. Jackson did not participate in the consideration or decision of the case.
The Court began by observing, "But for Masonite's patents and the del credere agency agreements there can be no doubt that this is a price-fixing combination which is illegal per se under the Sherman Act."316 U.S. at 274.  That was true despite the district court's findings that in negotiating and entering into the first agreement, each of the defendants, other than Masonite, "acted independently of the others, negotiated only with Masonite, desired the agreement regardless of the action that might be taken by any of the others, did not require as a condition of its acceptance that Masonite make such an agreement with any of the others, and had no discussions with any of the others." The reason that was so was that here, as the Court said in Interstate Circuit, "It was enough that, knowing that concerted action was contemplated and invited, the distributors gave their adherence to the scheme and participated in it." The circumstances left "no room for doubt that all had an awareness of the general scope and purpose of the undertaking."316 U.S. at 275.
The Court then turned to the argument that the 1926 General Electric decision saved the arrangement from the antitrust laws. The Court did "not agree that the 'agency' device saved the arrangement from the Sherman Act." To be sure. del credereagency is a useful commercial device. "But, however useful it may be in allocating risks between the parties and determining their rights inter se, its terms do not necessarily control when the rights of others intervene, whether they be creditors or the sovereign." Even assuming "that the agreements constituted the appellees as del credere agents of Masonite," the Court insisted, that "does not prevent the arrangement from running afoul of the Sherman Act." because a patent owner "cannot extend his statutory grant by contract or agreement" and a patent "affords no immunity for a monopoly not fairly or plainly within the grant." Here, the agency agreements were used to fix the prices at which the "agents" disposed of the goods to their customers. Once the patented product "passes to the hands of the purchaser, it is no longer within the limits of the [patent] monopoly. It passes outside of it, and is no longer under the protection of" the patent law. "In applying that rule, this Court has quite consistently refused to allow the form into which the parties chose to cast the transaction to govern." Here, the form of the transaction is del credere agency, but in fact the other defendants operate their businesses on their own, not as Masonite's agents, and the purpose of the arrangement is to put together a combination among competitors to fix prices:
[When a patentee] utilizes the sales organization of another business—a business with which he has no intimate relationship—quite different problems are posed, since such a regimentation of a marketing system is peculiarly susceptible to the restraints of trade which the Sherman Act condemns. And when it is clear, as it is in this case, that the marketing systems utilized by means of the del credere agency agreements are those of competitors of the patentee, and that the purpose is to fix prices at which the competitors may market the product, the device is, without more, an enlargement of the limited patent privilege and a violation of the Sherman Act. In such a case, the patentee exhausts his limited privilege when he disposes of the product to the del credere agent. He then has, so far as the Sherman Act is concerned, no greater rights to price maintenance than the owner of an unpatented commodity would have.216 U.S. at 276-79.
For that reason the outward form of the arrangement is immaterial, the Court said, for the purpose here was not that in the General Electric case, so that its principle does not apply:
So far as the Sherman Act is concerned, the result must turn not on the skill with which counsel has manipulated the concepts of "sale" and "agency," but on the significance of the business practices in terms of restraint of trade. . . . In the General Electric case, the Court thought that the purpose and effect of the marketing plan was to secure to the patentee only a reward for his invention. We cannot agree that that is true here. In this case, the price regulation was based on mutual agreement among distributors of competing products . . . The power of Masonite to fix the price of the product which it manufactures, and which the entire group sells and with respect to which all have been and are now actual or potential competitors, is a powerful inducement to abandon competition. . . . Control over prices thus becomes an actual or potential brake on competition. This kind of marketing device thus actually or potentially throttles or suppresses competing and noninfringing products, and tends to place a premium on the abandonment of competition.316 U.S. at 280-81.
The normal per se rule against price fixing should apply:
The power of this type of combination to inflict the kind of public injury which the Sherman Act condemns renders it illegal per se. If it were sanctioned in this situation, it would permit the patentee to add to his domain at public expense by obtaining command over a competitor. He would then not only secure a reward for his invention; he would enhance the value of his own trade position by eliminating or impairing competition. . . . As stated in Standard Sanitary Mfg. Co. v. United States,. rights conferred by patents "do not give any more than other rights a universal license against positive prohibitions. The Sherman law is a limitation of rights, rights which may be pushed to evil consequences, and therefore restrained."316 U.S. at 282.
Finally, the defendants argued that in 1941, after the Government sued them, they met together and revised their agreements to remove the objectionable features. They maintained that this "mark[ed] an abandonment of the former combination, and that, since the new arrangement is unobjectionable, there is nothing to enjoin." The Court said the modifications were ineffective to remove "the features which we have found to be fatal," because the agreements "still are unmistakable price-fixing agreements with competitors." Furthermore:
If there were any lingering doubt as to whether the appellees were parties to a conspiracy, it is dispelled at this point. A committee of the appellees was appointed to draft the new agreement. The agreement was completed after meetings at which representatives of all of the appellees attended. The 1941 agreements were the product of joint and concerted action.316 U.S. at 282-83.
Commentary
A contemporary Comment in the Yale Law Journal observes that the "line of demarcation between [the patent and antitrust] laws has been blurred by partial judicial acceptance of patent owners' contentions that restrictive patent license agreements are removed from the Sherman Act by the patent monopoly."Comment, Effect of Sherman Act on Fixing Prices of Patented Goods by Agency Licensing Agreements, 51  L.J. 299 (1941). Focusing on the Masonite case, the Comment amplifies the factual picture presented in the Court's opinion by comparing the respective terms of the General Electric and Masonite agency agreements:
General Electric in its agreements controlled the quantity and kind of stock to be kept on hand by the agents; Masonite made no such provision in its 1933 agreement. Likewise General Electric could order return of stock at any time; Masonite could only recall stock from its agents in special circumstances. With respect to indicia of ownership, Masonite's distributors were to pay the freight on the consigned goods, carry insurance on them, pay taxes in respect of sale, might not use Masonite's trademark, and had to pay for the goods consigned by advancing one-half of the price of the hardboard within a limited time even though the goods had not yet been sold. . . . General Electric, in contrast, paid freight, taxes, and insurance, put its own trade-mark on the goods, and required no payment until the goods had been sold, but did require that the agent pay for any lost or broken stock. Finally, the distributors in the Masonite case agreed to save Masonite harmless from any tortious actions by third parties arising out of sale of hardboard.51  at 303 n.16.
However. "Changes in the third set of agreements, made in 1941 after the Government had instituted suit and admittedly impelled by the pending action, placed more of the incidents of ownership on Masonite, thus bringing relationship between manufacturer and distributor more in line with that of the General Electric case."51  at 303.
Nonetheless, the Comment points out, the agency device is anomalous in this marketing context. In the General Electric case, the agents were small retail stores that sold to small buyers. In the Masonite case the agents were large competitors of Masonite that "occupied relatively the same position in the chain of distribution as did Masonite itself." The Masonite agency contracts, unlike those in General Electric, "effectually removed the most important factor in competition between Masonite and its distributors"—price.51  at 306.
Richard Day, in a paper published in the  Antitrust Law Journal, saw Masonite as a "major step in expanding the Interstate Circuit concept of conscious parallelism," in that (he asserted) it eliminated the requirement of interdependence among the spokes. He pointed to the statement in the opinion holding that when each distributor defendant entered into the vertical agreement with Masonite it "desired the agreement regardless of the action that might be taken by any of the others,"' that is, that each acted (he said) without requiring that the others do the same. Day asserts, "The decisive factor in inferring a vertical-horizontal conspiracy among all defendants was the subsequent awareness by each distributor that 'its contract was not an isolated transaction but part of a larger arrangement.' " In other words, the spokes must be conscious of one another's acts but need not consider them necessary for entering into an agreement with the hub. Day explains, "In other words, consciously parallel acquiescence, or continued acquiescence, amounts to a combination or conspiracy."Richard E. Day, New Theories of Agreement and Combination, 42  L.J. 287, 293–94 (1972-1973). Day's prediction, however, is inconsistent with subsequent development of the law of hub-and-spoke conspiracy law.
Day recognizes the difficulty with the proposition. It does not work in refusal-to-deal cases, he points out, because it is impossible to tell whether a buyer acquiesces in a seller's demand in order to avoid the seller's unilaterally refusing to deal with him if he does not acquiesce, "only to get the product, not caring what others do," or instead does so because "it is necessary that all dealers adhere to the seller's wishes for the restrictive plan to succeed." It is thus "practicably impossible to determine whether the conscious parallelism was dependent or interdependent, in the sense that there was or was not a unity of anticompetitive purpose among the seller and acquiescing dealers." Day concludes that a better legal test "must be found if there is to be any positive means for distinguishing between lawful and unlawful refusals to deal."Day at 294–95.
He then turns to the so-called "rimless wheel" conspiracy theory considered that the Sixth Circuit considered in Elder-Beerman Stores Corp. v. Federated Dept. Stores, Inc.459 F.2d 138 (6th Cir. 1972). See Hub-and-spoke conspiracy#Elder-Beerman. But Day is doubtful of the theory's validity.Day at 297.
Day concludes that "acquiescing in another's communicated anticompetitive plan in order to avoid his preannounced threat of termination certainly meets all of the requisites for finding a vertical combination or conspiracy."Day at 301. He then considers a potential hub-and-spoke conspiracy or rimless conspiracy that might be occasioned by several such episodes:
 Where two or more vertical combinations or conspiracies have been induced or coerced by means of a refusal to deal by the same person, more than mere awareness of the acquiescence by others is required to infer a vertical-horizontal combination or conspiracy. On the one hand, the communication of the plan or policy required to be followed to avoid the threat of termination may be viewed as an "invitation" to join together in such a conspiracy. On the other hand, the fact that each acquiescing party was coerced by the threat of termination tends to negate the horizontal combination hypotheses.Day at 302.
He asks how one chooses between those alternatives, and answers that "it all boils down to a reasonable application of generally recognized rules of evidence under the implied conspiracy doctrine to determine . . . whether or not a conspiracy or combination may be inferred from all of the evidence, direct and circumstantial."
Antitrust lawyer Tommy Austern opined that in the wake of Masonite and Gypsum, "What is left of the 1926 G.E. Mazda decision can be comfortably engraved on the head of a pin."H. Thomas Austern,  Umbras and Penumbras: The Patent Grant and Antitrust Policy, 33  1015, 1017 (1965).
Antitrust lawyer and MIT economics professor Morris Adelman criticized Masonites conspiracy doctrine, saying that "the 'conspiracy' consisted in non-simultaneous assent."Morris A. Adelman, Effective Competition and the Antitrust Laws, 61  1289, 1325 (1948).
Randall Marks, in a 1986 article in the Maryland Law Review, argues that Masonite, taken together with Interstate Circuit, "stand for the proposition that avoidable, interdependent conduct that has an anticompetitive effect may be the basis for finding an implied agreement."Randall David Marks, Can Conspiracy Theory Solve the Oligopoly Problem?, 45  387, 421 (1986).
Antitrust Division senior economist Gregory Werden, in a 2004 article in the Antitrust Law Journal, interpreted Masonite as holding "that simple knowledge of the existence of Masonite's dealings with others created an unlawful concert .of action among all of those [so-called] agents." He points to subsequent Supreme Court decisions supporting that theory—United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc. (citing Interstate Circuit, 306 U.S. at 226-27. and  FTC v. Cement Inst..—since in Paramount the Court stated that "to find a conspiracy . . . [i]t is enough that a concert of action is contemplated and that the defendants conformed to the agreement," while in the Cement case, the Court held, "It is enough to warrant a finding of a 'combination' with the meaning of the Sherman Act, if there is evidence that persons, with knowledge that concerted action was contemplated and invited, give adherence to and then participate in a scheme."Gregory J. Werden, Economic Evidence on the Existence of Collusion: Reconciling Antitrust Law with Oligopoly Theory, 71  L.J. 719, 741 (2004).
References
External links
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1942 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Matlock" ==> """
United States v. Matlock, 415 U.S. 164 (1974), was a Supreme Court of the United States case in which the Court ruled that the Fourth Amendment prohibition on unreasonable searches and seizures was not violated when the police obtained voluntary consent from a third party who possessed common authority over the premises sought to be searched. The ruling of the court established the "co-occupant consent rule," which was later explained by Illinois v. Rodriguez, 497 U.S. 177 (1990) and distinguished later by Georgia v. Randolph (2006), in which the court held that a third party could not consent over the objections of a present co-occupant, and Fernandez v. California (2014), where the court held when the objecting co-resident is removed for objectively reasonable purposes (such as lawful arrest), the remaining resident may validly consent to search.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 415
References
External links
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1974 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. McBratney" ==> """
United States v. McBratney, 104 U.S. 621 (1881), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that upon the admission of Colorado as a state, there being no reservation to the United States of jurisdiction over the Indian territory within the state limits, that the United States circuit court for the district of Colorado had no jurisdiction over the murder of one white man by another in the Ute reservation in said state.
 Background 
McBratney was convicted of the murder of Thomas Casey on the Ute Reservation in Colorado.  Following conviction, McBratney appealed claiming that the federal courts did not have jurisdiction to try a white man for the murder of another white man on an Indian reservation.  On appeal, the circuit court could not come to an agreement and issued a certificate of division..,  81 (2013).
 Supreme Court 
Justice Horace Gray delivered the opinion of the court.  Gray stated that although the treaty with the Utes provided for federal jurisdiction, the act of Congress creating the state of Colorado did not reserve federal jurisdiction over Indian reservations.  He noted that in the past, Congress had explicitly reserved such lands and jurisdiction, as in the case of Kansas.  The federal court would still have jurisdiction for crimes committed against Indians by whites, or vice versa, but the state otherwise had jurisdiction.,  192 (2001).
 Subsequent developments 
Since the decision, every state that has been admitted, with the exception of Hawaii, has been required to acknowledge federal jurisdiction over reservation lands.
 References 
External links
Category:1881 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Four case law
Category:United States Native American criminal jurisdiction case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Murder trials
Category:Ute tribe
Category:Native American history of Colorado
"""

From "United States v. Mead Corp." ==> """
United States v. Mead Corp., 533 U.S. 218 (2001), is a case decided by the United States Supreme Court that addressed the issue of when Chevron deference should be applied. In an 8–1 majority decision, the Court determined that Chevron deference applies when Congress delegated authority to the agency generally to make rules carrying the force of law.
Background
The Mead Corporation challenged a ruling of the United States Customs Service that classified its day planners as "diaries, notebooks and address books, bound," which were subject to a tariff.  
Before Mead, it was clear that the Chevron doctrine applied to interpretations adopted in legislative rules and certain formal adjudications, but lower courts differed on whether it also applied to interpretative rules, policy statements, informal adjudications, advisory letters, and amicus briefs. In 2001, the Supreme Court finally began to shed some light on the issue.  
In Mead, the issue was whether the court should defer to the Customs Services' interpretation of the Customs Act, as manifested by the many classification decisions its regional offices made annually. The court granted certiorari to determine the limits of Chevron deference.
Decision
Justice Souter wrote that "administrative implementation of a particular statutory provision qualifies for Chevron deference when it appears that Congress delegated authority to the agency generally to make rules carrying the force of law, and that the agency interpretation claiming deference was promulgated in the exercise of that authority.".
Recognizing that thousands of tariff decisions are issued each year by the 46 regional offices of the U.S. Customs Service, and that each decision has no precedential value, the Court determined that the Chevron Doctrine should not apply.
However, the Court remanded the case for the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit to determine whether Customs' classification decision was entitled to deference according to its "power to persuade" under Skidmore v. Swift, 323 U.S. 134 (1944).Mead Corp., 533 U.S. at 234–39.
Justice Scalia was the sole dissenter in the case. Scalia believed that Chevron deference should be applied to all agency decisions that are "authoritative" and so took issue with the Court's reaffirmation of Skidmore, which Scalia called an "anachronism."Mead Corp., 533 U.S. at 239, 250.
See also
Chevron v. Natural Resources Defense Council (1984)
United States v. Haggar Apparel Co. (1999), holding that the Court of International Trade was required to apply Chevron deference to regulations promulgated by the Customs Service.
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 533
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Mendenhall" ==> """
United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S. 544 (1980), was a United States Supreme Court case that determined "seizure" occurs when an officer uses displays of authority to detain a person..
The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit heard the appeal of Ms. Sylvia Mendenhall as pertaining to Ms. Mendenhall's alleged unconstitutional seizure by two DEA agents at Detroit Metropolitan Airport. The court ruled against the defendant in a 5–4 majority, though the court's Dissent shows confusion as to the majority vote.
The decision notably set a standard by which a valid consensual stop could be converted into an unconstitutional Terry stop, such as by "the threatening presence of several officers, the display of a weapon by an officer, some physical touching of the person of the citizen, or the use of language or tone of voice indicating that compliance with the officer's request might be compelled."
Background
On the morning of February 10, 1976, Sylvia Mendenhall was walking through the concourse of Detroit Metropolitan Airport after disembarking a commercial flight returning from Los Angeles. During her walk through the airport, she was noticed by two Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) agents. The two agents grew suspicious, later stating that she appeared to have the characteristics of a person unlawfully transporting narcotics. The agents approached Mendenhall and identified themselves as federal agents. Following procedure, they began to question Ms. Mendenhall; their questions included, "How long were you in California?" to which she responded by stating that hers was a short, two-day trip. The agents later asked her to present identification and an airline ticket. She presented her driver’s license and the airline ticket to the agents. The name on the driver’s license said “Sylvia Mendenhall”, yet the name on the airline ticket was “Annette Ford”.  Upon questioning, she responded, “[I] just felt like using that name.” "Agent Anderson then specifically identified himself as a federal narcotics agent and, according to his testimony, the respondent "became quite shaken, extremely nervous. She had a hard time speaking."Mendenhall, 446 U.S. at 548. The agents requested that the respondent accompany them to the DEA office at the Airport; she did so willingly. At the office, the agents asked for permission to inspect her handbag and her person and informed her of her right to decline. She responded, "Go ahead," while handing her purse to the agent. A female police officer arrived at the office to conduct the search. The officer also proclaimed that the respondent had the right to decline to the search. When asked to remove her clothes, she explained that she had a flight to catch, but was assured that if she had no narcotics on her, that there would be no issues. Without further comments, she began to disrobe. Two packages were found beneath her undergarments and were handed to the policewoman. One package appeared to contain an illegal substance. The respondent was arrested for possession of heroin. The United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan denied the motion to suppress the evidence. The court concluded that the agents' actions were permissible in investigating suspicion of criminal activity. The respondent voluntarily accompanied the agents to the DEA office. The court convicted Sylvia Mendenhall. The court of appeals reversed the decision, stating that the respondent did not properly consent to the search.
Drug-courier profile as testified by DEA Agent
"The agent Manuel Lopez testified that the respondent's behavior fit the 'drug courier profile'—an informally compiled abstract of characteristics thought typical of persons carrying illicit drugs. In this case, the agents thought it relevant that (1) the respondent was arriving on a flight from Los Angeles, a city believed by the agents to be the place of origin for much of the heroin brought to Detroit; (2) the respondent was the last person to leave the plane, 'appeared to be very nervous,' and 'completely scanned the whole area where [the agents] were standing'; (3) after leaving the plane, the respondent proceeded past the baggage area without claiming any luggage; and (4) the respondent changed airlines for her flight out of Detroit."Mendenhall, 446 U.S. at 547 n.1.
Conflict
The issue requesting clarification was whether or not the respondent's Fourth Amendment rights were violated. The court failed to construct a majority defining "seizure". Whether or not the respondent voluntarily consented to the search or was coerced into it, there is sufficient evidence that the respondent was given the option to go on her way. According to Justice Stewart, evidence that the respondent was not asked to go to the DEA office with the agents is not enough to dismiss that the respondent gave consent. There was no evidence of force, and the respondent's voluntary accompanying the agents is sufficient to side with the District Court. Evidence that she was a 22-year-old Black woman with no high school diploma and was being apprehended by White agents, though not completely irrelevant, was held as not being decisive evidence.
The Fourth Amendment serves "to prevent arbitrary and oppressive interference by enforcement officials with the privacy and personal security of individuals." United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 U.S. 543, 554. As long as the person being questioned has the right to disregard the questions and has the right to vacate, then a search does not impede on a person's liberty or privacy. Police questioning is an effective manner of enforcing criminal law. The questioning of Sylvia Mendenhall furthered the compelling interest of the DEA. "Without such investigation, those who were innocent might be falsely accused, those who were guilty might wholly escape prosecution, and many crimes would go unsolved. In short, the security of all would be diminished." Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. at 225. Because the respondent was not held by force and could have walked away, she was not technically "seized" by the DEA agents. Since there is no constitutionally protected interest in regard to the "seizure" of a person, we are left with the precedent in Terry v. Ohio. In  Terry, a police officer identified himself and the three gentlemen in question mumbled something leading Officer McFadden to believe they were dangerous. The officer grabbed Terry and threw Terry between the officer and the other two suspects. Terry was lawfully "seized" under the impression he was dangerous. In this case, Terry was unable to walk away and forced to a search. Based on the precedent provided by Terry, the search and seizure of Mendenhall was lawful.
Historical significance
State v. Cook, 107 Ohio App. 3d 154 (1995)
"Applying United States v. Mendenhall, defendant was seized when four officers approached and ordered [the defendant's] companion, then the defendant, to step out of [the defendant's] parked truck."
United States v. Drayton (2002)
In United States v. Mendenhall, the court determined that "seizure" occurs when an officer  uses physical force or displays authority to detain a person. In United States v. Drayton, the court determined that the Fourth Amendment does not govern consensual encounters.. In Drayton, a police officer identified himself and asked a passenger on the bus if the police had consent to perform a drug and illegal weapon search. Another officer stood at the front of the bus but did not block the exit. The court ruled that this did not violate constitutional rights.
Based on Mendenhall case, a law enforcement officer publicly approaching an individual and asking such individual questions is not a violation of the individual's Fourth Amendment rights. As long as the officer does not imply that compliance is mandatory, the officer may question or ask to examine the identification of an individual.
Powell's Concurrence
"Mr. Justice Powell, with whom the Chief Justice and Mr. Justice Blackmun join, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
"I join Parts I, II-B, II-C, and III of the Court's opinion. Because neither of the courts below considered the question, I do not reach the Government's contention that the agents did not "seize" the respondent within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment. In my view, we may assume for present purposes that the stop did constitute a seizure. I would hold—as did the District Court—that the federal agents had reasonable suspicion that the respondent was engaging in criminal activity, and, therefore, that they did not violate the Fourth Amendment by stopping the respondent for routine questioning."
White's Dissent
"Mr. Justice White, with whom Mr. Justice Brennan, Mr. Justice Marshall, and Mr. Justice Stevens join, dissenting.
"The Court today concludes that agents of the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) acted lawfully in stopping a traveler changing planes in an airport terminal and escorting her to a DEA office for a strip-search of her person. This result is particularly curious because a majority of the Members of the Court refuse to reject the conclusion that Ms. Mendenhall was "seized," while a separate majority decline to hold that there were reasonable grounds to justify a seizure. Mr. Justice Stewart concludes that the DEA agents acted lawfully, regardless of whether there were any reasonable grounds for suspecting Ms. Mendenhall of criminal activity, because he finds that Ms. Mendenhall was not "seized" by the DEA agents, even though, throughout the proceedings below, the Government never questioned the fact that a seizure had occurred necessitating a [display] of antecedent reasonable suspicion. Mr. Justice Powell's opinion concludes that, even though Ms. Mendenhall may have been "seized," the seizure was lawful, because her behavior while changing planes in the airport provided reasonable suspicion that she was engaging in criminal activity. The Court then concludes, based on the absence of evidence that Ms. Mendenhall resisted her detention, that she voluntarily consented to being taken to the DEA office, even though she, in fact, had no choice in the matter. This conclusion is inconsistent with our recognition that consent cannot be presumed from a showing of acquiescence to authority, and it cannot be reconciled with our decision last Term in Dunaway v. New York, 442 U.S. 200 (1979)."
Summary of Dissent
Mr. Justice White's reason for dissent is based on the contradiction that the majority does not refute that a "seizure" did occur, while at the same time a majority was unable to justify that the "seizure" was necessary. Mr. Justice Powell strongly believes that Ms. Mendenhall was forced into the search, even though there is a lack of evidence that she did not have the opportunity to leave.
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Drug Enforcement Administration litigation
Category:Detroit Metropolitan Airport
"""

From "United States v. Miller" ==> """
United States v. Miller, 307 U.S. 174 (1939), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States that involved a Second Amendment to the United States Constitution challenge to the National Firearms Act of 1934 (NFA). The case is often cited in the ongoing American gun politics debate, as both sides claim that it supports their position.
Background
The case involved a criminal prosecution under the 1934 National Firearms Act (NFA). Passed in response to public outcry over the St. Valentine's Day Massacre, the NFA requires certain types of firearms, such as fully automatic firearms and short-barrelled rifles and shotguns, to be registered with the Miscellaneous Tax Unit, which was later folded into what eventually became the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF), then part of the Bureau of Internal Revenue, the ancestor of today's Internal Revenue Service. The $200 tax was to be paid at the time of registration and again if the firearm was ever sold.
The defendants Jack Miller and Frank Layton were indicted on charges of unlawfully and feloniously transporting in interstate commerce from Oklahoma to Arkansas an unregistered double-barrel 12-gauge shotgun having a barrel less than 18 inches in length, in violation of the National Firearms Act, 26 U.S.C.S. § 1132c et seq. ("Act"). At trial in federal district court, the defendants filed a demurrer to the indictment alleging that the Act was not a revenue measure but an attempt to usurp police power reserved to the states and so was unconstitutional. Defendants further argued that the Act violated the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution. The district court held that the section of the Act that made it unlawful to transport an unregistered firearm in interstate commerce was unconstitutional as violative of the Second Amendment. It accordingly sustained the demurrer and quashed the indictment. The government took a direct appeal to the Supreme Court.
In reality, the district court judge was in favor of the gun control law and ruled the law unconstitutional because he knew that Miller, who was a known bank robber and had just testified against the rest of his gang in court, would have to go into hiding as soon as he was released. He knew that Miller would not pay a lawyer to argue the case at the Supreme Court and would simply disappear. Therefore, the government's appeal to the Supreme Court would surely be a victory because Miller and his attorney would not even be present at the argument.
United States v. Miller, 26 F. Supp. 1002 (W.D. Ark. 1939)
On March 30, 1939, the Supreme Court heard the case. Attorneys for the United States argued four points:
The NFA is intended as a revenue-collecting measure and so is within the authority of the Department of the Treasury.
The defendants transported the shotgun from Oklahoma to Arkansas and so used it in interstate commerce.
The Second Amendment protects only the ownership of military-type weapons appropriate for use in an organized militia.
The "double barrel 12-gauge Stevens shotgun having a barrel less than 18 inches in length, bearing identification number 76230," was never used in any militia organization.
Neither the defendants nor their legal counsel appeared at the Supreme Court. A lack of financial support and procedural irregularities prevented counsel from traveling.
Miller was found shot to death in April, before the decision had been rendered.
Decision
On May 15, 1939, the Supreme Court, in an opinion by Justice McReynolds, decided on the National Firearms Act, as applied to one indicted for transporting in interstate commerce a 12-gauge shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long without having registered it and without having in his possession a stamp-affixed written order for it, as required by the Act: 
 Not unconstitutional as an invasion of the reserved powers of the States. Citing Sonzinsky v. United States, 300 U. S. 506, and Narcotic Act cases. P. 307 U. S. 177.     The conclusion was in the favor of the NFA.
 Not violative of the Second Amendment of the Federal Constitution. P. 307 U. S. 178.
The Court cannot take judicial notice that a shotgun having a barrel less than 18 inches long has today any reasonable relation to the preservation or efficiency of a well regulated militia, and therefore cannot say that the Second Amendment guarantees to the citizen the right to keep and bear such a weapon.
In the absence of any evidence tending to show that possession or use of a "shotgun having a barrel of less than eighteen inches in length" at this time has some reasonable relationship to the preservation or efficiency of a well regulated militia, we cannot say that the Second Amendment guarantees the right to keep and bear such an instrument. Certainly it is not within judicial notice that this weapon is any part of the ordinary military equipment, or that its use could contribute to the common defense.
In addition, Justice McReynolds wrote:
With obvious purpose to assure the continuation and render possible the effectiveness of such forces the declaration and guarantee of the Second Amendment were made. It must be interpreted and applied with that end in view.The Second Amendment: A Biography, Michael Waldman, Page 83
Interpretations
Gun control advocates argue that the United States Circuit Courts, with very few exceptions, have for over six decades cited Miller in rejecting challenges to federal firearms regulations.
Gun rights advocates claim the case as a victory because they interpret it as stating that ownership of weapons for efficiency or the preservation of a well-regulated militia unit is specifically protected. Furthermore, they frequently point out that short-barreled shotguns (with 20-inch barrels) have been commonly used in warfare and that the statement made by the judges indicates that they were not made aware of this fact. Because the defense did not appear, there was arguably no way for judges to know otherwise. Two of the justices involved in the decision had prior military experience, Justice Black as a captain in the field artillery during World War I and Justice Frankfurter as a major in the Army legal service; however, there is no way to know if they were personally aware of the use of shotguns by American troops. During World War I, between 30,000 and 40,000 short-barreled pump-action shotguns were purchased by the US Ordnance Department and saw service in the trenches and for guarding German prisoners.
Some argue that fundamental issues related to the case were never truly decided because the Supreme Court remanded the case to the federal district court for "further proceedings", which never took place. By the time of the Supreme Court decision, Miller had been killed, and since Layton made a plea bargain after the decision was handed down, there were no claimants left to continue legal proceedings.
The US Supreme Court has mentioned Miller in only seven subsequent cases: Konigsberg (1961);  Atlanta Motel (1964); Adams (1972); Lewis (1980); Printz (1997); Heller (2008) and McDonald v. City of Chicago (2010); Justice James Clark McReynolds authored the decision in United States v. Miller, the only Supreme Court case that directly involved the Second Amendment until District of Columbia v. Heller in 2008.
Here are the Supreme Court's interpretations of the 1939 Miller opinion:
Konigsberg v. State Bar (1961); Footnote 10
That view, which of course cannot be reconciled with the law relating to libel, slander, misrepresentation, obscenity, perjury, false advertising, solicitation of crime, complicity by encouragement, conspiracy, and the like, is said to be compelled by the fact that the commands of the First Amendment are stated in unqualified terms: "Congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble". But as Mr. Justice Holmes once said: "[T]he provisions of the Constitution are not mathematical formulas having their essence in their form; they are organic living institutions transplanted from English soil. Their significance is vital not formal; it is to be gathered not simply by taking the words and a dictionary, but by considering their origin and the line of their growth." Gompers v. United States, 233 U.S. 604, 610. However, compare the qualified language of the Second Amendment: "A well regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed." And see United States v. Miller, 307 U.S. 174.
Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States (1964); (concurring opinion of Black; Footnote 11) "... cases in which the commerce power has been used to advance other ends not entirely commercial: e. g., ... United States v. Miller, 307 U.S. 174 (National Firearms Act); 
Adams v. Williams (1972); (dissenting opinion of Douglas, joined by Marshall)
The leading case is United States v. Miller, 307 U.S. 174, upholding a federal law making criminal the shipment in interstate commerce of a sawed-off shotgun. The law was upheld, there being no evidence that a sawed-off shotgun had "some reasonable relationship to the preservation or efficiency of a well regulated militia". Id., at 178. The Second Amendment, it was held, "must be interpreted and applied" with the view of maintaining a "militia". 
Critics say that proposals like this water down the Second Amendment. Our decisions belie that argument, for the Second Amendment, as noted, was designed to keep alive the militia.
Lewis v. United States (1980); Footnote 8
(the Second Amendment guarantees no right to keep and bear a firearm that does not have "some reasonable relationship to  the preservation or efficiency of a well regulated militia"); United States v. Three Winchester 30-30 Caliber Lever Action Carbines, 504 F.2d 1288, 1290, n. 5 (CA7 1974); United States v. Johnson, 497 F.2d 548 (CA4 1974); Cody v. United States, 460 F.2d 34 (CA8), cert. denied, 409 U.S. 1010 (1972) (the latter three cases holding, respectively, that 1202 (a) (1), 922 (g), and 922 (a) (6) do not violate the Second Amendment). 
Printz v. United States (1997) (concurring opinion of Thomas)
Our most recent treatment of the Second Amendment occurred in United States v. Miller, 307 U.S. 174 (1939), in which we reversed the District Court's invalidation of the National Firearms Act, enacted in 1934. In Miller, we determined that the Second Amendment did not guarantee a citizen's right to possess a sawed off shotgun because that weapon had not been shown to be "ordinary military equipment" that could "contribute to the common defense". Id., at 178. The Court did not, however, attempt to define, or otherwise construe, the substantive right protected by the Second Amendment. 
District of Columbia v. Heller (2008)
See also
Firearm case law in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 307
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Second Amendment case law
Category:Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
"""

From "United States v. Miller (1976)" ==> """
United States v. Miller, 425 U.S. 435 (1976), was a United States Supreme Court that held that bank records are not subject to protection under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.United States v. Miller, . The case, along with Smith v. Maryland, established the principle of the third-party doctrine in relation to privacy rights.
Background
In 1973, sheriffs for Houston County, Georgia discovered an undocumented whiskey distillery, first by seizing a truck with distillery equipment and arresting its drivers, and later investigating a warehouse fire in the town of Kathleen and discovering distillery equipment there. They identified the warehouse property leaser as Mitch Miller of Georgia. The Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Bureau (ATF) of the United States Treasury Department, investigating the case, requested that local banks, holding Miller's accounts, provide all paperwork of his bank transactions to date via a grand jury subpoena duces tecum, rather than a warrant; the banks complied without notifying Miller. The financial records supported evidence that Miller had rented the truck, radio equipment, and sheet metal to support the distillery, and he and four others were charged with conspiracy (by selling tax-free whiskey), possession of distilled spirits, and possession of an unregistered still. 
The trial was held at the United States District Court for the Middle District of Georgia. During the defense, Miller attempted to prevent the bank records from being submitted as evidence, claiming these were illegally obtained, as such records should be protected from illegal search and seizure under the Fourth Amendment. The District Court rejected Miller's arguments, and resulted in a conviction with a sentence of three years in prison for Miller. Miller argued on the use of bank records as evidence to the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, which reversed the District Court's findings. Miller had attempted to argue that the Bank Secrecy Act, which required banks to make microfilm copies of all checks they processed, was unconstitutional, the Fifth Circuit recognized that the Supreme Court had validated the Act's constitutionality through California Bankers Ass'n v. Shultz,. but this did not allow for the types of actions that the ATF used. The Fifth Circuit cited Boyd v. United States for the proposition that "a compulsory production of a man's private papers to establish a criminal charge against him...is within the scope of the Fourth Amendment".. The court ruled that the Bank Secrecy Act did not overrule Fourth Amendment protections, and overturned the District Court's ruling.United States v. Miller, 500 F.2d 751 (5th Cir. 1974), rehearing denied, 508 F.2d 588 (5th Cir. 1975).
Supreme Court
The government petitioned the Supreme Court to hear their appeal, asking whether the privacy rights of the Fourth Amendment covered the method that the ATF had acquired the bank records. Oral arguments were presented on January 12, 1976, with a decision issued on April 21, 1976.
The majority decision was given by Justice Lewis Powell, with all but Justices Brennan and Marshall joining, reversing the Fifth Circuit's decision. Powell determined that the bank records were not the private papers of Miller, but instead owned by the banks as part of its necessary business operations. Reiterating points made in California Bankers Ass'n v. Shultz, Powell stated that there is no expectation of privacy that a customer of a bank has when they do business through the bank, as checks, deposit slips and other paperwork are elements of commercial transactions. The Supreme Court remanded Miller's case back to the Fifth Circuit.
Justice William J. Brennan Jr. dissented, identifying that a similar case, Burrows v. Superior Court,Burrows v. Superior Court, 13 Cal. 3d 238, 529 P.2d 590 (1974). had been decided in the California Supreme Court that ruled that bank records were protected under the Fourth Amendment, in a manner consistent with California Bankers Ass'n v. Shultz, which the Court could have used for this case. Justice Thurgood Marshall also dissented, reiterating his dissent from California Bankers Ass'n that he believed the Bank Secrecy Act was unconstitutional and would lead to violation of Fourth Amendment rights.
Impact
United States v. Miller, along with Smith v. Maryland,. which dealt with the privacy of telephone records, established the concept of a third-party doctrine that has been used by the courts to determine to what extent Fourth Amendment protection expectation of privacy covers. This doctrine generally finds that information that a person provides voluntarily to a third-party no longer is covered by expectation of privacy,  and the government can obtain such information without a warrant.
 See also 
Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978 
 References 
External links
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "United States v. Mitchell (1983)" ==> """
United States v. Mitchell, 463 U.S. 206 (1983), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States  held that the United States is accountable in money damages for alleged breaches of trust in connection with its management of forest resources on allotted lands of the Quinault Reservation.United States v. Mitchell, .
Background
History
The Quinault and Quileute tribes, are American Indian (Native American) tribes located on the Quinault and Quileute Reservations in the State of Washington.  The tribes were moved onto unsuitable reservations after signing the Treaty of OlympiaTreaty of Olympia, . with the United States in 1855.  In 1873 a reservation of  was established by Executive Order along the Washington coastline, with most of the reservation being heavily wooded.Sisk, Gregory C. (2003), Yesterday and Today: of Indians, Breach of Trust, Money, and Sovereign Immunity, 39 Tulsa L. R. 313, Univ. of Tulsa.  In 1905, the federal government began transferring or allotting land to individual tribal members under the Indian General Allotment ActIndian General Allotment Act, , as amended, , et seq. and the Quinault Allotment Act.Quinault Allotment Act, .  By 1935 the entire reservation had been broken up into  parcels.  The timber resources on the allotted land was managed by the Department of the Interior and the Secretary of the Interior has statutory authority over the sale of timber from allotted trust lands.  The Secretary has issued comprehensive regulations on the management of Indian timber resources..
Prior court decisions
In 1971, 1,465 individuals who owned allotments filed a lawsuit in the Court of Claims alleging that the United States had mismanaged the timber resources on the reservation.  Mitchell and the other plaintiffs alleged that the government had breached their fiduciary duty by failing to obtain proper value for timber sold, by failing to properly manage timber resources, and by excessive charges for administrative duties.  After discovery had been conducted and a partial trial held in 1977, the government moved to dismiss the suit on jurisdictional grounds.  The Court of Claims denied the motion, basing their jurisdiction to hear the case under the Indian General Allotment Act. The United States appealed to the Supreme Court.Newton, Nell Jessup (1992) Indian Claims in the Courts of the Conqueror, 41 Am. Univ. L. R. 753, American Univ.
The Supreme Court reversed the Court of Claims, holding that the Indian General Allotment Act did not create a trust relationship and that any grounds for recovery must be based on other grounds.  The case then returned to the Court of Claims to consider the plaintiff's other claims, and the United States again moved for dismissal.  The Court of Claims rejected the motion to dismiss, holding that three other federal laws gave the plaintiffs a cause of action.  These three laws dealt with timber sales,. regulations and sustained yield,. and rights-of-way. and .
The United States again appealed to the Supreme Court, which granted certiorari to hear the case.
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|200px|alt=portrait of Justice Thurgood Marshall|Justice Thurgood Marshall, author of the majority opinion
Arguments
Joshua I. Schwartz argued the case for the United States.  Charles A. Hobbs argued the case for the tribal members.  The Shoshone tribe of the Wind River Indian Reservation filed an amicus curiae brief in support of the tribal members.  The United States argued that the Court of Claims did not have jurisdiction to hear the case.
Majority opinion
Justice Thurgood Marshall delivered the opinion of the court.  Marshall noted that both the Tucker ActTucker Act, . and the Indian Tucker ActIndian Tucker Act, . waived the sovereign immunity of the United States and allowed the plaintiffs to bring a case to the Court of Claims.  Marshall then examined the history of the three statutes that the Court of Claims held created a trust relationship with the plaintiffs.  He concluded that the plain language of the statutes created a trust relationship between the United States government and the plaintiffs.  Marshall noted that it is well established that a trustee is liable for damages in cases of a breach of fiduciary duties.  He stated that it "naturally follows  that the Government should be liable in damages for the breach of its fiduciary duties."  The decision of the Court of Claims was affirmed.Allen, Mark (1989), Native American Control of Tribal Natural Resource Development in the Context of the Federal Trust and Tribal Self-Determination, 16 B.C. Envtl. Aff. L. Rev. 857, Boston College.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr. dissented from the majority opinion.  Powell stated that without explicit language establishing liability on the government, there can be no valid claim or subject matter jurisdiction.  He would have reversed the decision of the Court of Claims.
Subsequent developments
Mitchell was the first case where the Supreme Court ruled that the United States government could be liable for monetary damages for a trust relationship.Berkey, Curtis G. (2006), Rethinking the Role of Federal Trust Responsibility in Protecting Indian Land and Resources, 83 Denver L. R. 1, Denver Univ.  As a result, Mitchell has been cited over 1,900 times by courts as of August, 2012.  Since the fiduciary duty has been established, tribes have been using it to ensure that the Secretary of the Interior takes their needs into consideration, especially in the area of mineral and timber resources.
References
External links
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Native American case law
"""

From "United States v. Montgomery County Board of Education" ==> """
United States v. Montgomery Country Board of Education, 395 U.S. 225 (1969), was a case heard before the United States Supreme Court concerning the integration of public schools in Montgomery County, Alabama.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 395
External links
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States school desegregation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
"""

From "United States v. Montoya De Hernandez" ==> """
United States v. Montoya De Hernandez, 473 U.S. 531 (1985), was a U.S. Supreme Court case regarding the Fourth Amendment's border search exception and balloon swallowing..
Background
Rose Elvira Montoya de Hernandez entered the United States at Los Angeles International Airport from Bogotá, Colombia. Customs inspectors detained Montoya de Hernandez upon her arrival based upon a suspicion that she was smuggling drugs. After 16 hours and a rectal examination by a physician that produced a balloon containing a foreign substance, she passed balloons filled with cocaine from her alimentary canal. The defendant had claimed that she was pregnant, and she was given the opportunity to undergo an X-ray, but she refused after being informed that she would have to be handcuffed en route to the hospital. Over the next three days, the defendant passed 88 balloons filled with over one pound of cocaine.
At trial, Montoya de Hernandez alleged that her Fourth Amendment rights were violated by an unreasonable detention. The U.S. government contended that the inspectors had reasonable suspicion that the defendant-respondent was a drug smuggler. She had a noticeable bulge in her abdomen when she was detained, and a female inspector searched her revealing that Montoya de Hernandez was wearing two sets of elastic underpants and had paper towels lining her crotch area (as balloon swallowing makes bowel movements hard to control).
A federal district court disagreed with Montoya de Hernandez's Fourth Amendment claim, and she was subsequently convicted for federal narcotics offenses. The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed the district court's conviction, on the grounds that the district court had incorrectly refused to suppress evidence used against the defendant. The federal government appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
Decision
The Supreme Court, in an opinion by Justice Rehnquist joined by Chief Justice Burger and Justices White, Blackmun, Powell and O'Connor, reversed the Ninth Circuit's holding that defendant was subject to an unreasonable search and seizure and upheld the conviction entered for charges brought by the government because custom agents were subject to a reasonable suspicion standard under the Fourth Amendment for detaining suspects.
The Supreme Court held that the detention of a traveler at the border, beyond the scope of a routine customs search and inspection, is justified at its inception if customs agents, considering all the facts surrounding the traveler and her trip, reasonably suspect that the traveler is smuggling contraband in her alimentary canal; here, the facts, and their rational inferences, known to the customs officials clearly supported a reasonable suspicion that respondent was an alimentary canal smuggler.
Justice Stevens filed a concurring opinion, while Justice Brennan, joined by Justice Marshall dissented, stating that "Indefinite involuntary incommunicado detentions "for investigation" are the hallmark of a police state, not a free society"..
See also
Border search exception
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 473
References
External links
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Los Angeles International Airport
Category:Cocaine in the United States
Category:Cocaine trafficking
"""

From "United States v. More" ==> """
United States v. More, 7 U.S. (3 Cranch) 159 (1805), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that it had no jurisdiction to hear appeals from criminal cases in the circuit courts by writs of error. Relying on the Exceptions Clause, More held that Congress's enumerated grants of appellate jurisdiction to the Court operated as an exercise of Congress's power to eliminate all other forms of appellate jurisdiction.
The second of forty-one criminal cases heard by the Marshall Court, More ensured that the Court's criminal jurisprudence would be limited to writs of error from the state (and later, territorial) courts, original habeas petitions and writs of error from habeas petitions in the circuit courts, and certificates of division and mandamus from the circuit courts. Congress did not grant the Court jurisdiction to hear writs of error from the circuit courts in criminal cases until 1889, for capital crimes, and 1891, for other "infamous" crimes. The Judicial Code of 1911 abolished the circuit courts, transferred the trial of crimes to the district courts, and extended the Court's appellate jurisdiction to all crimes.Brent D. Stratton, Criminal Law: The Attenuation Exception to the Exclusionary Rule: A Study in Attenuated Principle and Dissipated Logic, 75  139, 139 n.1 (1984). But, these statutory grants were construed not to permit writs of error filed by the prosecution, as in More.Rossman, 1990, at 524 n.19 (citing United States v. Sanges, 144 U.S. 310 (1892)).
More arose from the same Federalist/Jeffersonian political dispute over the judiciary that gave rise to Marbury v. Madison (1803) and Stuart v. Laird (1803). Benjamin More, a justice of the peace in the District of Columbia, argued that the repeal of statutory provisions authorizing compensation for his office violated the salary-protection guarantees for federal judges in Article Three of the United States Constitution. Below, a divided panel of the United States Circuit Court of the District of Columbia had sided with More, interpreted the repeal act prospectively, and sustained his demurrer to the criminal indictment for the common law crime of exacting illegal fees under color of office.
Background
United States presidential election, 1800
thumb|right|After inauguration, President Thomas Jefferson removed almost half all federal appointed officials.
The Federalist Party and the Democratic-Republican Party comprised the First Party System in the United States. Democratic-Republican Thomas Jefferson defeated Federalist John Adams in the 1800 presidential election. Jefferson's party also took control of Congress in the House and Senate elections. After the elections, the lame duck Federalist administration passed the Judiciary Act of 1801 (the "Midnight Judges Act"), creating 16 new circuit judgeships to preside in the circuit courts (as opposed to the district judges and the Supreme Court justices riding circuit).Murrin, Johnson, McPherson, et al Murrin, Johnson, McPherson, et al Along with the District of Columbia Organic Act of 1801 (the "Organic Act"), the statutes created many judicial vacancies, and Adams filled nearly all of these judgeships on his last day in office. Marshall, in his dual role as Adams' Secretary of State, failed to deliver some of these commissions before leaving office.
Companion cases
Immediately after his inauguration, Jefferson instructed his Secretary of State, James Madison, to stop delivery on all outstanding commissions., 1985, at 19. Further, an act of March 8, 1802 abolished the circuit court judgeships created by the Midnight Judges Act (15 of which had already been filled), restoring the system created under the 1789 and 1793 acts., 1985, at 19, 22. Federalists viewed this as unconstitutional and looked to the then-pending case of Marbury v. Madison—concerning a confirmed D.C. justice of the peace who had not received his commission—as a test case for the constitutionality of the repeal. The next session of the Supreme Court was in June, one month before the repeal would take effect. But, the Judiciary Act of 1802 delayed the Court's next session until February 1803, and made other changes to the structure of the judicial system., 1985, at 20.
More broadly, Jefferson removed 146 of 316 (46%) incumbent, second-level, appointed federal officials, including 13 U.S. Attorneys and 18 U.S. Marshals., 1985, at 22. Jefferson also displaced two district judges—Ray Greene and Jacob Read—citing technical flaws in their appointments. Further, District Judge John Pickering was impeached and removed from office on a party-line vote., 1985, at 23. The following day, the House impeached Justice Samuel Chase, but six Democratic-Republicans crossed party lines in the Senate to prevent his conviction by a single vote.
In Marbury, the Supreme Court held that Madison's failure to deliver the commission to Marbury was illegal, but did not grant Marbury a writ of mandamus on the ground that § 13 of the Judiciary Act of 1789 was unconstitutional insofar as it authorized the Court to issue such writs under its original jurisdiction.Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137 (1803). Stuart v. Laird—involving a civil judgment rendered by a circuit court constituted under the Midnight Judges Act and enforced by a circuit court constituted under the Judiciary Act of 1802—challenged the constitutionality both of abolishing the circuit judgeships and of requiring the Supreme Court justices to ride circuit. In a brief opinion, the Court rejected both challenges.Stuart v. Laird, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch.) 299 (1803).
District of Columbia Organic Act of 1801
Both the United States Circuit Court of the District of Columbia and the D.C. justices of the peace were created on February 27, 1801 by the District of Columbia Organic Act of 1801.District of Columbia Organic Act of 1801, 2 Stat. 103. Unlike its better-known predecessor, the Midnight Judges Act,Judiciary Act of 1801 (Midnight Judges Act), 2 Stat. 89. the Organic Act survived repeal by the Jeffersonian Congress.John G. Roberts, Jr., What Makes the D.C. Circuit Different?: A Historical View, 92  375, 378 (2006).
D.C. justices of the peace
thumb|right|President Jefferson refused to deliver commissions to some of President Adams' confirmed D.C. justice of the peace nominees, like William Marbury (pictured).
The D.C. justices of the peace were appointed by the President, in a number at his discretion, and confirmed by the Senate for five-year terms. A D.C. justice of the peace had jurisdiction over "all matters, civil and criminal, and in whatever relates to the conservation of the peace" within their county.District of Columbia Organic Act of 1801, § 11, 2 Stat. 103, 107. The District of Columbia was divided into two counties: Washington County, east of the Potomac River, and Alexandria County, west of the Potomac.District of Columbia Organic Act of 1801, § 2, 2 Stat. 103, 105. Justices of the peace were authorized to "inflict whipping, imprisonment, and fine as high as 500 pounds of tobacco" and to hear civil cases with an amount in controversy up to $20.More, 7 U.S. at 167 (oral argument). One year after More, in Ex parte Burford (1806), the Marshall Court's first original habeas case, the Court granted a writ of habeas corpus to a prisoner subjected to preventive detention by the D.C. justices of the peace.Ex parte Burford, 7 U.S. (3 Cranch) 448 (1806).
As to compensation, the Organic Act provided that justices of the peace "shall be entitled to receive for their services the fees allowed for like services by the laws herein before adopted and continued, in the eastern part of said district." A March 3, 1801 amendment to the Organic Act provided that: "[T]he magistrates, to be appointed for the said district, shall be and they are hereby constituted a board of commissioners within their respective counties, and shall possess and exercise the same powers, perform the same duties, receive the same fees and , as the levy courts or commissioners of county for the state of Maryland possess, perform and receive . . . ."Mar. 3, 1801, § 4, 2 Stat. 115, 115.
On March 4, 1801, President John Adams's last day in office, Adams nominated and the Senate confirmed 20 D.C. justices of the peace for Washington County and 19 for Alexandria County.O'Fallon, 1993, at 43 & n.4. On March 16, President Thomas Jefferson issued 15 commissions to justices of the peace in Washington County, including 13 nominated by Adams, and 15 in Alexandria County, including 11 nominated by Adams; the remainder were of his own choosing. (Jefferson's list, submitted to the Senate on January 6, 1802, erroneously contained the name of John Laird, a confirmed Adams appointed who had not received a commission from Jefferson, instead of More.)O'Fallon, 1993, at 48 n.27. The plaintiffs in Marbury v. Madison (1803)—William Marbury, Dennis Ramsay, Robert Townsend Hooe, and William Harper—were among the confirmed Adams nominees not commissioned.
On May 3, 1802, Congress eliminated both the fees for justice of the peace services, except travel expenses, authorized by the Organic Act and fees associated with the justices of the peace's role on the board of commissioners.Act of May 3, 1802, ch. 15, § 8, 2 Stat. 193, 194–95. These two sources represented the entirety of their compensation.O'Fallon, 1993, at 52.
D.C. circuit court
The three-judge United States Circuit Court of the District of Columbia was populated by its own judges, rather than by a mixture of district judges and circuit riding Supreme Court justices like the other circuit courts. The D.C. circuit court had jurisdiction over crimes committed within the district.District of Columbia Organic Act of 1801, § 5, 2 Stat. 103, 106. With regard to appeals from the D.C. circuit court, the Organic Act provided:
[A]ny final judgment, order or decree in said circuit court, wherein the matter in dispute, exclusive of costs, shall exceed the value of one hundred dollars, may be re-examined and reversed or affirmed in the supreme court of the United States, by writ of error or appeal, which shall be prosecuted in the same manner, under the same regulations, and the same proceedings shall be had therein, as is or shall be provided in the case of writs of error on judgments, or appeals upon orders or decrees, rendered in the circuit court of the United States.District of Columbia Organic Act of 1801, § 8, 2 Stat. 103, 106.
The provision to which the Organic Act referred, that for writs of error from the circuit courts to the Supreme Court in the Judiciary Act of 1789, provided:
And upon a like process [as a writ of error from the district court to the circuit court], may final judgments and decrees in civil actions, and suits in equity in a circuit court, brought there by original process, or removed there from courts of the several States, or removed there by appeal from a district court where the matter in dispute exceeds the sum or value of two thousand dollars, exclusive of costs, be re-examined and reversed or affirmed in the Supreme Court, the citation being in such case signed by a judge of such circuit court, or justice of the Supreme Court, and the adverse party having at least thirty days’ notice.Judiciary Act of 1789, § 22, 1 Stat. 73, 84.
Unlike the appellate provision of the Judiciary Act of 1789, the appellate provision of the act of February 27, 1801 was not explicitly limited to civil cases (except insofar as it incorporated the former by reference). Further, because the D.C. circuit court was not constituted within the framework of the Judiciary Act of 1802, appeals to the Supreme Court by way of certificates of division could not issue. After More, the Marshall Court heard six appeals from the D.C. circuit court via original habeas.Ex parte Burford, 7 U.S. (3 Cranch) 448 (1806); Ex parte Bollman, 8 U.S. (4 Cranch) 75 (1807); Ex parte Kearney, 20 U.S. (7 Wheat.) 38 (1822); Ex parte Watkins, 28 U.S. (3 Pet.) 193 (1830); Ex parte Watkins, 32 U.S. (7 Pet.) 568 (1833); Ex parte Milburn, 34 U.S. (9 Pet.) 704 (1835).
Criminal appeals
thumb|right|Justice Samuel Chase expressed his willingness to sign a writ of error in a criminal case while riding circuit in 1800.
The availability of criminal appeals to the Supreme Court by means of writs of error from the circuit courts was perhaps an open question prior to More.Rossman, 1990, at 522–25. In England, the writ of error was available as of right in misdemeanor cases, but, in felony cases, required the express consent of the prosecutor.Rossman, 1990, at 523 n.17.
The legislative history of the Judiciary Act of 1789 reveals little consideration of criminal appeals. Caleb Strong, a Senator at the time of its drafting, described § 22 of that act as follows: "Writs of Error from the Circuit to the Supr. Court in all Causes not criminal of which the Circuit Court has original Cognizance and the Matter in Dispute does not exceed 2000 Dolrs."Rossman, 1990, at 556. Senator (and future Supreme Court justice) William Paterson noticed the lack of provision for criminal appeals in preliminary notes and a draft outline of a speech he gave on June 23, 1789.Rossman, 1990, at 557. According to Rossman, Paterson may have viewed the inability of the government to appeal (to a court in the nation's capitol) as a "protection for ordinary citizens." The issue of criminal appeals was not mentioned in the House debates.
Shortly after the Judiciary Act of 1789 took effect, Attorney General Edmund Randolph proposed, in a report to the House of Representatives, a criminal appeal similar to that in England: a writ of error as of right in non-capital cases, and no writs of error in capital cases.Rossman, 1990, at 557 n.184. Randolph's report was referred to the Committee of the Whole, which took no action.
Prior to Marshall's tenure, the Supreme Court had heard only two criminal cases—both by prerogative writ. First, in United States v. Hamilton (1795), the Court granted bail to a capital defendant—as it was authorized to do by § 33 of the Judiciary Act of 1789Judiciary Act of 1789, § 33, 1 Stat. 73, 91–92. and § 4 of the Judiciary Act of 1793.Judiciary Act of 1793, § 4, 1 Stat. 333, 334. The greater portion of the decision was dedicated to the Court's refusal to order the case tried by a special circuit court, as was provided for by § 3 of the Judiciary Act of 1793.Judiciary Act of 1793, § 3, 1 Stat. 333, 334. In Ex parte Bollman (1807), the Court explained that its jurisdiction in Hamilton could only have been exercised via original habeas under § 14 of the Judiciary Act of 1789.Ex parte Bollman, 8 U.S. (4 Cranch) 75, 100–01 (1807). Second, in United States v. Lawrence (1795), the Court declined to issue a writ of mandamus to compel a district judge to order the arrest of a deserter of the French navy.United States v. Lawrence, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 42 (1795). In one criminal trial, United States v. Callender (C.C.D. Va. 1800), Justice Samuel Chase (who expressed no dissent in More) wrote:
[I]f I am not right, it is an error in judgment, and you can state the proceedings on the record so as to show any error, and I shall be the first man to grant you the benefit a new trial by granting you a writ of error in the supreme court.United States v. Callender, 25 F. Cas. 239, 251 (C.C.D. Va. 1800) (No. 14,709).
In United States v. Simms (1803), the Court heard a writ of error, brought by the United States, on the merits from a criminal case in the D.C. circuit court.United States v. Simms, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 252 (1803). Simms was the first such case, and after Simms, the next criminal writ of error heard by the Court was More.Rossman, 1990, at 523. U.S. Attorney for the District of Columbia John T. Mason argued both Simms and More.
Indictments
thumb|right|Because the law of Virginia remained in force in Alexandria County, More was indicted for the common law crime of exacting illegal fees under color of his office.
Benjamin More was one of two of D.C. justices of peace in Alexandria County of Jefferson's own choosing, receiving an interim appointment.O'Fallon, 1993, at 43. Jefferson proceeded to nominate More for a full five-year term, and the Senate confirmed More on April 27, 1802.O'Fallon, 1993, at 48. According to O'Fallon, "More appears to have been a man of moderate Jeffersonian sentiments and attachments, who nonetheless joined in a Federalist defense of judicial independence."O'Fallon, 1993, at 45. He was "an unlikely character for the lead role in a Federalist attack on Jeffersonian principles." O'Fallon hypothesizes that More's case was intended as a test case by all parties involved. "More has all the markings of a trumped-up case, manufactured to present the Supreme Court with the issues of principle raised by the repeal, without the embarrassment of direct conflict with the Executive."
More was indicted by the Grand Inquest for the County of Washington, during its July term, for taking unlawful fees for his services as a justice of the peace.More, 7 U.S. at 172.O'Fallon, 1993, at 44 n.9, 48. The indictment charged More with having taken the fees on July 17 and 24. A capias, returnable at the December 1802 term, was issued.O'Fallon, 1993, at 48–49. The members of the Inquest included five other D.C. justices of the peace: Daniel Carrol, Daniel Reintzell, Joseph Sprigg Belt, Thomas Corcoran, and Anthony Reintzell.O'Fallon, 1993, at 48 n.28. Another member of the Inquest was Thomas Beall, a confirmed Adams appointee who had not received a commission from Jefferson.
More was indicted a second time at the December term for conduct on December 10, 1802.O'Fallon, 1993, at 49. More demured, and the case was continued until the July 1803 term. Only the latter indictment was mentioned in the United States Reports.More, 7 U.S. at 159–60.
More's demurrer was opposed by U.S. Attorney Mason, a Jefferson appointee.O'Fallon, 1993, at 56 n.58. Mason argued that the D.C. justices of the peace were Article I judges established pursuant to Congress's enumerated power over the District of Columbia in Article One of the United States Constitution. Article One provides that Congress shall have power "[t]o exercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatsoever, over such District (not exceeding ten Miles square) as may, by Cession of particular States, and the Acceptance of Congress, become the Seat of the Government of the United States." art. I, § 8, cl. 17. Mason advanced a broad view that Congress's power over the District of Columbia was not limited any other constitutional provision.O'Fallon, 1993, at 49–50 & n.32. In support of his argument that the justices of the peace were not Article III judges, Mason argued that their jurisdiction was broader than that permitted by Article III.O'Fallon, 1993, at 50.
According to O'Fallon, there were additional indicia—not cited by either party—that the justices of the peace were not Article III judges.O'Fallon, 1993, at 50–51. For example, the Organic Act authorized the President to appoint as many justices of the peace as he "shall from time to time think expedient." This was a broad delegation to the President of Congress's power "[t]o constitute Tribunals inferior to the supreme Court." art. I, § 8, cl. 9.
More was not indicted under any criminal statue passed by Congress. Rather, his was "an indictment at common law . . . for having, under colour of his office, exacted and taken an illegal fee."More, 7 U.S. at 160 n.* (C.C.D.C. 1803) (Kilty, C.J., dissenting). The Organic Act provided that the laws of Maryland and Virginia would continue in force in the portions of the district ceded from those states.District of Columbia Organic Act of 1801, § 1, 2 Stat. 103, 103–05. Since More was a justice of the peace for Alexandria County, the common law of Virginia would have applied.
Dismissal
thumb|right|William Cranch both heard the case as a D.C. circuit court judge and reported the Supreme Court's decision.
The D.C. circuit court judges hearing the demurrer were Chief Judge William Kilty and assistant judges William Cranch and James Markham Marshall (Chief Justice John Marshall's brother). Cranch and Marshall were Adams appointees; Kilty was a Jefferson appointee. Cranch, also the reporter of decisions for the Supreme Court, included the D.C. circuit court opinions in the margin of his report of the Supreme Court's decision in More.
Majority
Cranch, joined by Marshall, sustained More's demurrer based on the Compensation Clause of Article Three of the United States Constitution.More, 7 U.S. at 160 n.* (C.C.D.C. 1803) (Cranch, J., joined by Marshall, J.). That clause provides: "The Judges, both of the supreme and inferior Courts . . . shall, at stated Times, receive for their Services a Compensation which shall not be diminished during their Continuance in Office." art. III, § 1 (emphasis added).
Cranch held that Congress's power over the federal district was limited by the remainder of the Constitution. In response to Mason's argument for unfettered power, Cranch replied: "[T]his is a doctrine to which I can never assent. Can it be said, that congress may pass a bill of attainder for the district of Columbia? That congress may pass laws ex post facto in the district, or order soldiers to be quartered upon us in a time of peace, or make our ports free ports of entry, or lay duties upon our exports, or take away the right of trial by jury, in criminal prosecutions?"
Cranch held that More was an Article III judge sitting on a "Tribunal inferior to the supreme Court." In response to the argument that his jurisdiction exceeded Article Three, Cranch replied that: "The causes of which they have cognizance, are causes arising under the laws of the United States, and, therefore, the power of trying them, is part of the judicial power . . . ." In response to the argument that the fees would never have been paid at a "time Stated," Cranch replied that: "[I]t may, perhaps, be a compliance with the clause of the constitution, which requires that it shall be receivable at stated times, to say that it shall be paid when the service is rendered. And, we are rather to incline to this construction, than to suppose the command of the constitution to have been disobeyed." Further, Cranch dodged the question of whether a five-year term was consistent with the Good Behavior Clause. "It is unnecessary in this cause to decide the question, whether, as such, he holds his office during good behaviour . . . ."
Cranch stopped short of declaring the statute unconstitutional. He merely interpreted it as prospective, holding that it "cannot affect that justice of the peace during his continuance in office; whatever effect it may have upon those justices who have been appointed to office since the passing of the act." Contemporary media accounts reported that the circuit court had held that fee-elimination provision of the May 23, 1802 act unconstitutional, rather than interpreting it as prospective.O'Fallon, 1993, at 51 n.42. According to O'Fallon, this is evidence that Cranch's published opinion (as reported by himself) may have differed from his oral opinion.
Dissent
Chief Judge Kilty's dissent noted the recent confirmation of the principle of judicial review in Marbury v. Madison. "According to the course which has been pursued by the supreme court, it appears unnecessary to say any thing about the power of a court to examine into the constitutionality of a law . . . ." Instead, Kilty proceeded by "taking the power for granted." But, Kilty noted,  "[i]n testing an act of the legislature by the constitution, nothing less than the positive provisions of the latter can be resorted to . . . ."
Kilty briefly argued that More was not an Article III judge and that the fees in question were not compensation received at "times Stated." But, the bulk of Kilty's dissent was devoted to the argument that Congress's power over the federal district was broad. He argued that "the district of Columbia, though belonging to the United States, and within their compass, is not, like a state, a component part, and that the provisions of the constitution, which are applicable particularly to the relative situation of the United States and the several states, are not applicable to this district." "[W]hen congress, in exercising exclusive legislation over this territory, enact laws to give or to take away the fees of the justices of the peace, such laws cannot be tested by a provision in the constitution, evidently applicable to the judicial power of the whole United States, and containing restrictions which cannot, in their nature, affect the situation of the justices, or the nature of the compensation."
Yet, Kilty did not fully accept Mason's argument that Congress's power over the district was unlimited. He argued that the word "exclusive" meant only "free from the power exercised by the several states" and that "the legislative power to be exercised by congress may still be subject to the general restraints contained in the constitution." He admitted that, even within the federal district, Congress was
restrained from suspending the writ of habeas corpus, unless in the cases allowed; from passing (within and for the district) a bill of attainder, or ex post facto law; from laying therein a capitation tax; from granting therein any title of nobility; from making therein a law respecting the establishment of religion, or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; and from quartering soldiers therein, contrary to the third amendment.
Oral argument
Mason argued the appeal of the United States before the Supreme Court.More, 7 U.S. at 159 (oral argument). Samuel Jones argued for More.More, 7 U.S. at 165 (oral argument).
Merits
Jones cited Marbury v. Madison for the proposition that a D.C. justice of the peace does not serve merely at the pleasure of the president.More, 7 U.S. at 166 (oral argument). According to O'Fallon, due to the President's power to remove most appointees from office, this could only have been a reference to the Good Behavior Clause of Article Three.O'Fallon, 1993, at 51 n.40. That clause provides that "Judges, both of the supreme and inferior Courts, shall hold their Offices during good Behavior." Mason countered that Marbury only held that justices of the peace were entitled to hold their offices for five years of good behavior.
Mason again pressed his argument that Congress's power of the federal district was unlimited:
The constitution does not apply to this case. The constitution is a compact between the people of the United States in their individual capacity, and the states in their political capacity. Unfortunately for the citizens of Columbia, they are not in either of these capacities. . . . Congress are under no controul in legislating for the district of Columbia. Their power, in this respect, is unlimited.More, 7 U.S. at 167–68 (oral argument).
Marson also argued that More was not an Article III judge because "the judicial power exercised in the district of Columbia, extends to other cases [than those enumerated in Article III], and, therefore, is not the judicial power of the United States."More, 7 U.S. at 168 (oral argument). "It is a power derived from the power given to congress to legislate exclusively in all cases whatsoever over the district."
Jurisdiction
thumb|right|Just two years earlier, in United States v. Simms (1803), the Court had heard a criminal appeal from the same court concerning faro gambling (pictured).
On February 13, sua sponte, Chief Justice Marshall raised his doubts to the Court's jurisdiction to entertain criminal appeals.More, 7 U.S. at 169 (oral argument).O'Fallon, 1993, at 44 n.9. Argument on this question commenced on February 22. Mason argued in favor of jurisdiction. No argument from More's counsel on this issue was reported, "although it was typical for the reporter to summarize the arguments on both sides."Rossman, 1990, at 523 n.18.
Mason acknowledged that, under Clarke v. Bazadone (1803),Clarke v. Bazadone, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 212 (1803) (holding that the Supreme Court had no jurisdiction to hear a civil writ of error from the General Court for the Territory Northwest of the Ohio). the Supreme Court's appellate jurisdiction required an affirmative grant by Congress.More, 7 U.S. at 170 (oral argument). Mason argued that such a grant was found in § 14 of the Judiciary Act of 1789 (known as the All Writs Act), which authorized the Supreme Court to "issue writs of scire facias, habeas corpus, and all other writs, not specially provided for by statute, which may be necessary for the exercise of [its] jurisdiction, and agreeable to the principles and usages of law." Mason's argument based on the All Writs Act was not necessarily limited to the D.C. circuit court. Said Mason:
There is no reason why the writ of error should be confined to civil cases. A man's life, his liberty, and his good name, are as dear to him as his property; and inferior courts are as liable to err in one case as in the other. There is nothing in the nature of the cases which should make a difference; nor is it a novel doctrine that a writ of error should lie in a criminal case. They have been frequent in that country from which we have drawn almost all our forms of judicial proceedings.
Chief Justice Marshall replied that, if Congress had made no provision for appeals of any kind to the Supreme Court, "your argument would be irresistible."More, 7 U.S. at 169–70 (oral argument). But, Marshall countered, under the Exceptions Clause, when Congress "has said in what cases a writ of error or appeal shall lie, an exception of all other cases is implied."More, 7 U.S. at 171 (oral argument). The Exceptions Clause provides that "[i]n all [cases other than those in which the Supreme Court has original jurisdiction], the supreme Court shall have appellate Jurisdiction, both as to Law and Fact, with such Exceptions, and under such Regulations as the Congress shall make." art. III, § 2, cl. 2.
Mason replied, first, that the Exceptions Clause did not apply to the federal district, and second, that Organic Act differed from the Judiciary Act of 1789 by referring to "any final judgment, order, or decree," rather than explicitly limiting appeals to "civil cases." Mason suggested that the references to the amount in controversy could refer to criminal fines as well as civil judgments.More, 7 U.S. at 171–72 (oral argument). Finally, Mason pointed out that, just two years earlier, in United States v. Simms (1803), the Court had reached the merits in a criminal appeal from the same court.More, 7 U.S. at 172. Mason himself had argued Simms, and Marshall himself had authored the opinion.
In response to the last point, Marshall replied that: "No question was made, in that case, as to the jurisdiction. It passed sub silentio, and the court does not consider itself as bound by that case." Mason retorted: "But the traverser [Simms] had able counsel, who did not think proper to make the objection."
Opinion
thumb|right|Chief Justice John Marshall dismissed the writ of error for want of jurisdiction.
On March 2, 1805, writing for a unanimous Court, Chief Justice John Marshall dismissed the writ of error for want of jurisdiction.More, 7 U.S. at 172, 174. Justice Johnson was absent from the opinion announcement.More, 7 U.S. at 172 n.*.
Marshall held that the partial statutory grant of appellate jurisdiction to the Court operated as an exercise of Congress's power under the Exceptions Clause to limit the jurisdiction of the Court in all other cases.More, 7 U.S. at 172–73. Marshall noted that "it has never been supposed, that a decision of a circuit court could be reviewed, unless the matter in dispute should exceed the value of 2,000 dollars."More, 7 U.S. at 173. Thus, Marshall interpreted the $2000 amount in controversy requirement of § 22 of the Judiciary Act of 1789 as applying to the entire section, rather than only the last antecedent.
Marshall rejected the argument that the Organic Act authorized criminal appellate jurisdiction. He interpreted the grant, in light of its $100 amount in controversy requirement, as "confined to civil cases." "The words, 'matter in dispute,' seem appropriated to civil cases, where the subject in contest has a value beyond the sum mentioned in the act. But, in criminal cases, the question is the guilt or innocence of the accused. And although he may be fined upwards of 100 dollars, yet that is, in the eye of the law, a punishment for the offence committed, and not the particular object of the suit."More, 7 U.S. at 173–74.
A final footnote refers to United States v. La Vengeance (1796),United States v. La Vengeance, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 297 (1796). "where it seems to be admitted, that in criminal cases the judgment of the inferior court is final."More, 7 U.S. at 174 n.*. La Vengeance was an admiralty libel case. There, at oral argument, Attorney General Charles Lee argued, in the alternative, that the case was a "criminal cause" and therefore "should never have been removed to the Circuit Court, the judgment of the District Court being final in criminal causes."La Vengeance, 3 U.S. at 299 (oral argument). The Court summarily rejected Lee's argument: "we are unanimously of opinion, that it is a civil cause: It is a process of the nature of a libel in rem; and does not, in any degree, touch the persons of the offender."La Vengeance, 3 U.S. at 301.
Aftermath
After More, no writs of error issued from federal criminal trials in the circuit courts for 84 years.  In 1889, Congress created a right of appeal by writ of error in capital cases.Act of Feb. 6, 1889, §6, 25 Stat. 655, 656. In 1891, the Judiciary Act of 1891 (the "Evarts Act") extended this right to other serious crimes.Judiciary Act of 1891 (Evarts Act), § 5, 26 Stat. 826, 827. The Judicial Code of 1911 abolished the circuit courts and placed original jurisdiction for the trial of all federal crimes in the district courts.Judicial Code of 1911, § 24(2), 36 Stat. 1087, 1091. Appeal to the courts of appeals by writs of error was provided for all "final decisions," in civil and criminal cases alike.Judicial Code of 1911, § 128, 36 Stat. 1087, 1133–34. Appeals to the Supreme Court were permitted directly from the district courts by writ of error, from the courts of appeals on certified questions, and by petition for certiorari.Judicial Code of 1911, §§ 238–240, 36 Stat. 1087, 1157. Without reported discussion of the jurisdictional issue, the Court did hear writs of error from criminal cases removed to the circuit courts.Blyew v. United States, 80 U.S. (13 Wall.) 581 (1871). (Recall that the Judiciary Act of 1789 explicitly authorized appeals in removal cases.)
The Supreme Court had other, limited sources of appellate jurisdiction in criminal cases. The Court could hear criminal appeals from the state courts by writ of error, as authorized by the Judiciary Act of 1789.Judiciary Act of 1789, § 25, 1 Stat. 73, 85–87. See Cohens v. Virginia, 19 U.S. (6 Wheat.) 264 (1821). The Court could hear federal criminal appeals by certificate of division, as authorized by the Judiciary Act of 1802,Judiciary Act of 1802, § 6, 2 Stat. 156, 159–61. See United States v. Cantril, 8 U.S. (4 Cranch) 167 (1807). original habeas petition, as authorized by the Judiciary Act of 1789,Judiciary Act of 1789, § 14, 1 Stat. 73, 81–82. See Ex parte Burford, 7 U.S. (3 Cranch) 448 (1806). and mandamus, as authorized by the same act.Judiciary Act of 1789, § 13, 1 Stat. 73, 80–81. See Ex parte Taylor, 55 U.S. (14 How.) 3 (1852). Between 1867Act of Feb. 5, 1867, 14 Stat. 385. See Ex parte McCardle, 73 U.S. (6 Wall.) 318 (1867). and 1868,Act of Mar. 27, 1868, 15 Stat. 44. See Ex parte McCardle, 74 U.S. (7 Wall.) 506 (1869). and after 1885,Act of Mar. 3, 1885, 23 Stat. 437. See Ex parte Royall, 117 U.S. 241 (1886). the Court had jurisdiction to hear writs of error from habeas petitions (a civil action) in the circuit courts. Beginning in 1850, the Court also entertained such appeals from the territorial courts.See Forsyth v. United States, 50 U.S. (9 How.) 571 (1850); Simpson v. United States, 50 U.S. (9 How.) 578 (1850). Attempts to utilize other prerogative writs as sources of jurisdiction were unsuccessful.Ex parte Gordon, 66 U.S. (1 Black) 503 (1861) (admiralty writ of prohibition).
Analysis
More had received far less scholarly attention than Marbury.O'Fallon, 1993, at 44. "The timing and the ground of decision may explain why historians of the battle over repeal have ignored More."James M. O'Fallon, Marbury, 44  219, 241 n.72 (1992). "In a doctrinal summary of constitutional law, More stands only for the proposition that an affirmative grant of appellate jurisdiction by Congress carries with it an implicit negative of jurisdiction within the constitutional description but not mentioned in the grant."
According to O'Fallon, "More may have been part of a Federalist strategy to get the Court to intervene in the political struggle over the judiciary." Given that Justice Samuel Chase was acquitted by the Senate in his impeachment case on March 1, 1805, the day before the release of the More decision, "[o]ne can imagine John Marshall passing a sigh of relief as he handed down the judgment in More."O'Fallon, 1993, at 55. "[T]he dismissal of More marked the end of Federalist efforts to obtain a Supreme Court ruling, directly or by implication, that the repeal of the 1801 Judiciary Act was unconstitutional.O'Fallon, 1993, at 55–56. "More is of a piece with Marbury and Stuart v. Laird in its avoidance of an opportunity for an open clash with political critics of the courts. It further shares with Marbury the characteristic of declining an exercise of jurisdiction that the Court found to be unwarranted."O'Fallon, 1993, at 56. O'Fallon argues:
Rather than seize the opportunity presented by More, John Marshall ducked. . . . Without questioning the soundness or propriety of Marshall's decision, it is worth noting that the Court had previously entertained criminal appeals from the district without raising any such jurisdictional problem. One might reasonably wonder if the Court wanted to avoid a decision on the merits. By March of 1805, the repeal question had lost its political immediacy, and the impeachment strategy of the Jeffersonians had faltered. There was little to be gained in reopening the sores of the repeal battle. And Marshall may have felt that he had had his say on the critical matters of principle with his opinion in Marbury.
Notes
References
Dwight Henderson,  (1985).
James M. O'Fallon, The Case of Benjamin More: A Lost Episode in the Struggle over Repeal of the 1801 Judiciary Act, 11  43 (1993).
David Rossman, "Were There No Review": The History of Review in American Criminal Courts, 81  518 (1990).
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:1805 in United States case law
Category:Exceptions Clause case law
Category:Good Behavior Clause case law
Category:Legal history of the District of Columbia
Category:Criminal cases in the Marshall Court
"""

From "United States v. Moreland" ==> """
United States v. Moreland, 258 U.S. 433 (1922), was a case heard by the Supreme Court of the United States on March 9 and 10, 1922, and decided a month later on April 17.  The case involved a Fifth Amendment rights issue centering on whether or not hard labor was an infamous punishment (thus triggering the necessity of a grand jury indictment) or whether imprisonment in a penitentiary was a necessity for punishment to be considered infamous.
The majority opinion also included the court's contention for continued support of the findings of a previously held case, Wong Wing v. United States, .  Lawyers for the United States argued that Wong Wing was improperly applied in the Moreland case, and had been modified or overruled by subsequent cases.  The court strongly rejected the government's contentions regarding Wong Wing in its opinion, and ruled in favor of Moreland.
Facts and History
The dissenting opinion written by Justice Louis Brandeis offers a succinct account of the facts that led up to this case:
On January 18, 1921, an information, under the Act of March 23, 1906, c. 1131, 34 Stat. 86, was filed against Moreland in the juvenile court of the District of Columbia for willfully neglecting to provide support for his minor children-girls aged 8 and 13. He was tried by a jury and found guilty.
(An information is defined as “a formal accusation of a crime made by a public officer rather than by grand jury indictment.”) 
The statute described by Justice Brandeis (also referred to as the Act of March 23, 1906 or the Act) suggests the punishment of
‘a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment in the workhouse of the District of Columbia at hard labor for not more than twelve months or by both such fine and imprisonment.’
Mr. Moreland underwent a jury trial and was found guilty of failing to provide proper child support; the Supreme Court found no issue with the proceedings themselves.  The juvenile court suspended sentence and gave him a chance to make these obligatory payments.  After a month of failing to do so, “Moreland was sentenced on April 19, 1921, to be committed to the workhouse at hard labor for 6 months.”
Moreland objected to the sentence, claiming the offense he had been charged with amounted to an infamous crime because the Act of March 23, 1908 included hard labor as a potential punishment; the Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution would therefore apply, as would its ban on individuals being held to answer for infamous crimes without indictment or presentment by a grand jury.  The juvenile court overruled his claim.  Moreland appealed.
The trial originated in the D.C. court system, so the appeal went directly to the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, which reversed the juvenile court's decision and directed that the complaint be dismissed, freeing Moreland.  The Court of Appeals relied upon the findings of Wong Wing in making its determination that Moreland's claim was valid, and therefore found the Act of March 23, 1908 to be unconstitutional.  Writ of certiorari was filed and granted by the Supreme Court.
Issues
Three separate but interconnected issues were addressed:
First, there was contention over the issue of what exactly made a crime (or its punishment) infamous: the location (a penitentiary), or the inclusion of hard labor in the sentence.
Crimes in which only a fine was faced are not considered infamous, and crimes where a convict must serve at a penitentiary had previously been found to be infamous.  But Moreland argued crimes where a convict must spend time in confinement (penitentiary or not) and carry out hard labor should also be considered infamous.  Merely the addition of hard labor to a sentence was enough to make it infamous.  The United States contended that hard labor was not in and of itself an infamous punishment, and that time in a penitentiary was a necessity.
Second, because the Act gave the option of either a fine, imprisonment, or both, the United States maintained that the Act was not unconstitutional because the threat of imprisonment was severable from the threat of fine (which would not be infamous).  Because the court could decide to impose only a fine, the United States argued the Act as a whole should not be struck down.
Third, the United States in its arguments attacked the legality of Wong Wing v. United States and its application to this case, arguing that other Supreme Court cases modified or overruled Wong Wing.  Wong Wing was the primary case cited by the Court of Appeals in finding the Act of March 23, 1908 unconstitutional, so in arguing this, the United States argued for the entirety of the Court of Appeals' decision to be set down.
Majority Opinion
thumb|Taft Court in 1921.
The Court, in its 5-3 ruling (Justice Clarke not having participated), upheld the Court of Appeals’ decision fully, including its decisions to strike as unconstitutional the Act of March 23, 1908, and to order Moreland's release.  The majority opinion – written by Justice Joseph McKenna and joined by Justices Day, McReynolds, Pitney, and Van Devanter – noted their reluctance in the inevitable end result, but felt duty-bound to uphold the right of a U.S. citizen to be protected by the Fifth Amendment, and “... the right, at times, must be accorded one whose conduct tempts to a straining of the law against him.”
Infamy and Severability
In deciding the issue of infamy and infamous crimes, the Court had to lay down some basic definitions.  The Court ruled the workhouse at Occoquan in the state of Virginia (a prison farm), to which Moreland was to be sent, was not a penitentiary.  It was the contention of the United States that this meant the crime was not infamous, because they argued “the place of imprisonment – that is, imprisonment in a penitentiary – ... makes the infamy; the accompaniment of hard labor being but an incident.”
However, the Supreme Court held that the status of Occoquan was not a relevant fact to the Moreland case; crimes requiring time served in a penitentiary had already been deemed to be infamous in the 1885 case Ex Parte Wilson (114 U.S. 417).  The focus of the case instead rested upon the sentence of hard labor, and the majority quoted from the Wilson case: “... it was declared that, if imprisonment was in any other place than a penitentiary and was to be at hard labor, the latter ... made it infamous.”  The United States’ contention was in direct opposition to the findings of Wilson, and was rejected.
The Court also rejected the United States’ argument that “the provision of the Act [Moreland was charged under] for punishment by fine or imprisonment are severable.” Justice McKenna wrote:
The contention is untenable.  It is what sentence can be imposed under the law, not what was imposed, that is the material consideration.  When an accused is in danger of an infamous punishment, if convicted, he has a right to insist that he be not put upon trial, except on the accusation of a grand jury.
In upholding the Court of Appeals’ decision the Supreme Court again upheld a key finding of Wilson, noting that even the possibility of an infamous punishment (regardless of whether or not lesser punishments like fines were available) made the crime infamous, and required Fifth Amendment constitutional requirements to be met.
Defense of Wong Wing
Justice McKenna devoted a vast portion of the majority opinion to a defense of Wong Wing v. United States in a prime example of the principle of stare decisis.  McKenna wrote that the United States “resists both the authority and extent of [Wong Wing] by the citation of others, which, it asserts, modify or overrule it.  A review of it, therefore, is of initial importance.”
The majority opinion found odd the United States’ efforts to “modify the case or to remove it as authority for” the issue at hand before the Court of Appeals, noting “the means and pains taken to accomplish [that goal] are somewhat baffling to representation.”  Arguments that the Supreme Court (and the Court of Appeals) were wrong to even cite Wong Wing and that a key finding of that case was incorrectly applied gave the majority pause and lead to a lengthy defense of that 1896 verdict.
The United States noted Wong Wing was not referenced in the opinion of Fitzpatrick v. United States (178 U.S. 304) (1900), a case that occurred four years later.  The United States claimed that this omission meant Wong Wing did not apply, or had been set aside by the Supreme Court, but this argument is rejected in the court's opinion for two reasons: “… a case is not overruled merely by an omission to mention it”; and Ex Parte Wilson had been cited in both Wong Wing and Fitzpatrick to justify the findings of each case.
In Wong Wing, just like in Ex Parte Wilson, a punishment requiring hard labor was set aside because it was brought about without the involvement of a grand jury indictment.  But the United States suggested Wong Wing's punishment was found to be infamous because he was to be sent to a penitentiary, and not because the sentence involved hard labor.
The majority opinion found this contention odd, because the Detroit House of Corrections, to which Wong Wing was sent many years ago, was in fact not a penitentiary: “it was, and is, what its name implies – a place of correction and reformation, not of condemnation to infamy.”  Since the hard labor sentence against Wong Wing was set aside and not done so because he was to be sent to a penitentiary, it can only have been because the inclusion of hard labor was infamous and therefore led to a Fifth Amendment violation.
Dissenting Opinion
Justice Brandeis wrote the dissenting opinion, which disagreed with the majority on key issues.
In regards to findings of the Wong Wing case, the dissenters felt the case had been improperly applied, agreeing with the United States’ case.  In particular, the minority found the Detroit House of Correction to be a penitentiary. A court commissioner, and not a grand jury, sentenced Wong Wing to an infamous penitentiary imprisonment; this is why the Wong Wing punishment was in violation of the Fifth Amendment.  The minority opinion devoted several sentences to the suggestion that the workhouse at Occoquan was nothing like a penitentiary.  Therefore, they focused on the matter of hard labor as a trigger for infamy.
Citing several examples from colonial America or examples in history of times when hard labor was considered an acceptable punishment, the minority sided with the United States: “It is not the provision for hard labor, but the imprisonment in a penitentiary, which now renders a crime infamous.”  The minority disagreed that Wong Wing found the presence of hard labor alone to be an infamous sentence.
The minority noted a statement made in Ex Parte Wilson: “‘What punishments shall be considered as infamous may be affected by the changes of public opinion from one age to another’.”  Because the Constitution contains no mention of hard labor, and the Fifth Amendment only refers to infamous crimes, the minority contended the two could not be linked together, because “commitment to Occoquan for a short term for nonsupport of minor children is certainly not an infamous punishment.”
However, this statement ignored another finding of Ex Parte Wilson mentioned by the majority: “… if imprisonment was in any other place than a penitentiary and was to be at hard labor, the latter … made it infamous …”  Also, this same cited statement would seem to apply to the majority opinion as well: through the cases of Wong Wing and now United States v. Moreland, public opinion had changed to include any hard labor as the very definition of infamy.
Justice Brandeis contended that the Court had never held hard labor alone to be an infamous punishment; it did so in its Moreland opinion.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 258
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:1922 in United States case law
Category:Grand Jury Clause case law
"""

From "United States v. Morgan (1941)" ==> """
United States v. Morgan, 313 U.S. 409 (1941), is the fourth and final decision by the United States Supreme Court in a long battle between the Secretary of Agriculture and market agencies on the reasonable rates to be rendered for services.  The Court held that, under the Packers and Stockyards Act, the Secretary of Agriculture had the authority and he properly determined the reasonable rates for services rendered by market agencies.United States v. Morgan, .
Background
The Packers and Stockyards Act provides the Secretary of Agriculture the authority to set rates to be paid by agencies for services rendered.  Under the Act, however, two conditions are put upon the exercise of this power: (1) The Secretary must be of the opinion that the existing rate is unjust, and (2) this opinion must be the result of a full hearing.
In the early 1930s the Secretary of Agriculture became concerned that the Fred O. Morgan Sheep Commission CompanyUnited States v. Morgan, . and other agencies doing business at the Kansas City Stockyards were charging unreasonable rates for services rendered.  The Secretary of Agriculture at that time was Arthur M. Hyde, who, in lieu of an open hearing, had taken testimonies from the agencies.  In March 1933, Henry A. Wallace became the new Secretary of Agriculture as Franklin D. Roosevelt took office as the 32nd United States President.  Three months after assuming office, Wallace issued an order setting maximum rates to be charged by market agencies for their services at the Kansas City Stockyards.  Morgan and the other agencies then brought suit to void that maximum rate because they had not been provided a proper hearing on the matter.  The United States District Court for the Western District of Missouri agreed with the Secretary of Agriculture, and the agencies appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Morgan v. United States  
In 1936, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the agencies and reversed the District Court by setting aside the maximum rate that had been determined by the Secretary.  The Court required the Secretary of Agriculture to provide evidence that he had adequately provided an appropriate hearing to the agencies. The matter returned to the District Court where the Secretary of Agriculture would provide evidence that he had made his determination on the maximum rate after reading the transcripts of the hearings provided by his predecessor.  The District Court agreed with the Secretary of Agriculture, and so the agencies again appealed to the Supreme Court because Wallace had not presided over the hearings himself.Morgan v. United States, .
 Morgan v. United States  
For the Second time, the Supreme Court heard the case between the agencies and the Secretary of Agriculture.  In 1938, the Court would side in favor with the agencies for the second time and reversed the District Court for the second time.  The Court determined that reading the testimonies of a prior hearing did not provide the agencies a full hearing by the Secretary of Agriculture as required by the Packers and Stockyards Act.  The Court held the hearing to be fatally defective and the order of the Secretary invalid. This decision stands for the important rule of administrative law that "he who decides must hear."
 United States v. Morgan  
In 1939, the Supreme Court heard the third case between the agencies and the Secretary of Agriculture.  This case involved the return of payments made between 1933 and 1937 in excess of a reasonable rate properly determined, and agreed by both parties, in 1937.  The Secretary of Agriculture wanted to hold a new hearing to determine whether the excess payments were reasonable; while the agencies demanded return of the excess.  Unlike the previous two cases, the District Court agreed with the agencies and determined that the Secretary of Agriculture must return the excess payments to the agencies.United States v. Morgan, .  For the third time, the Supreme Court reversed the decision of the District Court.  It determined that the excess should be held pending a new hearing to determine the reasonable rate that should have been charged between 1933 and 1937.
 United States v. Morgan  
In June 1938, the Secretary of Agriculture directed that the proceeding be reopened to determine the reasonable rate that should have been set retroactively between 1933 and 1937.  After an appropriate hearing and consideration, it was determined that the rate set in 1933 was reasonable.  The agencies again brought suit.  This time the agencies charged the Secretary of Agriculture with making a decision that was not supported by the evidence and that the Secretary of Agriculture was biased against a fair ruling.  The agencies introduced into evidence a letter Wallace wrote to the New York Times following the Court's 1938 decision stating his extreme disappointment that opinion.  The agencies also sued for the right to dispose and question the Secretary of Agriculture.  After siding with the Secretary of Agriculture in the first two cases, the District Court sided with the agencies for the second consecutive time.  The Secretary of Agriculture would then appeal to the Supreme Court.
 Decision 
In 1941, the Supreme Court heard its fourth cases between Henry A. Wallace, the Secretary of Agriculture, and Fred O. Morgan Sheep Commission Company with other agencies doing business at the Kansas City Stockyards.  The Court determined that the Wallace had properly heard evidence and made determinations on the reasonable rates agencies should have been charged for their services between 1933 and 1937.  The Court also determined that the expressed strong views by Wallace in his letter to the New York Times did not unfit him for exercising his duty in the subsequent proceedings.  Finally, the Court held that the Secretary of Agriculture, as a high-ranking official, should not be called upon to question and defend the basis for his decision. Thus the Court ruled in favor of the Secretary of Agriculture and determined that the agencies could not recover payments made to the government between 1933 and 1937.  The District Court decision was then reversed.
This was the last case between the Secretary of Agriculture and the agencies.  In their four appearances before the Court, each side had prevailed twice.  The Court sided with the agencies with their 1936 and 1938 decisions and sided with the Secretary of Agriculture in the 1939 and 1941 decisions.  However, the United States District Court for the Western District of Missouri decisions did not prevail in any Morgan case as the Supreme Court reversed the lower court in all four decisions.
 Morgan Doctrine 
The 1941 Morgan decision has been classified as a landmark decision by federal courts and the decision is the foundation for the Morgan Doctrine which strongly cautions against the taking of depositions from high-ranking government officials. In 1941, the Court recognized the importance of protecting the decision-making process of such officials and feared the effects of interrogations and analogized the high-ranking government official to a judge; "[j]ust as a judge cannot be subjected to such scrutiny, so the integrity of the administrative process must be equally respected.
 References 
External links
Category:1941 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "United States v. Morgan (1954)" ==> """
United States v. Morgan, 346 U.S. 502 (1954), is a landmark decision by the United States Supreme Court which provides the writ of coram nobis as the proper application to request federal post-conviction judicial review for those who have completed the conviction's incarceration in order to challenge the validity of a federal criminal conviction.
Background
The ancient writ of coram nobis originated in the English judicial system during the sixteenth century. If a court discovered a factual mistake or error after the conclusion of a case, the writ could be issued by the court to correct the error.  The writ of coram nobis was identical to the writ of habeas corpus; except, the writ of habeas corpus was reserved exclusively for those who were held in prisons, and the writ of coram nobis was available to everyone else..
The Judiciary Act of 1789 provided courts in the United States the authority to issue writs to achieve justice as long as the writ does not conflict with constitutional rights or legislative statutes.Judiciary Act of 1789, 1 Stat. 81-82  In 1911, the authorization of the federal judiciary to issue writs was modified into 28 U. S. C. § 1651(a) and is known as the “all-writs section of the Judicial Code”.. In 1946, the writ of coram nobis was considered obsolete when Congress added Rule 60(e) to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure which specifically abolished the writ of coram nobis in civil cases.  Until this time, federal courts only used the writ of coram nobis to correct errors in federal civil cases because errors in federal criminal cases could be corrected with a writ of habeas corpus.  Thus, in its 1947 decision, United States v. Smith, the Supreme Court observed “it is difficult to conceive of a situation in a federal criminal case today where [the writ of coram nobis] would be necessary or appropriate.” United States v. Smith,  n.4 (1947).
Questions about whether the writ of coram nobis would be necessary or appropriate resurfaced just one year later with the Act of June 25, 1948 which codified existing federal habeas corpus statutes and provided only those individuals in-custody access to the writ of habeas corpus.Act of June 25, 1948  Prior to the Act of June 25, 1948, the writ of habeas corpus was the sole application for United States federal courts to review convictions of those who had completed their incarceration.  Following the Act of June 25, 1948, federal courts were left to decide whether the act eliminated any review of convictions for those who had completed their incarceration or whether the writ of coram nobis (which had been limited to reviews of civil cases in US federal courts) could be expanded to include reviews of criminal cases for those who had completed their incarceration.
Morgan resolved these questions by determining that those who had completed their incarceration could challenge their conviction through the writ of coram nobis.  Although the Supreme Court states in Carlisle v. United States, “it is difficult to conceive of a situation in a federal criminal case today where [the writ of coram nobis] would be necessary or appropriate [for prisoners and others serving out a term of a federal conviction],”. Morgan provides when the writ of coram nobis is necessary or appropriate for those who are no longer in-custody.
Case
In 1939, nineteen-year-old Robert Patrick Morgan pled guilty to stealing three letters from the US Post Office and was sentenced in the United States District Court for the Northern District of New York to four years in federal prison; however, Morgan's constitutional rights were violated because he was not provided an attorney nor did he waive his constitutional right to an attorney. Unfortunately for Morgan, he was unaware that his constitutional rights were violated until after he had completed his sentence. In 1950, Morgan was convicted of attempted burglary in a New York county court. As a result of his 1939 federal conviction, the county court applied New York's Multiple Offenders Law and sentenced Morgan to seven to ten years at Attica Prison.
In 1952, Morgan first became aware of the constitutional violations related to his 1939 federal conviction. As a result, he petitioned the district court for the writ of coram nobis. If successful, his state sentence would be reduced because he would no longer be considered a multiple offender. The district court denied Morgan's petition on the ground that the coram nobis petition was to be treated as a habeas corpus petition under 28 U.S.C. § 2255, which was unavailable to Morgan because he was no longer in federal custody. Morgan appealed the district court's decision to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. The case was argued before the appellate court on January 13, 1953. On February 5, 1953, the three-judge panel unanimously determined that Morgan was entitled to the writ of coram nobis and reversed the district court's decision.United States v. Morgan,  Following the appellate court's decision, the attorney's office for the United States petitioned and was granted a writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court.United States v. Morgan, .
Decision
thumb|250px|right|In a 5–4 decision, the United States Supreme Court held that federal courts have the authority to issue the writ of coram nobis to those who are no longer in custody.United States v. Morgan was argued on October 19, 1953, and decided January 4, 1954. In a 5–4 decision, the Court agreed with the Second Circuit and held that federal courts have the authority under the all-writs section of the Judicial Code to issue the writ of coram nobis to those who are no longer in custody.United States v. Morgan, . Justice Stanley Reed wrote for the majority in Morgan, which held:
 Federal District Courts, under the authority of the All-Writs Section, 28 U.S.C. § 1651(a), may issue the writ of coram nobis.Morgan, 346 U.S. at 506-510.
 A motion for a writ of coram nobis “is a step in the criminal case” and “is of the same general character as a motion under 28 U.S.C. § 2255.”Morgan, 346 U.S. at 505, n.4.
 A writ of coram nobis should be allowed only under circumstances compelling such action to achieve justice.Morgan, 346 U.S. at 511.
 If no other remedy is available and sound reasons existing for failure to seek appropriate earlier relief, a motion of the writ of coram nobis must be heard by the federal court.Morgan, 346 U.S. at 512.
 Since adverse consequences resulting from the conviction persist after conclusion of a sentence, the petitioner is entitled to show that his conviction was invalid.Morgan, 346 U.S. at 512-13.
 The writ of coram nobis may be issued to correct a constitutional violation. Thus, Morgan broadened the writ of coram nobis, which had historically been issued only to correct errors of fact, to allow courts to also correct errors of law.
Division of circuit courts
thumb|250px|right|Map of the United States Courts of Appeals Federal appellate courts are currently divided on the deadline to file an appeal of a district court's decision of a case to petition for a writ of coram nobis. Most appellate courts provide 60 days to file an appeal; two other courts provide only 10 days to file an appeal. The source of this controversy is found in footnote 4 of the Morgan decision in which the Court held the writ of coram nobis “is a step in the criminal case” and also “of the same general character as one under 28 U.S.C. § 2255.”
The Second, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, and Tenth circuit courts held that the civil time limit should apply to coram nobis appeals because the writ of coram nobis is "of the same general character" as the writ of habeas corpus under 28 U.S.C. § 2255. Habeas corpus petitions follow time limit guidelines of the civil rule which provides a 60-day time period to file an appeal.Fed.R.App.P. 4(a)(1) However, the Eighth and Ninth circuit courts held that a writ of coram nobis is governed by the criminal time limit for filing appeals because it a "step in a criminal case." Criminal rules of appellate procedure only provide a 10-day time period to file an appeal.United States v. Johnson, 
See also
Habeas corpus in the United States
Post conviction
 References 
External links
Category:1954 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Appellate review
Category:Criminal justice
"""

From "United States v. Morrison" ==> """
United States v. Morrison, 529 U.S. 598 (2000), is a U.S. Supreme Court decision that held that parts of the Violence Against Women Act of 1994 were unconstitutional because they exceeded the powers granted to the US Congress under the Commerce Clause and the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause. Along with United States v. Lopez (1995), it was part of a series of Rehnquist Court cases that limited Congress's powers under the Commerce Clause.
The case arose from a challenge to a provision of the Violence Against Women Act that provided victims of gender-motivated violence the right to sue their attackers in federal court. In a majority opinion joined by four other justices, Chief Justice William Rehnquist held that the Commerce Clause gave Congress only the power to regulate activities that were directly economic in nature, even if there were indirect economic consequences. Rehnquist also held that the Equal Protection Clause did not authorize the law because the clause applies only to acts by states, not to acts by private individuals.
In his dissenting opinion, Associate Justice David Souter argued that the majority revived an old and discredited interpretation of the Commerce Clause.
Background
In 1994, the United States Congress passed the Violence Against Women Act, which contained a provision at  for a federal civil remedy to victims of gender-based violence even if no criminal charges had been filed against the alleged perpetrator of that violence.
That fall, at Virginia Tech, freshman student, Christy Brzonkala, alleged that she was assaulted and raped repeatedly by students Antonio Morrison and James Crawford. Brzonkala initially stated that she visited Morrison and Crawford in their dormitory and they assaulted her, but later claimed that she was assaulted in her dormitory, and had never met the students until that day. During the school-conducted hearing on her complaint, Morrison admitted having sexual contact with her, but claimed that it was consensual. College proceedings failed to punish Crawford who produced an alibi witness, but initially punished Morrison with a suspension (which was later struck down by the administration). A state grand jury did not find sufficient evidence to charge either man with a crime.Taylor, Stuart. "Court to Congress: You can't regulate everything by Stuart Taylor Jr.", National Journal (1999-03-13).  Retrieved 2007-02-13.  Brzonkala then filed suit under the Violence Against Women Act.
The United States District Court for the Western District of Virginia held that Congress lacked authority to enact 42 U.S.C. § 13981. A three-judge panel of the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit reversed the decision 2–1. The Fourth Circuit reheard the case en banc and reversed the panel, upholding the district court.
Ruling
The Court's 5–4 decision invalidated the section of the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) of 1994 that gave victims of gender-motivated violence the right to sue their attackers in federal court. Chief Justice Rehnquist, writing for the majority, held that Congress lacked authority, under either the Commerce Clause or the Fourteenth Amendment, to enact that provision.
However, the Act's program funding remained unaffected.
Majority opinion
The majority opinion was that VAWA exceeded congressional power under the Commerce Clause and the Equal Protection Clause.
Commerce Clause
With regard to the Commerce Clause, the majority said that the result was controlled by United States v. Lopez (1995), which had held that the Gun-Free School Zones Act of 1990 was unconstitutional. As in Morrison, the Court had stressed "enumerated powers" that limit federal power to maintain "a distinction between what is truly national and what is truly local." Therefore, Lopez limited the scope of the Commerce Clause to exclude activity that was not directly economic in nature, even if there were indirect economic consequences.  Lopez was the first significant limitation on the Commerce Clause powers of Congress in 53 years. The Lopez court stated that Congress may regulate the use of the channels of interstate commerce, the "instrumentalities" (such as vehicles) used in interstate commerce, and activities that substantially affect interstate commerce. Because VAWA's civil remedy concededly did not regulate the first or second categories, the Court analyzed its validity under the third in Morrison.
The majority concluded that acts of violence that were meant to be remedied by VAWA had only an "attenuated," not a substantial, effect on interstate commerce. The government, however, argued that "a mountain of evidence" indicated that such acts in the aggregate had a substantial effect. For that proposition the government relied on Wickard v. Filburn (1942), which held that Congress could regulate an individual act that lacked a substantial effect on interstate commerce if, when aggregated, such acts had the required relation to interstate commerce. Once again, relying on Lopez, the majority replied that the aggregation principle of Wickard did not apply because economic effects of crimes against women were indirect and so they could not be addressed through the Commerce Clause.
The Court explained that the need to distinguish between economic activities that directly and those that indirectly affect interstate commerce was caused by "the concern that we expressed in Lopez that Congress might use the Commerce Clause to completely obliterate the Constitution's distinction between national and local authority." Referring to Lopez, the Court stated, "Were the Federal Government to take over the regulation of entire areas of traditional State concern, areas having nothing to do with the regulation of commercial activities, the boundaries between the spheres of federal and State authority would blur." The majority further stated that "it is difficult to perceive any limitation on federal power, even in areas such as criminal law enforcement or education where States historically have been sovereign."
Justice Thomas's concurring opinion also expressed the concern that "Congress [was] appropriating State police powers under the guise of regulating commerce."
The majority, quoting from NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp. (1937), stated that the scope of the interstate commerce power
Equal Protection Clause
The Court also held that Congress lacked the power to enact VAWA under the Fourteenth Amendment. It relied on the "state action" doctrine, which originated in United States v. Harris (1883) and the Civil Rights Cases (1883), and provides that the prohibitions of the Fourteenth Amendment do not constrain private individuals.
The U.S. government argued that VAWA appropriately enforced the Equal Protection Clause's ban on governmental gender discrimination. Specially, the government argued that pervasive gender stereotypes and assumptions permeated state justice systems and that such forms of state bias led to "insufficient investigation and prosecution of gender-motivated crime, inappropriate focus on the behavior and credibility of the victims of that crime, and unacceptably lenient punishments for those who are actually convicted of gender-motivated violence." That bias, the government argued, deprived women of the equal protection of the laws, and the private civil remedy of VAWA was meant to redress "both the States' bias and deter future instances of gender discrimination in the state courts."
The Court responded that even if there had been gender-based disparate treatment by state authorities in that case, precedents such as the Civil Rights Cases limit the manner in which Congress may remedy discrimination, and they require a civil remedy to be directed at a state or a state actor, not a private party. The Court stated that such precedents prohibit only action by state governments, not private conduct. In other words, the unequal enforcement of state laws caused by inaction is, by that interpretation, beyond the scope of the federal government's enforcement of the Equal Protection Clause.
The majority reaffirmed the state action doctrine and specifically reaffirmed the results reached in United States v. Harris (1883) and the Civil Rights Cases (1883), both of which were decided 15 years after the Fourteenth Amendment's ratification in 1868. In the Civil Rights Cases, the Court had held that the Equal Protection Clause applied only to acts done by states, not to acts done by private individuals.  Because the Civil Rights Act of 1875 applied to racial discrimination in private establishments, the Court decided in the Civil Rights Cases, it exceeded congressional enforcement power under section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment. In Harris, the Court ruled that the Clause did not apply to a prison lynching since the Fourteenth Amendment did not apply to private actors, only state actors. In that case, a sheriff, a state actor, had tried to prevent the lynching.
Morrison stated that "assuming that there has been gender-based disparate treatment by state authorities in this case, it would not be enough to save § 13981's civil remedy, which is directed not at a State or state actor but at individuals who have committed criminal acts motivated by gender bias." The Court agreed with the government that there was a "voluminous congressional record" supporting the "assertion that there is pervasive bias in various state justice systems against victims of gender-motivated violence." The Court also agreed with the government that "state-sponsored gender discrimination violates equal protection unless it serves important governmental objectives...." However, according to the majority, even if there is unconstitutional state action, Congress is justified in targeting only state actors, rather than private parties.
The government's argument was that VAWA had been enacted in response to "gender-based disparate treatment by state authorities." In contrast there was "no indication of such state action" in the Civil Rights Cases.  According to the Court, however, the Civil Rights Cases held that the Fourteenth Amendment did not allow Congress to target private parties to remedy the unequal enforcement of state laws. To support that interpretation of the Civil Rights Cases, the Court quoted one of the Congressmen who had supported the law that the Civil Rights Cases struck down: "There were state laws on the books bespeaking equality of treatment, but in the administration of these laws there was discrimination against newly freed slaves."  To the majority, that quote indicated that the law deemed unconstitutional in the Civil Rights Cases was meant to combat the same kind of disparate treatment against which VAWA was aimed.
The majority continued that even if the government's distinction between Morrison and the Civil Rights Cases was valid, the VAWA remained unconstitutionally aimed not at state actors but at private criminal conduct.  Under City of Boerne v. Flores (1997), the majority stated, Congress was required to adhere to the Court's interpretation of the Fourteenth Amendment, including the Court's interpretation of the state-action doctrine. The "congruence and proportionality" requirement of Boerne did not allow Congress to exceed the Court's interpretation of the Fourteenth Amendment.  Although it had been widely believed that Section Five of the Fourteenth Amendment was a "one-way ratchet" and a minimum standard, the Court's interpretation of the Equal Protection Clause,See, e.g., Stephen L. Carter, "The Morgan 'Power' and the Forced Reconsideration of Constitutional Decisions", 53 U. Chi. L. Rev. 819 (1986); William Cohen, "Congressional Power to Interpret Due Process and Equal Protection", 27 Stan L. Rev. 603 (1975). that interpretation had been rejected by the Court in Boerne  to prevent what the Court described as "a considerable congressional intrusion into the States' traditional prerogatives and general authority."
The belief that section five was a "one-way ratchet" had been based on Katzenbach v. Morgan, 384 U.S. 641 (1966), in which the Court had called that Section Five of the Fourteenth Amendment "a positive grant of legislative power authorizing Congress to exercise its discretion in determining the need for and nature of legislation to secure Fourteenth Amendment guarantees." In Morrison, the Court, as it had in Boerne, again distinguished Morgan on the ground that Morgan had involved federal legislation "directed at New York officials," instead of private parties. The Court also noted that unlike the VAWA, the legislation in Morgan "was directed only to the State where the evil found by Congress existed."
Dissenting opinions
Justice Souter, joined by Justices Stevens, Ginsburg, and Breyer, argued that enacting VAWA was well within Congress's power under the Commerce Clause and stated that the majority revived an old and discredited interpretation of the Commerce Clause. Justice Breyer, joined by Justices Stevens, Souter, and Ginsburg, argued that it was primarily the responsibility of Congress, not the courts, to put limits on Congress's power under the Commerce Clause. Joined by Justice Stevens, Justice Breyer contended that Congress had been sensitive to concerns of federalism in enacting VAWA, and he expressed doubts about the majority's pronouncements on the Fourteenth Amendment. According to the four dissenting justices, the Fourteenth Amendment and the Seventeenth Amendment "are not rips in the fabric of the Framers' Constitution, inviting judicial repairs," and amendments affecting states' rights like the Seventeenth Amendment "did not convert the judiciary into an alternate shield against the commerce power."Justice Souter’s dissent, which was joined by Justice Stevens, Justice Ginsburg, and Justice Breyer, May 15, 2000
Reactions
Morrison, like Boerne, Kimel, and Garrett, was one of a series of Rehnquist Court decisions from 1999 through 2001 holding that Congress's enumerated powers do not permit various federal civil rights laws.However, see Jonathan H. Adler, "Is Morrison Dead? Assessing a Supreme Court Drug (Law) Overdose", Lewis & Clark L. Rev. (Winter 2005) (discussing Gonzalez v. Raich) Morrison was also seen by the press as one of the Rehnquist Court's series of federalism decisions, mainly because of the Court's previous decisions in Lopez and other cases.Masters, Brooke.  "No Winners in Rape Lawsuit", The Washington Post, May 19, 2000: "Although the case started as a classic 'he said, she said,' by the time it reached the Supreme Court, U.S. v. Morrison was all about federalism, not sexual politics."
The Washington Post came out in favor of Morrison: "The court got it right. If Congress could federalize rape and assault, it's hard to think of anything it couldn't."The Washington Post, Editorial: States’ Business, (2000-05-16).  Retrieved 2007-02-13. The lawyer and writer Wendy Kaminer agreed with the courts that Congress had overstepped its bounds by invoking the Commerce Clause: "The price of upholding VAWA's civil rights remedy is an unconstitutional grant of unlimited power to Congress, power that will not always be used wisely or with regard to individual rights. We need to combat sexual violence without making a federal case of it."Kaminer, Wendy.  "", American Prospect (2000-02-14).  Retrieved 2007-02-13. Kaminer's article also stated:
"Try the common sense test: When you think of a rape in a college dormitory, do you think about interstate commerce? As the Fourth Circuit noted in Brzonkala, the relationship between sexual violence and interstate commerce is rather attenuated.... Do you want Congress to enjoy unrestricted regulatory power over you? (Do you want your divorce in federal court? Do you want Congress making local zoning decisions for your town?) The Supreme Court in Lopez rightly held that the Commerce Clause is not a grant of general police power.... This standard does not unduly limit congressional power, including the power to prohibit discrimination. It does not invalidate the Civil Rights Act of 1964: Segregation in hotels and restaurants, on transportation systems, and in the workplace involved commercial activities with clear and substantial effects upon interstate commerce." 
Professor Catharine MacKinnon criticized Morrison for relying on "implicitly patriarchal" legal reasoning. She argued that the decision reflected an attitude, pervasive in the American judicial system, of violence against women being a "domestic" issue and therefore less serious than "male issues."Catharine A. MacKinnon, "Disputing Male Sovereignty: On United States v. Morrison", 114 Harv. L. Rev. 135 (2000–2001) Professor Peter M. Shane said that the attorneys general of 36 states had endorsed the VAWA, and he argued that the endorsement "exposes one of the more bizarre aspects of the Supreme Court's recent activism on behalf of state sovereignty: From the states' point of view, this campaign is often pointless and sometimes counterproductive."Shane, Peter.  "In Whose Best Interests? Not the States", Washington Post (2000-05-21).  Also see Mauro, Tony. "States' Rights Triumph in Supreme Court Kimel Decision, Oral VAWA Argument", Legal Intelligencer (2000-01-12);  Greenhouse, Linda. "Justices Cool to Law Protecting Women", New York Times, (2000-01-12) Shane stated the 36 attorneys general had called the Violence Against Women Act "a particularly appropriate remedy for the harm caused by gender-motivated violence."
See also
 Rehnquist Court
 Congressional power of enforcement
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 529
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
Notes
External links
 Dimino, Michael. Yes, Virginia (Tech), Our Government Is One Of Limited Powers: United States v. Morrison, 120 S.Ct. 1740 (2000), 24 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 895 (2001).
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment, section five case law
Category:Violence against women in the United States
Category:Virginia Tech
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "United States v. Mouat" ==> """
United States v. Mouat, 124 U.S. 303 (1888), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the Appointments Clause. 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1888 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "United States v. Mueller" ==> """
United States v. Mueller, 113 U.S. 153 (1885), was a contracts case before the United States Supreme Court.
A contractor had been hired to furnish stone to the United States for a building, as well as to saw, cut, and dress it, all as "required". However, delays in the work had been caused by the United States arising from doubts as to the desirability of completing the building with the particular type of stone, as well as to the desirability of the site itself. Suspensions of work involved the examination of the building's foundation and the stone by several commissions.
The Court held that the contractor could recover damages for the enforced suspensions of, and delays in, the work by the United States.. As a side item, the Court held a contract to furnish "all of the dimension stone that may be required in the construction" of a building does not include dimension stone used in "the approaches or steps leading up into the building".
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Munoz-Flores" ==> """
United States v. Munoz-Flores, 495 U.S. 385 (1990), was a United States Supreme Court case that interpreted the Origination Clause of the United States Constitution. The Court was asked to rule on whether a statute that imposed mandatory monetary penalties on persons convicted of federal misdemeanors was enacted in violation of that clause, as the lower court had held.
Background
In June 1985, German Munoz-Flores was charged with and pleaded guilty to aiding the illegal entry of aliens into the United States. Both misdemeanor counts were for aiding and abetting aliens to elude examination and inspection by immigration officers.495 U.S. at 388. A provision of the federal criminal codes requires courts to impose a "special assessment" monetary penalty on any person convicted of a federal misdemeanor.18 U.S.C. §3013(a)(1).
The money accrued from the special assessments is given to the Crime Victims Fund, which was established by the Victims of Crime Act of 1984.Crime Victims Fund, 42 U.S.C. §10601. The fund uses the money for programs to both compensate and assist victims of federal crimes.
Munoz-Flores moved to correct his sentence by arguing that the special assessments ($25 per offense in his case) were unconstitutional because they violated the Origination Clause of the Constitution. The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals held in favor of Munoz-Flores.United States v. Munoz-Flores, 863 F.2d 654 (9th Cir. 1988).
Supreme Court decision
The issue at the center of the case was whether the statute requiring the special assessments conflicts with the Constitution. The Origination Clause states, "All Bills for raising Revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives...."U.S. Const., Art. I, §7, cl. 1. The Court was tasked with deciding whether the special assessments statute qualified as a "bill for raising revenue," per the Origination Clause.
In an opinion by Justice Marshall, the Court relied on precedent to find that the special assessments should not be considered a revenue bill.See Twin City Bank v. Nebeker, 167 U.S. 196, 202 (1897). The Court stated that as a general rule, a statute that establishes a federal program and raises revenue to support that program does not violate the Constitution. The Court differentiated that type of revenue from a statute raising revenue to support government generally. Justice Marshall wrote, "Although the House certainly can refuse to pass a bill because it violates the Origination Clause, the ability does not absolve this Court of its responsibility to consider constitutional challenges to congressional enactments."495 U.S. at 392. He continued, "A law passed in violation of the Origination Clause would thus be no more immune from judicial scrutiny because it was passed by both houses and signed by the President than would a law passed in violation of the First Amendment."495 U.S. at 397. Thus, the Court made it clear that despite the finding that the special assessment was not a revenue bill, even if it had been a revenue bill and then had subsequently been passed by both houses, it would still be subject to judicial review of its legality.
Justice Stevens's concurrence
Justice Stevens filed a concurring opinion in the case in which he argued that a bill can originate unconstitutionally but still become an enforceable law if it is passed by both houses of Congress and signed by the President. Justice Stevens argued that it was unnecessary for the Court to decide whether the statute was passed in violation of the Origination Clause because it passed both houses of Congress and was signed by the President. He rested the argument on the fact that while the Origination Clause provides for how Congress and the President should go about enacting laws, it is silent as to what the consequences should be for an improper origination.
 References 
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:United States political question doctrine case law
Category:Origination Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Compensation for victims of crime
"""

From "United States v. National Treasury Employees Union" ==> """
United States v. National Treasury Employees Union, 513 U.S. 454 (1995), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that Section 501(b) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 violates the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.
 Background 
Congress amended the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 with the Ethics Reform Act of 1989 (). In section 501(b), Congress prohibited its members, federal officers, and other government employees from "accepting an honorarium for making an appearance, speech, or writing an article."
The National Treasury Employees Union challenged this section as an unconstitutional violation of the First Amendment's freedom of speech protection. The District Court held the honorarium ban unconstitutional and enjoined the government from enforcing it. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit affirmed the District Court's holding.
 Opinion of the Court 
Associate Justice John Paul Stevens authored the majority opinion. Citing the test put forward in Pickering v. Board of Education of Township High School District 205, the Court found that the restriction put in place in Section 501(b) of the Act "constitutes a wholesale deterrent to a broad category of expression by a massive number of potential speakers" requiring an even greater burden than that put forward in Pickering.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1995 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Navajo Nation (2003)" ==> """
United States v. Navajo Nation,  537 U.S. 488 (2003) was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Navajo Nation initiated proceedings alleging that the Secretary of the Interior had breached their fiduciary duty to the Tribe by not acting in the Tribe's best interests.
 Conclusion 
Citing Mitchell II the court found that "The IMLA and its implementing regulations impose no obligations resembling the detailed fiduciary responsibilities that Mitchell II found adequate to support a claim for money damages", reversing the judgment of the United States Court of Appeals and remanding the case.
 See also 
 United States v. Navajo Nation (2009)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 References 
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:Navajo Nation
"""

From "United States v. Navajo Nation (2009)" ==> """
United States v. Navajo Nation, 556 U.S. 287 (2009) was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Navajo Nation initiated proceedings in the Court of Federal Claims alleging that when they sought the assistance of the United States Secretary of the Interior to renegotiate their original leasing agreement with the Peabody Coal Company in 1984, a procedural process defined by the 1964 Indian Mineral Leasing Act (IMLA) of 1938, the United States Secretary of the Interior had been improperly influenced by the coal company, and as a result, had breached his fiduciary duty to the Nation when he approved the 1987 lease amendments.
 Background 
The Indian Mineral Leasing Act (IMLA) of 1938 was brought to the attention of the Navajo people in 1964 when the Navajo Nation entered into an agreement with a third party to lease a substantial portion of Navajo land for coal mining.. The Navajo Nation complained that the United States acted in the interests of a coal mining company, and not in the interests of the Navajo Nation, when negotiating the rate of royalty payments owed on coal mined from Navajo land. The Court of Federal Claims dismissed the complaint, ruling that although the United States had breached its fiduciary obligations to the Navajo Nation, this breach was not actionable because the United States did not have a trust relationship with the Navajo Nation and monetary relief was not available. The court of appeals reversed, holding (1) that a trust relationship existed and exists with the Navajo Nation, and (2) monetary damages are an available remedy for breach of this trust.
 Questions presented 
 Whether the court of appeals’ holding that the United States breached fiduciary duties in connection with the Navajo coal lease amendments is foreclosed by Navajo?
 Is the United States liable to the Navajo Nation for up to $600 million in damages for breach of fiduciary duty in connection with the Secretary's actions concerning an Indian mineral lease?
 Did the Secretary violate any specific statutory or regulatory duty established pursuant to the IMLA?
 Issues 
Whether the U.S. may be held liable for a breach of fiduciary duty with an Indian Tribe in connection with the negotiation of a mining lease, even when the U.S. has violated no specific statutory or regulatory duty established in the Indian Mineral Leasing Act of 1938?
 Facts 
The Navajo Nation is the biggest reservation in the United States, and extends into the states of Utah, Arizona and New Mexico, covering over . Diné Bikéyah, or Navajoland, is larger than 10 of the 50 states in America. The Navajo Nation's (“the Nation’s”) reservation lands contain a vast amount of coal, which is held in trust for the Nation by the federal government. The Nation and the predecessor in interest to the Peabody Western Coal Company (“Peabody”) entered into a lease for access to the Nation's mineral exchange for money. The lease was approved by the Secretary of the Interior with insight that there needs to be reasonable adjustments at the end of the term by the Secretary. While the appeal was pending, both Peabody and Nation anticipated a ruling in favor of the Nation.
 Conclusion 
The Court ruled that an Indian Tribe must "identify a substantive source of law that establishes specific fiduciary or other duties." The 6-3 opinion by Justice Antonin Scalia held that the IMLA could not be interpreted to require the Secretary to exercise broad authority to manage the tribe's resources for the tribe's benefit. Instead, the tribe itself controls negotiations and the Secretary has a more limited role in approving the agreements. The Court concluded that no provision of the IMLA entitled the tribe to monetary damages as a result of the government's role in the negotiations. Justice Souter, joined by justices Stevens and O'Connor, wrote a dissent arguing that the Secretary's approval power must be exercised for the tribe's benefit, and monetary damages may be awarded if that power is misused.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 556
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Barnhart v. Peabody Coal Co.
References
 External links 
 [ Supreme Court docket]
 [ Oral arguments transcript]
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:Navajo Nation
Category:Peabody Energy
"""

From "United States v. New Wrinkle, Inc." ==> """
United States v. New Wrinkle, Inc., 342 U.S. 371 (1952),.  is a 1952 Supreme Court decision in which the Court held that a claim of conspiracy to fix uniform minimum prices and to eliminate competition throughout substantially all of the wrinkle finish industry of the United States by means of patent license agreements was, if proved, a violation of § 1 of the Sherman Act. That one of the defendants, a patent-holding company, abstained from manufacturing activities, did not ship goods in commerce, and engaged solely in patent licensing did not insulate its activity from § 1. Making these license contracts for the purpose of regulating distribution and fixing prices of commodities in interstate commerce is subject to the Sherman Act, even though the isolated act of contracting for the licenses occurs within a single state. Patents give no protection from the prohibitions of the Sherman Act when the patent licensing agreements are used to restrain interstate commerce and fix prices of goods shipped in commerce.
Background
Before and during 1937, two paint companies, Kay & Ess and Chadeloid Chemical Co., were in patent litigation with each other. Each company claimed that it controlled the basic patents on wrinkle finish,Wrinkle–finish enamels, varnishes, and paints are manufactured in a manner such that, when they are applied to metal or another material and allowed to dry, they form a hard, wrinkled surface on the metal or other material. The patents cover methods and chemicals for making such enamels, varnishes and paints. 342 U.S. at 372 n.3. and each company contended that the patents of the other could not be used without infringing its own patents. In November 1937 they decided to settle the litigation by forming a new, jointly–owned company, New Wrinkle, to which they assigned their patents. They agreed that they would license the wrinkle–finish industry to make and sell at fixed prices. Kay & Ess and Chadeloid then worked together to induce all manufacturers of wrinkle finish products to accept the price-fixing patent licenses from New Wrinkle. The prospective licensees were assured that the other manufacturers were being dealt with on the same basis "in order to establish minimum prices throughout the industry." By September 1938 the leading manufacturing companies and some 200 other manufacturers—substantially all manufacturers of wrinkle finishes in the United States—held nearly identical ten-year extendable license agreements from New Wrinkle, fixing prices. These license agreements required that a licensee observe in all sales of products covered by the licensed patents a schedule of minimum prices, discounts, and selling terms. Unlike its organizers, Kay & Ess and Chadeloid, New Wrinkle does not manufacture and sell the patented products. It just owns and licenses the patents.342 U.S. at 373–76.
The United States sued Kay & Ess, Chadeloid, and New Wrinkle in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Ohio, for conspiring to fix uniform minimum prices and to eliminate competition throughout the wrinkle–finish industry, in violation of § 1 of the Sherman Act. The defendants filed motions to dismiss, which the district court granted without issuing any opinion. The United States appealed to the Supreme Court.
Ruling of the Supreme Court
thumb|right|200px|Justice Reed delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court
Justice Stanley Reed delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court.Justice Tom C. Clark, who had been Attorney General when the case was filed, recused himself.
Because New Wrinkle, unlike Kay & Ess and Chadeloid, did not manufacture or sell the patented products, and just owned and licensed the pooled patents, New Wrinkle contended that it is not engaged in trade or commerce—and thus could not be held liable for restraining trade and commerce under § 1 of the Sherman Act. "These contentions leave out of consideration," the Court responded, the allegations that "the use of patent licenses as an essential part of the plan to restrain trade, a trade in enamels, varnishes, and paints that is alleged to be and obviously is interstate in character." Pointing to the price-fixing provisions of the licenses, the Court said that it is "beyond question that this making of license contracts for the purpose of regulating distribution and fixing prices of commodities in interstate commerce is subject to the Sherman Act, even though the isolated act of contracting for the licenses is wholly within a single state."342 U.S. at 377.
New Wrinkle next argued that the doctrine of United States v. General Electric Co..—the 1926 GE case—immunized the price fixing from the antitrust laws. The Court distinguished the GE case from the case at bar: In the GE case, a patentee licensed a single other manufacturer to make and sell the patented product with a price limitation controlled by the patentee. In the present case, a patentee, acting in concert with all members of an industry, issued substantially identical licenses to all members of the industry under the terms of which the industry is completely regimented in order to organize the industry and stabilize prices. The Court said the case was indistinguishable from United States v. Line Material Co.,. and United States v. United States Gypsum Co.,. which held such conduct illegal.342 U.S. at 380.
Subsequent developments
In Newburgh Moire Co. v. Superior Moire Co., the Third Circuit held that price-fixing clauses in multiple patent licenses violated the Sherman Act. Newburgh entered into licensing agreements with three of the five manufacturers in the moire finish industry, containing price-fixing clauses. The court held that the fact that there was more than one price-fixing license (in contrast to the single such license in the General Electric case) made the licenses fall outside the range of protected behavior that the General Electric case allowed. The Third Circuit explained:
At worst, we think that the patent laws were not intended to empower a patentee to grant a plurality of licenses, each containing provisions fixing the price at which the licensee might sell the product or process . . . and that, if a plurality of licenses are granted, such provisions therein are prohibited by the antitrust laws. The course pursued by Newburgh in the case at bar transcends the authority of the General Electric decision.237 F.2d at 293-94.
Despite the differences in the fact patterns (multiple licenses, pooling, cross-licensing), the court said it saw no difference between the General Electric and New Wrinkle cases, so that the latter must be regarded as overruling the former: "We can find no very strong basis for distinguishing between General Electric and New Wrinkle. The explanation probably lies more in history than in logic, for history is an untidy housekeeper."237 F.2d at 293
References
External links
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:1952 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. New York Telephone Co." ==> """
United States v. New York Telephone Co., 434 U.S. 159 (1977), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that law enforcement officials may obtain a court order forcing telephone companies to install pen registers in order to record the numbers called from a particular telephone.
 Background 
The Federal Bureau of Investigation suspected that a particular location in the Gramercy Park neighborhood of Manhattan homed a gambling operation, and asked the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York to order the New York Telephone Company to install a pen register. On March 19, 1976 District Court Judge Charles Henry Tenney did, finding probable cause of illegal gambling, authorized the installation of the pen register for up to twenty days, and ordered the telephone company to provide the necessary technical assistance required to install the pen register. The telephone company moved to vacate that order, arguing that a more specific wiretap order was required under Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968. On April 2 Judge Tenney denied the motion, and the company assisted in the installation of the pen register, but appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
On July 13 the Second Circuit agreed in part, holding that pen registers didn't fall under the provisions of Title III, and that the district court had the power to authorize their use under the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. However, Judges Harold Medina and Wilfred Feinberg also concluded that the district court had overstepped in ordering the company to provide technical assistance for their installation, provoking a dissent by Judge Walter R. Mansfield.Application of the United States in re Pen Register Order, 536 F. 2d 956 (CA2 1976). The case was appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States.  On October 3, 1977 the case was argued before the Supreme Court, with Deputy Solicitor General Lawrence G. Wallace appearing for the Government and George E. Ashley appearing for the respondent.https://www.oyez.org/cases/1977/76-835 
Opinion of the Court
On December 7, 1977, the Court reversed the lower court.  Writing for the Court, Justice Byron White first agreed that pen registers were not subject to the Title III restrictions on wiretap orders and that the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure allowed courts to use pen registers.United States v. New York Telephone Co., 434 U.S. 159 (1977) at 167, citing S. Rep. No. 1097, 90th Cong., 2d Sess., 90 (1968)  However, the All Writs Act gave the district court the power to order assistance from the telephone company.  Under the Act, issuing an extraordinary writ will be necessary or appropriate whenever it prevents the frustration of the court's previous orders.United States v. New York Telephone Co., 434 U.S. 159 at 173 citing FTC v. Dean Foods Co., 284 U.S. 597 (1966).  Therefore, this power extends even to third parties if they are in a position to frustrate the court's orders.United States v. New York Telephone Co., 434 U.S. 159 at 174 citing lower court opinions.
Ordering assistance from the telephone company was appropriate under the All Writs Act because the company was closely related to the underlying controversy, it was not in any way burdened by providing assistance, and its assistance was necessary to the surveillance.  Because the gambling operation was using the telephone to place illegal bets on a continuing basis, Justice White found the company was closely related to the controversy.United States v. New York Telephone Co., 434 U.S. 159 at 174.  Justice White found the company was not in any way burdened by providing “meager assistance” to the FBI because the company was a highly regulated public utility that regularly used pen registers, even just for billing.  Finally, Justice White found the court's order had been necessary because there was "no conceivable way" the FBI could have successfully accomplished its investigation without assistance from the telephone company and, regardless, the company had received financial compensation.United States v. New York Telephone Co., 434 U.S. 159 at 175 fn. 24 citing Babington v. Yellow Taxi Corp., 250 N.Y. 14, 17, 164 N.E. 726, 727 (1928) (Benjamin N. Cardozo, C.J.) (discussing the Hue and cry).
Dissents
Justice Potter Stewart wrote a concurrence in part and dissent in part to clarify that he agreed with all of the majority's opinion except for its discussion of the All Writs Act, and that he agreed with that part of Justice Stevens dissent on the All Writs Act.
Justice John Paul Stevens, joined by Justices William J. Brennan, Jr. and Thurgood Marshall dissented from all of the majority's opinion except for the holding that pen registers are not wiretaps.  Justice Stevens believed the only precedence for the court forcing assistance from the telephone company was the reviled writ of assistance.United States v. New York Telephone Co., 434 U.S. 159 at 180 fn. 3 (Stevens, J., dissenting) citing N. Lasson, The History and Development of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution 51-55 (1937).  Justice Stevens could not believe the First Congress would have granted federal courts a "roving commission" with “the wide ranging powers of an ombudsman” because writs of assistance were “one British practice that the Revolution was specifically intended to terminate”.United States v. New York Telephone Co., 434 U.S. 159 at 180 fn. 4 (Stevens, J., dissenting) citing Stanford v. Texas, 379 U.S. 476 (1965); Fraenkel, Concerning Searches and Seizures, 34 Harv. L. Rev. 361 (1921).
Justice Stevens saw the “open-ended grant of authority” in the majority's reading of the All Writs Act as fundamentally inconsistent with federal court's limited jurisdiction.United States v. New York Telephone Co., 434 U.S. 159 at 87 fn. 16 (Stevens, J., dissenting) citing Ex parte Bollman, 4 Cranch 75 (1807).  As such, the dissenters believed the All Writs Act would only authorize a court order if its purpose is to aid the court's exercise of jurisdiction and the means selected are analogous to a common-law writ.
Justice Stevens remained resolute in his critique; a quarter century later in Syngenta Crop Protection, Inc. v. Henson,  he was still calling to “expressly overrule that misguided decision”.
Subsequent developments
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) was passed in 1986 (Pub. L. No. 99-508, 100 Stat. 1848). Title III created the Pen Register Act, which included restrictions on private and law enforcement uses of pen registers.
The case has been relied on by the government in the 2016 FBI–Apple encryption dispute, that an All Writs Act order could be granted if it followed three tests: the company's closeness to the case; whether the government's request places an undue burden; and whether the company's assistance was necessary.Cyrus Farivar (Feb 25, 2016) Apple tells court it would have to create “GovtOS” to comply with ruling Arcs Technia
 References 
External links
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Gramercy Park
"""

From "United States v. Nice" ==> """
United States v. Nice, 241 U.S. 591 (1916), is a United States Supreme Court decision which declared that Congress still retains plenary power to protect Native American interests when Native Americans are granted citizenship. United States v. Nice overruled the Heff decision which declared that Native Americans granted citizenship by the Dawes Act were also then citizens of the state in which they resided, meaning the sale of alcohol to such Native Americans was not subject to Congress's authority.Smith, Michael. “The History of Indian Citizenship.” Great Plains Journal. 10.1 (Fall 1970): 33–35. Print.
Facts
thumb|left|The first page of the Dawes Act
In 1897, an amendment to the Indian Appropriations Act banned the sale of alcohol to Indians. Citizenship of the parties involved was never clarified. In the Supreme Court case Matter of Heff, the decision clarified that a Native American granted citizenship through the Dawes Act is immediately a citizen of the U.S. and his state. The 1897 amendment banning alcohol was considered a police statute, where power lies with the state and not Congress, and therefore would not apply to such a citizen. Representative of South Dakota, Charles H. Burke, saw the need to correct the situation in order to protect Native Americans from the sale of liquor. He amended the Dawes Act so that citizenship was only granted to a Native with an allotment after the trust period ran out (usually 25 years Canby Jr., William. American Indian Law In a Nut Shell, 4th edition. West Group, 2004. (21) Print.). This amendment was meant to allow Congress to continue to safeguard Indians’ personal welfare. However, those who received allotments before the amendment was signed into law on May 8, 1906, were still considered state citizens and not subject to federal authority except when concerning their land.  The amendment only put the alcohol ban into effect for Natives receiving allotments after May 8, 1906. When Fred Nice was indicted for selling alcohol to a Native American who received an allotment before 1906, he was acquitted in a lower court using the Heff decision as his defense, but the U.S. appealed, represented by Assistant Attorney General Warren.  Warren argued that the Pelican Case,  proved federal authority and overruled the Heff decision.
Holding
The court held that congress would retain plenary power to protect Native Americans.  Such plenary power is based on "the clause in the Constitution expressly investing Congress with authority 'to regulate commerce . . . with the Indian tribes,'" and the perceived dependence of tribes on the United States.  This decision meant the federal government could regulate Indian alcohol policy through the commerce clause and state powers could regulate Indian alcohol policy through the power of the police to regulate the conduct of citizens.  The major ruling is summed up by the following quote:
“Citizenship is not incompatible with tribal existence or continued guardianship, and so may be conferred without completely emancipating the Indians, or placing them beyond the reach of congressional regulations adopted for their protection.”.
The decision was based on a complete review of the Dawes Act which found that congress must have wanted to continue the ward- guardian relationship because it retained control over Indian money to look over “education and civilization.”   The ruling in United States v. Nice overruled the Heff decision, claiming it was "Not well grounded."  The decision also references United States v. Holliday  to show Congress's ability to regulate commerce.  Another reference is made to United States v. Kagama to show the dependence of tribes on the United States.  A similar situation in the case United States v. Sandoval is referenced to show that citizenship of the Indian party is not relevant to the issue of Congress's authority.
Implications
thumb|right|Woodrow Wilson addressed Native Americans on their progress towards civilization in 1913.
The legal position of Native Americans during the time of the case could be compared to that of a Minor. Minors are citizens with guardians and have special laws applying only to them. Native Americans were set to have congress as a guardian.  This status stemmed from the view of Native Americans as an inferior race which was put into legal terms in the case Johnson v. M'Intosh.Duthu, Bruce. American Indians and the Law. New York: Penguin Books, 2008. (73) Print.  Native Americans were viewed as unable to resist or handle alcohol.Miller, Robert J. "The 'Drunken Indian': Myth Distilled into Reality Through Federal Indian Alcohol Policy." Arizona State Law Journal. 28.223 (Spring 1996)  Congress viewed United States citizenship as a method of civilizing Native Americans.Wilkins, David E. American Indian Sovereignty and the U.S. Supreme Court: The Masking of Justice. University of Texas Press, 1997. (119) Print.  The treatment of citizenship in United States v. Nice implies the inferiority of Indians and allows for individual liberties of Native Americans to be restricted based on such an implication.Wilkins, David E. American Indian Sovereignty and the U.S. Supreme Court: The Masking of Justice. University of Texas Press, 1997. (136) Print.
Effects
United States v. Nice was referenced in the case United States v. Mazurie to support the court's decision to uphold a conviction of selling alcohol in Indian Country against non-Indians on the Wind River Reservation who had been denied a tribal liquor license.. United States v. Nice upheld Congressional power to regulate any commercial transaction involving individual Indians or a tribe,Ott, Brian R. "Indian Fishing Rights in the Pacific Northwest: The Need for Federal Intervention." Boston College Environmental Affairs Law Review. 14.313 (Winter 1987) wherever situated, and to regulate the introduction of alcoholic beverages into Indian country.
In his book American Indian Sovereignty and the U.S. Supreme Court: The Masking of Justice, David E. Wilkins claims that the decision in United States v. Nice "Muffled rights of individual Indians as federal citizens."  The court's decision continued the contradictory treatment of Native Americans with the incongruous ideas of Indians as dependent people in need of protection and Indians as United States Citizens.Wilkins, David E. American Indian Sovereignty and the U.S. Supreme Court: The Masking of Justice. University of Texas Press, 1997. (118) Print.
United States v. Nice upheld the plenary power of Congress.  The nearly unlimited power of Congress to adjust Indian rights still exists today.  However, in the late 1960s and 1970s, congressional leadership began to see Indian policy in a new light.  The past half century has seen a surge of laws favorable to Indians which allow tribes much more influence over their own futures.Wilkinson, Charles. Blood Struggle: The Rise of Modern Indian Nations. New York: Norton & Company, 2005. (242) Print. In fact, some Native Tribes, including the Yakama Nation, have banned alcohol on their reservations through acts of tribal sovereignty.Haupt, Robert J. "Never Lay a Salmon on the Ground with his Heas Toward the River": State of Washington Sues Yakamas over Alcohol Ban. American Indian Law Review. 26.67 (2001)
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States Native American case law
Category:1916 in United States case law
Category:Alcohol and Native Americans
"""

From "United States v. Ninety-Five Barrels Alleged Apple Cider Vinegar" ==> """
United States v. Ninety-Five Barrels Alleged Apple Cider Vinegar, 265 U.S. 438 (1924), was an in rem case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that apple cider vinegar is mislabeled when that vinegar is made from dried apples.. The label at issue indicated that the vinegar was made from "selected" apples. Douglas Packing Company, the manufacturer, admitted to dehydrating fresh apples and then rehydrating the apples with pure water to produce vinegar.
Additional chemicals were used in the manufacturing process for vinegar made from dried apples, but neither party alleged that this affected the vinegar. Other than this and the difference in apples, the manufacturing process was the same. The trial judge, who tried samples of the vinegar at issue and apple cider vinegar made from fresh apples, concluded that there were only slight differences in appearance and taste. Chemical comparison yielded similar results for both liquids.
There was no claim that vinegar from dried apples was of inferior quality. However, the court found first that the dried apple vinegar was not identical to vinegar as commonly understood—that produced from fresh ingredients. Second, fresh apples contain the apple juice that is normally used in the production of apple cider vinegar, whereas Douglas Packing used water as a substitute ingredient. Finally, the court found that "made from selected apples" misled the reader into thinking that the apples were fresh instead of dried. These three issues—an imitation under the same name, false or misleading ingredient listing, and misleading labelling—were all a part of the Pure Food and Drug Act section defining "misbranded". For this reason, the Supreme Court found that the apple cider was misbranded under the statute.
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 265
 References 
External links
Category:1924 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
Category:United States in rem cases
Category:Vinegar
Category:Food law
Category:Apple production
"""

From "United States v. Nixon" ==> """
United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683 (1974), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court unanimously ordered President Richard Nixon to deliver tape recordings and other subpoenaed materials related to the Watergate scandal to a federal district court. Decided on July 24, 1974, the ruling was important to the late stages of the Watergate scandal, amidst an ongoing process to impeach Richard Nixon. United States v. Nixon is considered a crucial precedent limiting the power of any U.S. president to claim executive privilege.
Chief Justice Warren E. Burger wrote the opinion for a unanimous court, joined by Justices William O. Douglas, William J. Brennan, Potter Stewart, Byron White, Thurgood Marshall, Harry Blackmun and Lewis F. Powell. Burger, Blackmun, and Powell were appointed to the Court by Nixon during his first term. Associate Justice William Rehnquist recused himself as he had previously served in the Nixon administration as an Assistant Attorney General.
 Summary 
The case arose out of the Watergate scandal, which began during the 1972 presidential campaign between President Nixon and his Democratic challenger, Senator George McGovern of South Dakota. On June 17, 1972, about five months before the election, five men broke into Democratic National Committee headquarters located in the Watergate Office Building in Washington, D.C.; these men were later found to have ties with the Nixon administration.
In May 1973, Attorney General Elliot Richardson appointed Archibald Cox to the position of special prosecutor, charged with investigating the break-in. Later that year, on October 20, Nixon ordered that Cox be fired, precipitating the immediate departures of both Richardson and Deputy Attorney General William Ruckelshaus in what became known as the "Saturday Night Massacre". Cox's firing kindled a firestorm of protest, forcing Nixon to appoint a new special prosecutor, Leon Jaworski.
In April 1974, Jaworski obtained a subpoena ordering Nixon to release certain tapes and papers related to specific meetings between the President and those indicted by the grand jury. Those tapes and the conversations they revealed were believed to contain damaging evidence involving the indicted men and perhaps the President himself.
Hoping that Jaworski and the public would be satisfied, Nixon turned over edited transcripts of 43 conversations, including portions of 20 conversations demanded by the subpoena. James D. St. Clair, Nixon's attorney, then requested Judge John Sirica of the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia to quash the subpoena. While arguing before Sirica, St. Clair stated that:
The President wants me to argue that he is as powerful a monarch as Louis XIV, only four years at a time, and is not subject to the processes of any court in the land except the court of impeachment.
Sirica denied Nixon's motion and ordered the President to turn the tapes over by May 31.United States v. Mitchell,  Both Nixon and Jaworski appealed directly to the Supreme Court, which heard arguments on July 8. Nixon's attorney argued the matter should not be subject to "judicial resolution" since the matter was a dispute within the executive branch and the branch should resolve the dispute itself. Also, he claimed Special Prosecutor Jaworski had not proven the requested materials were absolutely necessary for the trial of the seven men. Besides, he claimed Nixon had an absolute executive privilege to protect communications between "high Government officials and those who advise and assist them in carrying out their duties."
 Opinion of the Court 
Less than three weeks after oral arguments, the Court issued its decision.
On July 9, the day following oral arguments, all eight justices (Justice William H. Rehnquist recused himself due to his close association with several Watergate conspirators, including Attorneys General John Mitchell and Richard Kleindienst, prior to his appointment to the Court) indicated to each other that they would rule against the president.Bob Woodward and Scott Armstrong, The Brethren, p. 368. The justices struggled to settle on an opinion that all eight could agree to, however, with the major issue being how much of a constitutional standard could be established for what executive privilege meant.
Burger's first draft was deemed problematic and insufficient by the rest of the Court, leading the other Justices to criticize and re-write major parts of the draft. The final draft would eventually heavily incorporate Justice Blackmun's re-writing of Facts of the Case, Justice Douglas' appealability section, Justice Brennan's thoughts on standing, Justice White's standards on admissibility and relevance, and Justices Powell and Stewart's interpretation of the executive privilege.Woodward, p. 377
The stakes were so high, in that the tapes most likely contained evidence of criminal wrongdoing by the President and his men, that they wanted no dissent.Woodward, p. 412 Despite the Chief Justice's hostility to allowing the other Justices to participate in the drafting of the opinion, the final version was agreed to on July 23, the day before the decision was announced, and would contain the work of all the Justices.Woodward, p. 413 The Court's opinion found that the courts could indeed intervene on the matter and that Special Counsel Jaworski had proven a "sufficient likelihood that each of the tapes contains conversations relevant to the offenses charged in the indictment". While the Court acknowledged that the principle of executive privilege did exist, the Court would also directly reject President Nixon's claim to an "absolute, unqualified Presidential privilege of immunity from judicial process under all circumstances."
The Court held that a claim of Presidential privilege as to materials subpoenaed for use in a criminal trial cannot override the needs of the judicial process if that claim is based, not on the ground that military or diplomatic secrets are implicated, but merely on the ground of a generalized interest in confidentiality. 
It concluded that "when the ground for asserting of the privilege as to subpoenaed materials, sought for use in a criminal trial, is based solely on the generalized interest in confidentiality as distinguished from the situations whereat maybe based upon military secret or diplomatic secrets, it cannot prevail over the fundamental demands of due process of law in the fair administration of criminal justice."
Nixon was then ordered to deliver the subpoenaed materials to the District Court.
Nixon resigned sixteen days later, on August 9, 1974.
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:United States executive privilege case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Watergate scandal
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Trials of political people
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "United States v. O'Brien" ==> """
United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968), was a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court, ruling that a criminal prohibition against burning a draft card did not violate the First Amendment's guarantee of free speech. Though the court recognized that O'Brien's conduct was expressive as a protest against the Vietnam War, it considered the law justified by a significant government interest unrelated to the suppression of speech and was tailored towards that end.
O'Brien upheld the government's power to prosecute what was becoming a pervasive method of anti-war protest. Its more significant legacy, however, was its application of a new constitutional standard. The test articulated in O'Brien has been subsequently used by the court to analyze whether laws that have the effect of regulating speech, though are ostensibly neutral towards the content of that speech, violate the First Amendment. Though the O'Brien test has rarely invalidated laws that the court has found to be "content neutral", it has given those engaging in expressive conduct—from wearing of black armbands to burning of flags— an additional tool to invoke against prohibitions.
Background of the case
Draft cards under the Selective Service Act
In 1948, the United States instituted a peace-time draft with the Universal Military Training and Service Act (also called the Selective Service Act), which required all male American citizens to register with a local draft board upon reaching the age of 18. In 1965, Congress amended the act to prohibit the willful destruction of "draft cards" or registration certificates. These were small white cards bearing the registrant's identifying information, the date and place of registration, and his Selective Service number, which indicated his state of registration, local board, birth year, and his chronological position in the local board's classification record.
The act had already required all eligible men to carry the certificate at all times, and prohibited alterations that would perpetrate a forgery or fraud. The 1965 amendment, however, made it a separate crime under 50 U.S.C. § 462(b)(3) to "knowingly destroy" or "knowingly mutilate" the card. This amendment was passed at a time when public burnings of draft cards to protest the Vietnam War were a growing phenomenon, many observers (including the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit) believed that Congress had intentionally targeted such protesters.
O'Brien's protest and conviction
On the morning of March 31, 1966, David Paul O'Brien and three companions burned their draft cards on the steps of the South Boston Courthouse, in front of a crowd that happened to include several FBI agents. After the four men came under attack from some of the crowd, an FBI agent ushered O'Brien inside the courthouse and advised him of his rights. O'Brien proudly confessed to the agent and produced the charred remains of the certificate. He was subsequently indicted for violating § 462(b)(3) and put on trial in the U.S. District Court for the District of Massachusetts.The facts of O'Brien's protest, arrest, and trial are summarized in the Supreme Court's opinion, United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367, 369-70 (1968).
O'Brien insisted on representing himself at his trial and argued that the act was unconstitutional. He explained to the jury that he burned the draft card publicly to persuade others to oppose the war, "so that other people would reevaluate their positions with Selective Service, with the armed forces, and reevaluate their place in the culture of today, to hopefully consider my position". O'Brien was convicted and sentenced to the maximum of six years, as a "youth offender" under the now-repealed Youth Corrections Act, which submitted him to the custody of the Attorney General "for supervision and treatment".
Appeal
On appeal, the First Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that the 1965 amendment ran afoul of the First Amendment because it singled out "persons engaging in protest for special treatment".376 F.2d at 541.  The court's decision was written by Chief Judge Bailey Aldrich, and joined by Judges McEntee and Coffin. However, although O'Brien could not be convicted for protesting, the First Amendment could not protect him from being required to carry a draft card. The court believed that all the factual issues necessary for a "nonpossession" conviction had been fully litigated, and so affirmed his conviction on that basis and remanded for appropriate resentencing.Id. at 541-42.
Both O'Brien and the United States petitioned for review by the Supreme Court, with the government in United States v. O'Brien (No. 232) challenging the lower court's invalidation of § 462(b)(3) and O'Brien challenging in the nonpossession conviction in O'Brien v. United States (No. 233). The court decided both actions together and, in a 7–1 decision, upheld the constitutionality of § 462(b)(3), vacated the First Circuit's decision and reinstated O'Brien's sentence. O'Brien had also argued to the court that the First Circuit had unconstitutionally sustained his conviction for a crime of which he was neither convicted nor tried, and much of the court's questioning of the government during oral argument challenged this ruling. However, with that decision vacated, the court did not reach that issue.
Supreme Court's decision
Chief Justice Earl Warren's decision for the court rejected O'Brien's argument that the 1965 amendment to § 462(b)(3) was only passed to stifle the speech of anti-war protesters.  The law did not restrict speech on its face, but instead only addressed conduct that was not necessarily expressive, and applied without regard to whether the draft card was destroyed in private or before an audience. It also did not matter to the court if Congress had passed it with the intention of stifling protest, as long as it could be justified on another basis; Chief Justice Warren declared that "this Court will not strike down an otherwise constitutional statute on the basis of an alleged illicit legislative motive".391 U.S. at 383.
Despite finding that § 462(b)(3) only prohibited conduct, the court continued its First Amendment inquiry to determine whether the rule was unduly restrictive of the element of O'Brien's conduct that was expressive. The court plainly questioned whether this communicative element was "sufficient to bring into play the First Amendment" in O'Brien's case.391 U.S. at 376. Nevertheless, Justice Harlan, in his concurring opinion, recognized this as the "crux" of the court's decision.391 U.S. at 388.
Warren wrote that when a regulation prohibits conduct that combines "speech" and "nonspeech" elements, "a sufficiently important governmental interest in regulating the nonspeech element can justify incidental limitations on First Amendment freedoms". The regulation must
 be within the constitutional power of the government to enact,
 further an important or substantial government interest,
 that interest must be unrelated to the suppression of speech (or "content neutral", as later cases have phrased it), and
 prohibit no more speech than is essential to further that interest.
The court ruled that § 462(b)(3) satisfied this test.391 U.S. at 376-77.
First, the law was, to the court, unquestionably within the "broad and sweeping" constitutional powers of Congress under Article I to "raise and support armies" by "classify[ing] and conscript[ing] manpower for military service". Under the second prong of the test, the issuance of registration certificates was regarded as a "legitimate and substantial administrative aid" in the functioning of the draft system, as were laws that insured the "continuing availability" of issued draft cards. The court rejected O'Brien's characterization of the draft cards as nothing more than a superfluous notification of registration. Instead, the cards advanced "the smooth and proper functioning of the system" through functions such as providing proof of registration, facilitating contact between the registrant and draft board, reminding the registrant of the need to notify the board of changes of address, and further preventing fraud or forgery.  Third, the registration and raising of troops was unrelated to the suppression of speech. And fourth, the court saw "no alternative means" by which the government could ensure that draft cards would continue to be available than a law that prohibited their willful destruction.
Both the government's interest and § 462(b)(3), Warren wrote, "are limited to the noncommunicative aspect of O'Brien's conduct. The governmental interest and the scope of the 1965 Amendment are limited to preventing harm to the smooth and efficient functioning of the Selective Service System. When O'Brien deliberately rendered unavailable his registration certificate, he willfully frustrated this governmental interest. For this noncommunicative impact of his conduct, and for nothing else, he was convicted."391 U.S. at 381-82.
Harlan's concurrence
Justice John Marshall Harlan II, though joining Warren's opinion, wrote a brief separate concurrence.391 U.S. at 388-89 (Harlan, J., concurring).  Harlan wished to extend First Amendment protection to instances in which, though the majority's test was satisfied, the regulation at issue additionally had "the effect of entirely preventing a 'speaker' from reaching a significant audience with whom he could not otherwise lawfully communicate". This was adopted in later cases by the court as an additional prong of the O'Brien test, that the regulation must leave (as phrased in later decisions) "ample alternative channels" of communication. As Harlan felt that O'Brien had other means by which he could communicate his message, he had no problem affirming his conviction.
Douglas's dissent
Justice William O. Douglas was the sole dissenter.391 U.S. at 389-91 (Douglas, J., dissenting). Though he did not express disagreement with the court's First Amendment analysis, he believed that the asserted government interest was only valid when the nation was in a state of war as declared by Congress (which had not been the case since World War II).  Douglas questioned whether a peacetime draft was even constitutional, and wanted to reschedule O'Brien for reargument along with two cases challenging the draft that were denied review by the court the same day O'Brien was handed down,Holmes v. United States, 391 U.S. 936, and Hart v. United States, 391 U.S. 956. even though the parties in O'Brien had not presented arguments or briefs on that issue.
Subsequent developments
Vietnam War protests and developments in the draft
As the Vietnam War became more unpopular, the draft became more of a focal point for opposition and, despite O'Brien, public protests involving the burning of draft cards proliferated.  Though the court has not revisited this specific issue, the court ruled for other anti-war protesters very soon after O'Brien in Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District,Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District, 393 U.S. 503 (1969) which involved public school students who were suspended for wearing black armbands, and Cohen v. California, in which a man was convicted for disturbing the peace by wearing a jacket that read "Fuck the Draft" in a state courthouse..
Due in part to increasing domestic opposition, the United States reduced its involvement in Vietnam and completed withdrawal of its forces in 1973; the draft ended the same year. On January 21, 1977, the day after his inauguration, President Jimmy Carter signed Executive Order 11967, which granted a full pardon to anyone who had committed or been convicted of a non-violent violation of the Selective Service Act.Executive Order 11967 —Relating to violations of the Selective Service Act, August 4, 1964 to March 28, 1973. This included everyone from draft dodgers to protestors such as O'Brien. The pardon covered all such acts committed between August 4, 1964, the date of the Gulf of Tonkin Incident, and March 28, 1973, the end of American withdrawal.
In 1980, however, Congress reinstated the requirement that young men register with the Selective Service System, but without reinstating an active draft. In 1984, the Supreme Court upheld the registration requirement against a claim that it violated the privilege against self-incrimination.. The following year, it upheld the conviction of a man who refused to register despite his argument that this refusal constituted a political protest.. , male citizens (and many male noncitizen residents) between the ages of 18 to 25 are still required to register for preparation should a military draft be reinstated. The same provision in § 462(b)(3) of the act under which O'Brien was convicted remains law, though destroying draft cards is no longer a common form of protest and recent arrests for that offense are unknown.
Subsequent First Amendment decisions
For a few years following O'Brien, the decision was primarily cited to by the court for the proposition that an illicit legislative motive would not render a law unconstitutional.See, e.g., . Finally, in 1972, the court relied in part on O'Brien to invalidate a law that prohibited picketing outside public schools that was not related to a labor dispute. Quoting O'Brien, the court held that the law "imposes a selective restriction on expressive conduct far 'greater than is essential to the furtherance of [a substantial governmental] interest'". (internal marks in original).
Two years later, the court declared in Spence v. Washington that the O'Brien test was "inapplicable" when the asserted government interest "directly related to expression in the context of activity".Spence v. Washington, 418 U.S. 405, 415 n.8 (1974). Spence ruled that a man who displayed an American flag with a peace symbol taped to it was engaging in protected expression; in 1989, the court similarly upheld the right to burn the American flag as expressive conduct in Texas v. Johnson..
The court revisited the necessary fit between the important governmental interest and the means to actualize that interest in Clark v. C.C.N.V., 468 U.S. 288 (1984), in which it held that the nexus need merely be reasonable. The court also merged its doctrine of time-place-manner restrictions and the O'Brien test into an intermediate scrutiny hybrid.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 391
Conscription in the United States
Opposition to the Vietnam War
Symbolic speech
Notes
References
Further reading
External links
 First Amendment Library entry on United States v. O'Brien; includes list of newspaper and law review articles about the case.
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Conscription in the United States
Category:Draft-card burning
"""

From "United States v. O'Hagan" ==> """
United States v. O'Hagan, 521 U.S. 642 (1997), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning insider trading and breach of U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 10(b) and 10(b)-5. In an opinion written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the Court held that an individual may be found liable for violating Rule 10(b)-5 by misappropriating confidential information.United States v. O'Hagan, . The Court also held that the Securities and Exchange Commission did not exceed its rulemaking authority when it adopted Rule 14e-3(a), "which proscribes trading on undisclosed information in the tender offer setting, even in the absence of a duty to disclose".O'Hagan, 521 U.S. at 647.
 Background 
James O'Hagan was a partner at Minneapolis law firm Dorsey & Whitney. In July 1988, the firm was retained by Grand Metropolitan, a corporation with headquarters in London, which was considering an offer to takeover the Pillsbury Company, headquartered in Minneapolis. Even though he was not directly involved in the transaction, O'Hagan learned about the possible takeover by overhearing a discussion at lunch. In August 1988, O'Hagan began purchasing stock and options of the Pillsbury company, at around $39 per share.O'Hagan, 521 U.S. at 647-48.
By the end of September, O'Hagan owned approximately 5,000 shares of Pillsbury and 2,500 options – more than any other individual investor. In October, Grand Met announced the takeover bid and the price of Pillsbury stock rose to $60 per share. O'Hagan subsequently sold his stock at a profit of more than $4.3 million.O'Hagan, 521 U.S. at 648.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court held that O'Hagan could be found liable under Rule 10(b) for misappropriating confidential information, and the court remanded the case the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit for further proceedings.O'Hagan, 521 U.S. at 660-65, 666-67. Because O'Hagan was not directly involved in the proposed takeover, he was not obliged by SEC rules to refrain from trading Pillsbury's stock or to disclose his transactions. Though it didn't find O'Hagan in violation of SEC rules regarding trading by company insiders – known as the "classical doctrine theory" – the Supreme Court adopted an additional doctrine, the "misappropriation theory" set out by Chief Justice Warren Burger in Chiarella v. United States.Lowry J. Reisberg,  510 (Pearson, 4th ed. 2012).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 521
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States securities case law
"""

From "United States v. Oakland Cannabis Buyers' Cooperative" ==> """
In United States v. Oakland Cannabis Buyers' Cooperative, 532 U.S. 483 (2001), the United States Supreme Court rejected the common-law medical necessity defense to crimes enacted under the federal Controlled Substances Act of 1970, et seq. regardless of their legal status under the laws of states such as California that recognize a medical use for marijuana..   Oakland Cannabis Buyers' Cooperative was represented by Gerald Uelmen.
Background
This case would not have arisen without the passage of Proposition 215. California's Compassionate Use Act, allowed a patient or his primary caregiver to cultivate or possess marijuana on the advice of a physician.  Bolstered by the enactment, certain groups organized to supply marijuana patients in a manner consistent with the Act. The Oakland Cannabis Buyers' Cooperative is one such group.
In January 1998, the U.S. Government sued the OCBC to stop the cultivation and distribution of marijuana in violation of federal law.  The Government based its argument on the provisions of the Controlled Substances Act, which forbade the distribution, manufacture, and possession with intent to distribute or manufacture a controlled substance (including marijuana).  The lawsuit began in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California, and came before District Judge Charles R. Breyer. He concluded that the government would likely prevail on the merits and issued the injunction.
The OCBC believed, however, that ceasing the distribution of marijuana to patients would be harmful to it and so violated Judge Breyer's injunction.  The Government brought contempt proceedings against the OCBC. The OCBC argued that the distributions were medically necessary. Judge Breyer found OCBC in contempt, denied OCBC's request to authorize medically necessary distributions of marijuana, and authorized the U.S. Marshals to seize OCBC's premises. Then, the OCBC agreed to stop distributing marijuana. It also appealed Judge Breyer's decision to the Ninth Circuit.
The Ninth Circuit reversed and held that medical necessity was a legally cognizable defense to charges under the Controlled Substances Act.  Accordingly, the district court could have fashioned an injunction that was more limited in scope than a total ban on distributing marijuana. The Ninth Circuit ordered the district court to consider the criteria by which OCBC could distribute marijuana under the rubric of medical necessity. The government then asked the U.S. Supreme Court to review the case, and the Court granted certiorari..
When the case came before the Court, Justice Stephen Breyer recused himself from deciding the case because his brother Charles had been the district judge in the case.
Decision
Justice Thomas wrote for the majority.  The OCBC contended that the Controlled Substances Act was susceptible of a medical necessity exception to the ban on distribution and manufacture of marijuana.  The Court concluded otherwise.
In 1812, the Court had held in United States v. Hudson and Goodwin that there were no common-law crimes in federal law.    . The law thus required Congress, rather than the federal courts, to define federal crimes. The Controlled Substances Act did not recognize a medical necessity exception.
Thus, "a medical necessity exception for marijuana is at odds with the terms of the Controlled Substances Act."Oakland Cannabis Buyers' Cooperative, 532 U.S. at 491. When it passed the Controlled Substances Act, Congress made a value judgment that marijuana had "no currently accepted medical use."Oakland Cannabis Buyers' Cooperative, 532 U.S. at 493. It was not the province of the Court to usurp the value judgment made by the legislature. Thus, it was wrong for the Ninth Circuit to hold that the Controlled Substances Act contained a medical necessity defense. It was also wrong for the Ninth Circuit to order the district court to fashion a more limited injunction that would take into account the fact that marijuana was necessary for certain people to obtain relief from symptoms of chronic illnesses.
Subsequent history
The Court expressly noted that it did not decide another important issue of federal law: whether federal law could override a California law that allowed the purely-local cultivation and distribution of marijuana. It ordered the Ninth Circuit to address that argument in the first instance, and the Ninth Circuit in turn asked the district court to do so.
After further proceedings in the district court, the OCBC appealed to the Ninth Circuit again. The Ninth Circuit stayed its decision pending the Supreme Court's decision in Gonzales v. Raich, which was issued in June 2005..  The Ninth Circuit remanded the case to the district court, which rejected the claim, and OCBC appealed again to the Ninth Circuit.  The Ninth Circuit stayed the proceedings in this case.  The stay expired October 16, 2006.
Aftermath
Since the decision in this case and the US Congress's passage of the Rohrabacher–Farr amendment, allowing state medical cannabis programs, the OCBC has gone on to become the largest distributor of medical marijuana ID cards in California. Currently, over 100,000 patients throughout the state are registered members of the OCBC's ID program.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 532
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
  Transcript of the oral argument in the Supreme Court
  Decision of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals
 Schaffer Library of Drug Policy, Legal Documents from U.S. Oakland Cannabis Buyers’ Cooperative et al.
Oakland Cannabis Buyers’ Cooperative, Legal Documents from U.S. v. Oakland Cannabis Buyers’ Cooperative et al.
Drug Policy Alliance, “Medical Marijuana Cases: US v. Oakland Cannabis Buyers Cooperative”
 Brief of the Solicitor General
Category:Cannabis law reform in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
category:2001 in cannabis
Category:Cannabis law in California
Category:Healthcare in Oakland, California
"""

From "United States v. Olano" ==> """
United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725 (1993), was a United States Supreme Court case that distinguished between forfeiture and waiver. Quoting from Johnson v. Zerbst, , the Court noted, "Whereas forfeiture is the failure to make the timely assertion of a right, waiver is the "intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known right.... Whether a particular right is waivable; whether the defendant must participate personally in the waiver; whether certain procedures are required for waiver; and whether the defendant's choice must be particularly informed or voluntary, all depend on the right at stake."
According to the Court, mere forfeiture, as opposed to waiver, does not extinguish an "error" under Rule 52(b) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. If a legal rule was violated during the District Court proceedings, and if the defendant did not waive the rule, then there has been an "error" within the meaning of Rule 52(b) despite the absence of a timely objection.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 507
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
Category:1993 in United States case law
Category:Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "United States v. Oppenheimer" ==> """
United States v. Oppenheimer, 242 U.S. 85 (1916), was a landmark Supreme Court decision applying the common law concept of res judicata (literally: the thing is decided) to criminal law cases.
Prior history 
On error from the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York:
The defendant and others were indicted for a conspiracy to conceal assets from a trustee in bankruptcy. The defendant Oppenheimer set up a previous adjudication upon a former indictment for the same offense that it was barred by the one-year statute of limitations in the bankruptcy act for offenses against that act; an adjudication since held to be wrong in another case. This defense was presented in four forms entitled respectively, demurrer, motion to quash, plea in abatement, and plea in bar. After motion by the Government that the defendant be required to elect which of the four he would stand upon he withdrew the last-mentioned two, and subsequently the court granted what was styled the motion to quash, ordered the indictment quashed and discharged the defendant without day. The Government brings this writ of error treating the so-called motion to quash as a plea in bar, which in substance it was.
Holding
The holding, as delivered by Justice Holmes:
.
Rules of law applied
A "motion to quash" an indictment, based upon a former adjudication that a previous indictment for the same offense was barred by the statute of limitations, held, in substance, a plea in bar..
Under the Criminal Appeals Act of March 2, 1907, c. 2564, 34 Stat. 1246, the right to review decisions and judgments sustaining special pleas in bar is not limited to cases in which the decisions or judgments are based upon the invalidity or construction of the statutes upon which the indictments are founded., and , explained and distinguished.
A plea of the statute of limitations is a plea to the merits.
A judgment for defendant that the prosecution is barred by limitations goes to his liability in substantive law; and, in whatever form the issue was raised, such a judgment may be interposed as a conclusive bar to another prosecution for the same offense.
The Fifth Amendment, in providing that no one should be twice put in jeopardy, was not intended to supplant the fundamental principle of res judicata in criminal cases.
See also
Res judicata
Double jeopardy
Due process
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 242
References
External links
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1916 in United States case law
Category:United States criminal procedure case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "United States v. Ortiz" ==> """
United States v. Ortiz, 422 U.S. 891 (1975), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Fourth Amendment prevented Border Patrol officers from conducting warrantless, suspicionless searches of private vehicles removed from the border or its functional equivalent.
Background
On November 12, 1973, Ortiz was stopped in his car by Border Patrol officers on Interstate Highway 5 at San Clemente, California.  The Border Patrol officers found three people concealed in the trunk of the car.  These three people were found to be in the country illegally.. After the search of the car at the checkpoint, Ortiz was convicted of transporting illegal aliens.  Ortiz appealed the decision, and it was reversed by the Ninth Circuit Court.http://scholarlycommons.law.northwestern.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=5955&context=jclc   In their decision, the Ninth Circuit Court relied on a previous decision that was made in the case of Bowen v. United States, which stated that the requirement of probable cause for roving patrols that was outlined in the case of Almeida-Sanchez also extended to searches that were made at fixed checkpoints.  This court case would then go to the supreme court.
Government's Argument
In an argument before the Supreme Court, the Government, represented by Mark L. Evans and assisted by the Solicitor General Bork, argued that fixed checkpoints were "less intrusive than roving patrol searches and that the Border Patrol officials stationed at such checkpoints had less discretion in choosing which cars to search".  Because of their less intrusive manner, the government contended that searches at fixed checkpoints fell within the fourth amendment's requirement of reasonableness, even though they did not have probable cause for the searches.
Ortiz's Argument
In their argument challenging the constitutionality of these checkpoints on behalf of Ortiz, Mr. Charles M. Sevilla (the court-appointed attorney for Ortiz) argued that "in comparing a roving to a fixed check, we have to look at the nature of the intrusion involved and each case were involved with a search, which takes place because of the unfettered exercise of discretion by Border Patrol officer at a checkpoint who decides without any criteria... that he is going to select a car, refer to secondary and conduct a full search of a car".https://www.oyez.org/cases/1970-1979/1974/1974_73_2050   The attorney for Ortiz did not argue that checkpoints in general on the border were illegal, but that checkpoints that were located at a distance away from the border were in fact unconstitutional.  The attorney for Ortiz also argued that a warrant should have been required for the search to take place, leaving the decision for probable cause up to a judicial officer, and not to a Border Patrol man.  In his oral arguments, Sevilla stated "There was a warrant requirement because this is the concept where certainly a judicial officer should make the determination and not a Border Patrol man standing 66 miles north of a border determining a legal concept such as the functional equivalent of probable cause".  In summary, the attorney for Ortiz stated that because the checkpoint was 66 miles away from the border, the Border Patrol officers needed to have probable cause to search the vehicle along with a warrant.
Court Opinion
This court case was a unanimous vote of 9–0 in favor of Ortiz.  Associate Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr. delivered the majority opinion of the court.
Majority Opinion
In the majority opinion, Justice Powell stated that "nothing in this record suggests that the Border Patrol had any special reason to suspect that the respondent's car was carrying concealed aliens... The only question for decision is whether vehicle searches at traffic checkpoints... must be based on Probable Cause".  In his opinion, Justice Powell makes reference to a prior case, Almeida-Sanchez v. United States that involved the constitutionality of vehicle searches conducted by roving patrols.  Justice Powell states that, in the same way that these roving patrols must have probable cause for vehicle searches, traffic checkpoints must have probable cause to conduct vehicle searches as well. In the opinion, Justice Powell states that the "central concern of the Fourth Amendment is to protect liberty and privacy from arbitrary and oppressive interference by government officials". Justice Powell later goes on to say in his opinion, that the degree of discretion that is present in vehicle searches at checkpoints is not consistent with the fourth amendment, and that the Court has considered a search, even of an automobile, to be an invasion of privacy, and for that reason, the Court has always regarded probable cause as the minimum requirement for a lawful search.  Overall, in the majority opinion, Justice Powell and the court ruled that at traffic checkpoints removed from the border and "its functional equivalents", officers may not search private vehicles without consent or probable cause.
Concurring Opinions
Justice Rehnquist
In Justice Rehnquist's concurring opinion, he states that although he dissented in Almeida-Sanchez v. United States, he joined the opinion of the Court, because a majority of the Court still adhered to that ruling.  Justice Rehnquist put emphasis on the fact that the Court's opinion is confined to full searches, and does not extend to fixed-checkpoint stops that asked about citizenship status.
Chief Justice Burger and Justice Blackmun
In their concurrence opinion, Chief Justice Burger and Justice Blackmun agreed with the Majority Opinion, but they wrote that they "hope that when we next deal with this problem we give greater weight to the reality that the Fourth Amendment prohibits only "unreasonable searches and seizures" and to the frequent admonition that reasonableness must take into account all the circumstances and balance the rights of the individual with the needs of society".
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1975 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc." ==> """
United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc., 334 U.S. 131 (1948) (also known as  the Hollywood Antitrust Case of 1948, the Paramount Case, or the Paramount Decision), was a landmark United States Supreme Court antitrust case that decided the fate of film studios owning their own theatres and holding exclusivity rights on which theatres would show their movies. It would also change the way Hollywood movies were produced, distributed, and exhibited. It also opened the door for more foreign and independent films to be shown in U.S. theaters. The Supreme Court affirmed the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York's ruling that the existing distribution scheme was in violation of United States antitrust law, which prohibits certain exclusive dealing arrangements.. The decision created the Paramount Decree, a standard held by the United States Department of Justice that prevented film production companies from owning exhibition companies. The case is important both in American antitrust law and film history. In the former, it remains a landmark decision in vertical integration cases; in the latter, it is responsible for putting an end to the old Hollywood studio system.
As part of a 2019 review of its ongoing decrees, the Department of Justice issued a two-year sunsetting notice for the Paramount Decree in August 2020, believing the antitrust restriction was no longer necessary as the old model could never be recreated in contemporary settings.
Background
The legal issues originated in the silent era, when the Federal Trade Commission began investigating film companies for potential violations under the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890.
The major film studios owned the theaters where their motion pictures were shown, either in partnerships or outright. Thus specific theater chains showed only the films produced by the studio that owned them. The studios created the films, had the writers, directors, producers and actors on staff (under contract), owned the film processing and laboratories, created the prints and distributed them through the theaters that they owned: In other words, the studios were vertically integrated, creating a de facto oligopoly. By 1945, the studios owned either partially or outright 17% of the theaters in the country, accounting for 45% of the film-rental revenue.
Ultimately, this issue of the studios' then-alleged (and later upheld) illegal trade practices led to all the major movie studios being sued in 1938 by the U.S. Department of Justice. As the largest studio, Paramount Pictures was the primary defendant, but all of the other Big Five (Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Warner Bros., 20th Century Fox, and RKO Pictures) and Little Three (Universal Pictures, Columbia Pictures, and United Artists) were named, and additional defendants included numerous subsidiaries and executives from each company. Separate cases were also filed against large independent chains, including the 148-theater Schine.
The federal government's case was initially settled in 1940 in the District Court for the Southern District of New York with a consent decree, which allowed the government to resume prosecution if studios were noncompliant by November, 1943. Among other requirements, the District Court-imposed consent decree included the following conditions:
 The Big Five studios could no longer block-book short film subjects along with feature films (known as one-shot, or full force, block booking);
 The Big Five studios could continue to block-book features, but the block size would be limited to five films;
 Blind buying (buying of films by theater districts without seeing films beforehand) would be outlawed and replaced with "trade showing", special screenings every two weeks at which representatives of all 31 theater districts in the United States could see films before theatres decided to book a film; and
 The creation of an administration board to enforce these requirements.
The studios did not fully comply with the consent decree. In 1942, they instead, with Allied Theatre Owners, proposed an alternate "Unity Plan". Under the Plan, larger blocks of theatres were blocked with the caveat of allowing theaters to reject films. Consequently, the Society of Independent Motion Picture Producers (SIMPP) came into existence and thence filed a lawsuit against Paramount Detroit Theaters, representing the first major lawsuit of producers against exhibitors. The government declined to pursue the Unity proposal and instead, owing to noncompliance with the District Court's binding consent decree, resumed prosecution via the 1943 lawsuit. The 1943 case went to trial on October 8, 1945, one month and six days after the end of World War II. The District Court ruled in favor of the studios, and the government immediately appealed to the Supreme Court.
The case reached the United States Supreme Court in 1948; their verdict went against the movie studios, forcing all of them to divest themselves of their movie theater chains. This, coupled with the advent of television and the attendance drop in movie ticket sales, brought about a severe slump in the movie business.
The Paramount decision is a bedrock of corporate antitrust law and as such is cited in most cases where issues of vertical integration play a prominent role in restricting fair trade.
Decision
The Supreme Court ruled 7–1 in the government's favor, affirming much of the consent decree (Justice Robert H. Jackson took no part in the proceedings). William O. Douglas delivered the Court's opinion, with Felix Frankfurter dissenting in part, arguing the Court should have left all of the decree intact except its arbitration provisions.
Douglas' majority opinion
Douglas's opinion reiterated the facts and history of the case and reviewed the Supreme Court's opinion, agreeing that its conclusion was "incontestable". He considered five different trade practices addressed by the consent decree:
 Clearances and runs, under which movies were scheduled so they would only be showing at particular theatres at any given time, to avoid competing with another theater's showing;
 Pooling agreements, the joint ownership of theaters by two nominally competitive studios;
 Formula deals, master agreements, and franchises: arrangements by which an exhibitor or distributor allocated profits among theaters that had shown a particular film, and awarded exclusive rights to independent theatres, sometimes without competitive bidding;
 Block booking, the studios' practice of requiring theaters to take an entire slate of its films, sometimes without even seeing them and sometimes before the films had even been produced ("blind bidding"); and
 Discrimination against smaller, independent theaters in favor of larger chains.
Douglas let stand the Court's sevenfold test for when a clearance agreement could be considered a restraint of trade, as he agreed they had a legitimate purpose. Pooling agreements and joint ownership, he agreed, were "bald efforts to substitute monopoly for competition ... Clearer restraints of trade are difficult to imagine." He allowed, however, that courts could consider how an interest in an exhibitor was acquired; thus, he remanded some other issues back to the District Court for further inquiry and resolution. He set aside the lower court's findings on franchises so that they might be reconsidered from the perspective of allowing competitive bidding. On the block booking question, he rejected the studios' argument that it was necessary to profit from their copyrights: "The copyright law, like the patent statutes, makes reward to the owner a secondary consideration". The prohibitions on discrimination he let stand entirely.
Frankfurter's concurrence/dissent
Frankfurter took exception to the extent to which his colleagues had agreed with the studios that the District Court had not adequately explored the underlying facts in affirming the consent decree. He pointed to then-contemporary Court decision, International Salt Co. v. United States that lower courts are the proper place for such findings of fact, to be deferred to by higher courts. Also, he reminded the (Supreme) Court that the District Court had spent fifteen months considering the case and reviewed almost 4,000 pages of documentary evidence: "I cannot bring myself to conclude that the product of such a painstaking process of adjudication as to a decree appropriate for such a complicated situation as this record discloses was an abuse of discretion." He would have modified the District Court decision only to permit the use of arbitration to resolve disputes.
Aftermath
The court orders forcing the separation of motion picture production and exhibition companies are commonly referred to as the Paramount Decrees. Paramount Pictures Inc. was forced to split into two companies: the film company Paramount Pictures Corp. and the theater chain (United Paramount Theaters), itself merged in 1953 with the American Broadcasting Company.
Consequences of the decision include:
 An increase in the number of independent movie theaters throughout the 1950s, 60s and 70s.
 An increase in independent producers and studios to produce their film product, free of major studio interference.
 The beginning of the end of the old Hollywood studio system and its golden age, allowing creative freedom for both behind-the-camera personnel and actors.
 The weakening of the (Hays) Production Code, because of the rise of independent and "art house" theaters which showed foreign or independent films made outside of the Code's jurisdiction.
Following the decision, and with the rise of television, the major studios felt that the loss of their exclusive theatre arrangements would reduce the opportunity to re-release products from their extensive film libraries. Paramount, for example, sold its pre-1950 sound feature film library to MCA, which created EMKA (today Universal Television) to manage this library. Other studios, such as 20th Century Fox and Warner Bros., also sold or leased their classic back-catalogs to other companies such as Associated Artists Productions or National Telefilm Associates.
By contrast, Walt Disney believed his film library was much more valuable than RKO had estimated it to be. In 1953, he formed a holding company that both held rights to his pre-1953 works and distributed new material from his studio. That company became its own in-house distribution unit, Buena Vista Film Distribution Company, Inc. That move, along with the eventual Walt Disney Company's theme parks and other properties to provide an impetus into television programming (and eventual ownership of ABC in 1996), would provide the company much more revenue and power over the film market, with RKO in its 1948 state eventually dissolving in 1959 among dysfunctional management, and becoming nothing more than a nostalgia trademark and associated film library distributed among several other companies.
Termination of the Paramount decrees
The United States Department of Justice Antitrust Division began a review of antitrust decrees that did not have expiration dates. In 2019, the DOJ sought to terminate the Paramount Decrees, which would include a two-year sunset period as to the practices of block booking and circuit dealing to allow theater chains to adjust. The Department stated it was "unlikely that the remaining defendants can reinstate their cartel" as reasoning for terminating the decrees. The DOJ formally filed its motion for a court order to terminate the decrees on November 22, 2019. The move was opposed by independent movie theater owners, including the Independent Cinema Alliance, and independent filmmakers.
The court granted the DOJ's motion to lift the decrees on August 7, 2020, starting a two-year sunset termination period of the decrees.
Affected assets
 The 1929-1949 Paramount Pictures library – are now owned by Comcast/NBCUniversal's Universal Television via EMKA, Ltd.
 The pre-1950 Paramount short subjects library – are now owned by Paramount Global's Paramount Pictures via Melange Pictures, LLC
 The Fleischer Studios cartoons library
 The pre-October 1950 Famous Studios cartoons library
 The Popeye the Sailor cartoons – are now owned by Warner Bros. Discovery's Warner Bros. via Turner Entertainment Co.
 The pre-1950 Warner Bros. library – are now owned by Warner Bros. Discovery's Warner Bros. via Turner Entertainment Co.
 The pre-1948 Warner Bros. short subjects library
 The pre-August 1948 Warner Bros. Cartoons library
 The pre-1949 20th Century-Fox library – are now owned by The Walt Disney Company's Walt Disney Studios via 20th Century Studios
 Buena Vista Film Distribution Co, Inc. – renamed to Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures are owned by The Walt Disney Company via Disney Platform Distribution
 Disneyland – are now owned by The Walt Disney Company via Disney Parks, Experiences and Products
 ABC – are now owned by The Walt Disney Company via Disney General Entertainment Content
See also
 Bigelow v. RKO Radio Pictures, Inc., 327 U.S. 251 (1946), where the Supreme Court held that major Hollywood distributors had engaged in an antitrust conspiracy preventing certain independent movie houses from showing first run films.
 Buchwald v. Paramount
 Leibovitz v. Paramount Pictures Corp.
 Paramount Communications, Inc. v. QVC Network, Inc.
 United States v. Loew's Inc.
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1948 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:Paramount Pictures
Category:Business ethics cases
Category:Film production
Category:History of film
Category:History of Hollywood, Los Angeles
Category:Media case law
Category:1940s in American cinema
Category:1948 in American cinema
Category:Film production companies of the United States
"""

From "United States v. Park" ==> """
United States v. Park, 421 U.S. 658 (1975), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) could pierce the corporate veil. The defendant, Park, was the CEO of Acme International. Park had failed to comply with a mandate from the FDA, under the Federal Food, Drugs, and Cosmetics Act, to keep conditions within his warehouses legally sanitary.
In the case, the Court found Park strictly liable for the unsanitary conditions that his company had created, arguing for strict liability under the rationale that the Federal Food, Drugs, and Cosmetics Act was a 'public welfare' statute. The Court concluded that as a welfare statute, the purpose was to prevent egregious social harm; therefore, the Defendant could be held strictly liable for the crime. 
The Court held that if someone were to willingly be in charge of a company, and therefore its problems, then he or she willingly accepts the consequences of any illegal practices that his or her company or organization is involved in. An exception is made if the problem is impossible to fix.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
 United States v. Dotterweich
External links
Category:Food and Drug Administration
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1975 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Parke, Davis & Co." ==> """
United States v. Parke, Davis & Co., 362 U.S. 29 (1960), was a 1960 decision of the United States Supreme Court limiting the so-called Colgate doctrine, which substantially insulates unilateral refusals to deal with price-cutters from the antitrust laws. The Parke, Davis & Co. case held that, when a company goes beyond "the limited dispensation" of Colgate by taking affirmative steps to induce adherence to its suggested prices, it puts together a combination among competitors to fix prices in violation of § 1 of the Sherman Act. In addition, the Court held that when a company abandons an illegal practice because it knows the US Government is investigating it and contemplating suit, it is an abuse of discretion for the trial court to hold the case that follows moot and dismiss it without granting relief sought against the illegal practice..
Background
Parke-Davis makes pharmaceutical products and markets them through drug wholesalers and drug retailers. The retailers buy these products from the wholesalers or make large quantity purchases directly from Parke Davis. Parke Davis placed in its wholesalers' catalogue a Net Price Selling Schedule listing suggested minimum resale prices on the Parke Davis products that wholesalers sold to retailers and stating that it was "Parke Davis' continuing policy to deal only with drug wholesalers who observed that schedule." The retailers' catalog contained a schedule of minimum retail prices applicable in States with Fair Trade laws, and stated that this schedule was suggested for use also in places such as Virginia and D.C. where there were no Fair Trade laws.362 U.S. at 31-32.
thumb|250px
There were about 260 drugstores in D.C., and about 100 in Richmond, Virginia. Many of these stores were units of the large Peoples Drug Store chain (now CVS). Five drug wholesalers handled Parke Davis products in these areas. The wholesalers observed the resale prices suggested by Parke Davis. However, during the spring and early summer of 1956, drug retailers in the two cities advertised and sold several Parke Davis vitamin products at prices substantially below the suggested minimum retail prices. As a result, the Baltimore office manager of Parke Davis in charge of the sales district that included the two cities sought advice from his head office on how to handle this situation. The Parke Davis attorney advised that the company could legally "enforce an adopted policy arrived at unilaterally" to sell only to customers who observed the suggested minimum resale prices. He further advised that this meant that "we can lawfully say 'we will sell you only so long as you observe such minimum retail prices' but cannot say 'we will sell you only if you agree to observe such minimum retail prices,' since, except as permitted by Fair Trade [laws], agreements as to resale price maintenance are invalid."362 U.S. at 32-33.
The Baltimore branch manager put into effect a program for promoting observance of the suggested minimum retail prices. In order to ensure that retailers who did not comply would be cut off from sources of supply, representatives of Parke Davis visited the five wholesalers and told them, in effect, that not only would Parke Davis refuse to sell to wholesalers who did not adhere to the policy announced in its catalogue, but also that it would refuse to sell to wholesalers who sold Parke Davis products to retailers who did not observe the suggested minimum retail prices. Each wholesaler was interviewed individually and informed that his competitors were also being apprised of this. The wholesalers each indicated a willingness to go along with the Parke Davis policy. Parke Davis representatives also called on the price-cutter retailers and told each that, if he did not observe the suggested minimum retail prices, Parke Davis would refuse to deal with him, and that, furthermore, he would be unable to purchase any Parke Davis products from the wholesalers. Each retailer was also told that his competitors were being similarly informed.362 U.S. at 33-34.
Several retailers refused to give Parke Davis any assurances of compliance and continued despite these interviews to advertise and sell Parke Davis products at prices below the suggested minimum retail prices. Parke Davis furnished their names to the wholesalers. Parke Davis refused to fill any direct orders from such retailers, and the wholesalers likewise refused to fill any of their orders. This ban extended to all Parke Davis products, even those necessary to fill prescriptions (on which price cutting had not occurred).362 U. S. at 34.
The president of Dart Drug, one of the price-cutter retailers that Parke Davis had cut off, protested to the assistant branch manager of Parke Davis that Parke Davis was discriminating against him because a drugstore across the street, one of the Peoples Drug chain, had a sign in its window advertising Parke Davis vitamin products at cut prices. The retailer was told that, if this were so, the branch manager "would see Peoples and try to get them in line." The branch manager then visited a vice-president of Peoples and told him "that anyone that did not go along with our policy, we were not interested in doing business with them." Peoples then told Parke Davis that it would stop cutting prices on Parke Davis products. However, five retailers, including Dart Drug, continued their price cutting. Parke Davis decided that at least advertising cut prices should stop and that would lessen the price cutting. A Parke Davis representative visited Dart's president and he said that he might be willing to stop advertising, although continuing to sell at discount prices if shipments to him were resumed. Parke Davis representatives then told each of the other price-cutter retailers that Dart was ready to discontinue price-cut advertising. Each of the retailers said that, if Dart stopped advertising, he would also. Parke Davis reported this to Dart, and then all five retailers discontinued advertising of Parke Davis vitamins at less than suggested minimum retail prices, and Parke Davis and the wholesalers resumed sales of Parke Davis products to them.362 U.S. at 35-36.
However, after a month one of the retailers again started newspaper advertising, and, despite the efforts of Parke Davis to prevent it, the others quickly followed suit. At this point, the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice, on complaint of Dart Drug, began investigating Parke Davis for price fixing.  Parke Davis then stopped trying to promote the retailers' adherence to its suggested resale prices, and neither it nor the wholesalers since declined further dealings with the price cutters.362 U.S. at 36.
The US Government sued Parke Davis under §§ 1 and 3 of the Sherman Act for combining and conspiring "with retail and wholesale druggists in Washington, D.C., and Richmond, Virginia, to maintain the wholesale and retail prices of Parke Davis pharmaceutical products."See  The district court held that the Government's proofs did not establish a violation of the Sherman Act because Parke Davis's actions "were properly unilateral, and sanctioned by law under the doctrine laid down in the case of United States v. Colgate."164 F. Supp. at 829.
Ruling of Supreme Court
The Government appealed to the Supreme Court, which reversed. Justice Brennan wrote for the majority, Justice Stewart concurred in the judgment, and Justice Harlan, joined by Justices Frankfurter and Whittaker dissented.
Majority opinion
thumb|150px|Justice Brennan
Justice Brennan's opinion for the Court began with a review of what the Court had held in its 1919 decision in United States v. Colgate & Co.,. since the issue before the Court was whether the conduct of Parke Davis fell under the protection of the Colgate doctrine. The Government conceded for the purposes of the Parke Davis case that, under the Colgate doctrine, a manufacturer, having announced a price-maintenance policy, may bring about adherence to it by refusing to deal with customers who do not observe that policy. The Government contended, however, that "subsequent decisions of this Court compel the holding that what Parke Davis did here by entwining the wholesalers and retailers in a program to promote general compliance with its price maintenance policy went beyond mere customer selection, and created combinations or conspiracies to enforce resale price maintenance in violation of . . . the Sherman Act."362 U.S. at 37-38.
Dr. Miles
"The history of the Colgate doctrine is best understood," the Court said, "by reference to a case which preceded the Colgate decision, Dr. Miles Medical Co. v. John D. Park & Sons Co.. In that case, Dr. Miles entered into contracts with wholesale and retail merchants that required them to resell a medicine at prices that Miles fixed. Park refused to sign the contracts, induced customers of Miles to resell to Park, and then Park sold the medicines at cut prices in violation of Miles's resale-price maintenance program. Miles sued Park for inducing Miles's customers to breach their contracts with him. Citing Coke on Littleton, § 360 and Mitchel v Reynolds, the Court held the restrictive agreements that Miles sought to enforce were invalid at common law and under the Sherman Act as well. In the Colgate case, however, there was no agreement, just a refusal to deal with price cutters. "The Colgate decision distinguished Dr. Miles on the ground that the Colgate indictment did not charge that company with selling its products to dealers under agreements which obligated the latter not to resell except at prices fixed by the seller.See Dr. Miles, 220 U.S. at 378.
Schrader's Son
In the next case, United States v. Schrader's Son, Inc.,. the Government indicted a parts manufacturer for entering into price-fixing agreements with retailers, jobbers and manufacturers who used or resold his products. The Schrader's Son Court held that Colgate did not immunize the conduct, and explained that Colgate
meant no more than that a manufacturer is not guilty of a combination or conspiracy if he merely "indicates his wishes concerning prices and declines further dealings with all who fail to observe them ..."; however, there is unlawful combination where a manufacturer "enters into agreements—whether express or implied from a course of dealing or other circumstances—with all customers . . . which undertake to bind them to observe fixed resale prices.See Schrader's, 252 U.S. at 99.
Cudahy
The next decision was Frey & Son. Inc. v. Cudahy Packing Co.,. That was a treble damage suit alleging a conspiracy in violation of the Sherman Act between the manufacturer and jobbers to maintain resale prices. In that case, the Court held improper a jury instruction that a Sherman Act violation (price-fixing agreement) could be found if the defendant repeatedly called to the attention of the wholesales and jobbers the minimum price provision of its sales plan and "the great majority of them not only [expressed] no dissent from such plan, but actually [cooperated] in carrying it out by themselves selling at the prices named." But the authority of Cudahy "has been seriously undermined by subsequent decisions," The Parke Davis Court said.
Beech-Nut
In FTC v. Beech-Nut Packing Co.,. the company adopted a policy of refusing to sell to price cutters. It set up a policing system. " When an offender was cut off, he would be reinstated upon the giving of assurances that he would maintain prices in the future." The Court held that the FTC could find a violation of FTC Act § 5 where a practice "had a "dangerous tendency unduly to hinder competition or create monopoly." The company sought to defend under Colgate, but the Court said that "the Beech-Nut system goes for beyond the simple refusal to sell goods to persons who will not sell at stated prices, which, in the Colgate case, was held to be within the legal right of the producer." It made no difference that there were not express price-fixing contracts because the course of dealing was equivalent to that. Beech-Nut
limit[ed] Colgate to a holding that, when the only act specified in the indictment amounted to saying that the trader had exercised his right to determine those with whom he would deal, and to announce the circumstances under which he would refuse to sell, no Sherman Act violation was made out. However, because Beech-Nut's methods were as effective as agreements in producing the result that "all who would deal in the company's products are constrained to sell at the suggested prices," the Court held that the securing of the customers' adherence by such methods constituted the creation of an unlawful combination to suppress price competition among the retailers.Parke Davis, 362 U.S. at 41-42.
Bausch & Lomb
The next case, United States v. Bausch & Lomb Optical Co.,. made it clear "that Beech-Nut narrowly limited Colgate and announced principles which subject to Sherman Act liability the producer who secures his customers' adherence to his resale prices by methods which go beyond the simple refusal to sell to customers who will not resell at stated prices." In Bausch & Lomb, the Court found a violation of the Sherman Act where the distributor proffered a price-fixing plan and the wholesales joined in "by cooperating in prices, limitation of sales to and approval of retail licensees." The scope of the Colgate doctrine may have been uncertain before Beech-Nut and Bausch & Lomb but those decisions "plainly fashioned its dimensions as meaning no more than that a simple refusal to sell to customers who will not resell at prices suggested by the seller is permissible under the Sherman Act." A combination in violation of the Sherman Act is "organized if the producer secures adherence to his suggested prices by means which go beyond his mere declination to sell to a customer who will not observe his announced policy."Parke Davis, 362 U.S. at 43.
To sum this up, the Court said:
The Bausch & Lomb and Beech-Nut decisions cannot be read as merely limited to particular fact complexes justifying the inference of an agreement in violation of the Sherman Act. . . . The Sherman Act [also] forbids combinations of traders to suppress competition. True, there results the same economic effect as is accomplished by a prohibited combination to suppress price competition if each customer, although induced to do so solely by a manufacturer's announced policy, independently decides to observe specified resale prices. So long as Colgate is not overruled, this result is tolerated, but only when it is the consequence of a mere refusal to sell in the exercise of the manufacturer's right "freely to exercise his own independent discretion as to parties with whom he will deal." When the manufacturer's actions, as here, go beyond mere announcement of his policy and the simple refusal to deal, and he employs other means which effect adherence to his resale prices, this countervailing consideration is not present, and therefore he has put together a combination in violation of the Sherman Act. Thus, whether an unlawful combination or conspiracy is proved is to be judged by what the parties actually did, rather than by the words they used.362 U.S. at 44.
In this case, the Court explained:
Parke Davis did not content itself with announcing its policy regarding retail prices and following this with a simple refusal to have business relations with any retailers who disregarded that policy. Instead, Parke Davis used the refusal to deal with the wholesalers in order to elicit their willingness to deny Parke Davis products to retailers, and thereby help gain the retailers' adherence to its suggested minimum retail prices. The retailers who disregarded the price policy were promptly cut off when Parke Davis supplied the wholesalers with their names. The large retailer who said he would "abide" by the price policy, the multi-unit Peoples Drug chain, was not cut off. In thus involving the wholesalers to stop the flow of Parke Davis products to the retailers, thereby inducing retailers' adherence to its suggested retail prices, Parke Davis created a combination with the retailers and the wholesalers to maintain retail prices and violated the Sherman Act.
Furthermore, Parke Davis exceeded the "limited dispensation" of Colgate in still another way. Its treatment of the advertising controversy "demonstrates how far Parke Davis went beyond the limits of the Colgate doctrine":
Parke Davis did not rest with the simple announcement to the trade of its policy in that regard followed by a refusal to sell to the retailers who would not observe it. First, it discussed the subject with Dart Drug. When Dart indicated willingness to go along, the other retailers were approached, and Dart's apparent willingness to cooperate was used as the lever to gain their acquiescence in the program. Having secured those acquiescences, Parke Davis returned to Dart Drug with the report of the accomplishment. Not until all this was done was the advertising suspended and sales to all the retailers resumed. In this manner, Parke Davis sought assurances of compliance and got them, as well as the compliance itself. It was only by actively bringing about substantial unanimity among the competitors that Parke Davis was able to gain adherence to its policy.362 U.S. at 46.
Instead of inducing the retailers to adhere to the price-maintenance program as a "matter of individual free choice prompted alone" by individual self-interest, Parke Davis offered them its products "packaged in a competition-free wrapping . . . by virtue of concerted action induced by the manufacturer." Parke Davis was "thus the organizer of a price maintenance combination or conspiracy in violation of the Sherman Act."362 U.S. at 47.
Mootness
The district court alternatively rested its judgment of dismissal on the holding that Parke Davis had discontinued the scheme. "So far as the record indicates any reason, it is that Parke Davis stopped its efforts because the Department of Justice had instituted an investigation." The Court said that dismissal in such circumstances was an abuse of discretion:
The courts have an obligation, once a violation of the antitrust laws has been established, to protect the public from a continuation of the harmful and unlawful activities. A trial court's wide discretion in fashioning remedies is not to be exercised to deny relief altogether by lightly inferring an abandonment of the unlawful activities from a cessation which seems timed to anticipate suit.362 U.S. at 47-48.
Concurrence
thumb|150px|Justice Stewart
Justice Stewart agreed that the record amply "shows an illegal combination to maintain retail prices." He therefore could "find no occasion to question, even by innuendo, the continuing validity of the Colgate decision. (The innuendo to which he objects is in such statements as "So long as Colgate is not overruled, this result is tolerated."362 U.S. at 44 (Stewart, J., concurring).)
Dissent
thumb|150px|Justice Harlan
Justice Harlan protested:
The Court's opinion reaches much further than at once may meet the eye, and justifies fuller discussion than otherwise might appear warranted. Scrutiny of the opinion will reveal that the Court has done no less than send to its demise the Colgate doctrine, which has been a basic part of antitrust law concepts since it was first announced in 1919.362 U.S. at 49 (Harlan, J., dissenting).
He found the majority's limited Colgate doctrine vague and incomprehensible:
The Court now says that the seller runs afoul of the Sherman Act when he goes beyond mere announcement of his policy and refusal to sell not because the bare announcement and refusal fall outside the statutory phrase, but because any additional step removes a "countervailing consideration" in favor of permitting a seller to choose his customers. But we are left wholly in the dark as to what the purported new standard is for establishing a "contract, combination . . . or conspiracy [under § 1]."362 U.S. at 53.
He denied that Parke Davis went beyond Colgate. Moreover, he sees the majority's treatment of the trial court's findings as disguised oevrruling of Colgate—"I think that what the Court has really done here is to throw the Colgate doctrine into discard." He concludes: "It is surely the emptiest of formalisms to profess respect for Colgate and eviscerate it in application.'362 U.S. at 57.
Subsequent developments
In Russell Stover Candies v. FTC,Russell Stover Candies, Inc. v. FTC, 718 F.2d 256 (8th Cir. 1983), reversing In re Russell Stover Candies, 100 F.T.C. 1 (1982). the FTC, "in an admitted effort to test the viability of Colgate,"Glen 0. Robinson, Explaining Vertical Agreements: The Colgate Puzzle and Antitrust Method, 80  577, 594-95 & n.68 (1994). took the position that an unlawful combination or agreement could be found when a buyer unwillingly submitted to and complied with a supplier's pricing policy in order to avoid termination. The Eighth Circuit reversed, however, pointing to the statement in Parke Davis that "a simple refusal to sell to customers who will not resell at prices suggested by the seller is permissible under the Sherman Act" although an unlawful "combination is also organized if the producer secures adherence to his suggested prices by means which go beyond his mere declination to sell to a customer who will not observe his announced policy"; the court added that Parke Davis had been found to have gone far "beyond the limits of the Colgate doctrine" by enlisting wholesalers and retailers to adhere to and participate in the price-fixing program.718 F.2d at 258 (quoting 362 U.S. at 43). The court said that the FTC has presented a case in which "there are no 'plus factors' to take the case beyond Colgate," so it reversed the Commission.718 F.2d at 260. "Despite the FTC's attempt to gut Colgate," however, "it did not choose to argue that Section 5 [of the FTC Act] does not require agreement."Robinson, at 594 n.68. Instead, the FTC attempted to find a violation by invoking § 1 of the Sherman Act, including specifically the requirement of a contract,
combination, or conspiracy,Id. Professor Robinson found this "a little surprising." Id. There is case law that it is unnecessary under § 5 to find a conspiracy. See ; ;  (dictum: if the defendant's "purpose and practice . . . runs counter to the public policy declared in the Sherman and Clayton Acts, the Federal Trade Commission has the power to suppress it as an unfair method of competition"). but it failed to establish that.
In Business Electronics Corp. v. Sharp Electronics Corp.,. the Supreme Court held that mere evidence of complaints by retailer competitors about price cutting did not permit inference of an agreement to fix prices. The Court held that "a vertical restraint is not illegal per se unless it includes some agreement on price or price levels."485 U.S. at 735-36. The Court explained that some economic effect must be shown to depart from a rule-of-reason analysis: "[T]here is a presumption in favor of a rule-of-reason standard; [and] departure from that standard must be justified by demonstrable economic effect, such as the facilitation of cartelizing. . . ."485 U.S. at 726. A large part of the rationale of the holding of a Sherman Act violation in Parke Davis is that Parke Davis organized a horizontal cartel agreement among its direct customers to fix prices.See Parke Davis, 362 U.S. at 43.
In Leegin Creative Leather Products v. PSKS, Inc.,. the Supreme Court overruled Dr. Miles. It held "that vertical price restraints are to be judged by the rule of reason." Of this ruling, the dissent (but not the majority of the Court) said:
We here overrule one statutory case, Dr. Miles, decided 100 years ago, and we overrule the cases that reaffirmed its per se rule in the intervening years. See, e.g., Trenton Potteries, 273 U.S., at 399-401; Bausch & Lomb, 321 U.S., at 721; United States v. Parke, Davis & Co., 362 U.S. 29, 45-47 (1960); Simpson v. Union Oil Co. of Cal., 377 U.S. 13, 16-17 (1964).551 U.S. at _.
The particular pages of the Parke Davis opinion that the Leegin dissent cites include those in which the Parke Davis Court had found that Parke Davis had put together a horizontal combination or conspiracy among those to whom it sold its products, as in Interstate Circuit, Inc., v. United States.. The majority opinion, however, says nothing about overruling Parke Davis.
Furthermore, the majority opinion observed, in obiter dictum, that a vertical arrangement may organize a horizontal cartel:
A horizontal cartel among competing manufacturers or competing retailers that decreases output or reduces competition in order to increase price is, and ought to be, per se unlawful. To the extent a vertical agreement setting minimum resale prices is entered upon to facilitate either type of cartel, it, too, would need to be held unlawful under the rule of reason. This type of agreement may also be useful evidence for a plaintiff attempting to prove the existence of a horizontal cartel.Leegin, 551 U.S. at 893.
United States v. Apple Inc. involved a fact pattern very similar to Parke Davis, but in reverse. A retailer of e-books put together or "facilitated" a combination among its suppliers (publishers) to fix and raise prices. The Second Circuit held that "the district court did not err in determining that Apple orchestrated an agreement with and among the Publisher Defendants, in characterizing this agreement as a horizontal price fixing-conspiracy, or in holding that the conspiracy unreasonably restrained trade in violation of § 1 of the Sherman Act.791 F.3d at 314. Pointing to "express collusion among" the publishers, the Court said that "Apple consciously played a key role in organizing that collusion."791 F.3d at 316. Apple argued that under Leegin its conduct was vertical and had to be judged under a rule-of-reason analysis. The Second Circuit rejected that argument, saying that it was settled law that a mixed vertical and horizontal conspiracy, where distributors and manufacturers act together to fix prices or engage in other conduct illegal per se, as in this case "in which a vertical player organizes a horizontal cartel," are to be judged under the rules applicable to horizontal cartels: "In that situation, the court need not consider whether the vertical agreements restrained trade because all participants agreed to the horizontal restraint, which is and ought to be, per se unlawful."791 F.3d at 325.
Commentary
Professor Robinson argues that "some surpassingly foolish Supreme Court decisions" have misinterpreted Parke Davis as  making "coercion an effective substitute for agreement."Robinson, at 600. Although in Parke Davis, "the Court did not use the term 'coercion' to characterize the manufacturer's enforcement practices (describing them instead as creating a 'combination')," a few years later "the Court in Simpson v. Union Oil Co. interpreted Parke, Davis as holding that "a supplier may not use coercion on its retail outlets to achieve resale price maintenance."Robinson, at 500 n.90 (citing ).
Professor Hovenkamp contends that Parke Davis partially survives the Leegin decision.Herbert Hovenkamp, Leegin, the Rule of Reason, and Vertical Agreement 12 (2010). He suggests that Parke Davis does not find a price-fixing agreement on the basis of "announced conditions, terminations, or the use of third parties to gather information or to effect a termination." Rather, the Parke Davis Court finds an illegal combination or conspiracy on the basis of "control of third party resales and, more arguably, individualized negotiations with dealers falling short of traditional agreement, and perhaps even exhortation meetings." Although the Parke Davis case also involved "wholesalers reporting noncomplying dealers to the manufacturer as forming an 'information conspiracy' with the latter," he regards that as no longer surviving as a tenable theory under present law.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:1960 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Patane" ==> """
United States v. Patane, 542 U.S. 630 (2004), was a United States Supreme Court case relating to Miranda warnings.
 Background 
Samuel Patane was arrested in front of his home for calling his ex-girlfriend in violation of a restraining order. During the arrest, police officers began reading Patane his Miranda rights. Patane told the officers that he already knew his rights, at which point the officers then stopped reading them.  Detective Benner asked Patane about a pistol and Patane told him that he had a gun in his house. The police searched Patane's house with his permission and found the gun. As a felon, Patane was not permitted to possess a gun and was prosecuted for possession.
During the trial on gun possession charges, Patane argued that his arrest violated the Fourth Amendment prohibition of unreasonable searches and seizures and the Fifth Amendment right not to incriminate oneself because there was not probable cause to arrest him and because the gun had been found as a result of an un-Mirandized confession.
The district court initially ruled that there was not probable cause for his arrest and that it was therefore unconstitutional. A Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals panel disagreed, holding that Patane's ex-girlfriend had given police probable cause for the arrest. However, the panel held that the gun could not be used as evidence because it had been found as the result of an un-Mirandized (and therefore unconstitutional) confession. The government appealed, arguing that physical evidence found as the result of un-Mirandized testimony could be used in court, despite the fact that the testimony itself was inadmissible.
Issue
Whether a failure to give a suspect the warnings prescribed in Miranda v. Arizona requires the suppression of physical evidence derived from the suspect's unwarned but voluntary statement.https://www.supremecourt.gov/qp/02-01183qp.pdf 
Holding
In a decision without a majority opinion, three justices wrote that the Miranda warnings were merely intended to prevent violations of the Constitution, and that because Patane's un-Mirandized testimony was not admitted at trial the Constitution (specifically the Fifth Amendment's protection against self-incrimination) had not been violated. Physical evidence obtained from un-Mirandized statements, as long as those statements were not forced by police, were constitutionally admissible. Two other justices also held that the physical evidence was constitutionally admissible, but did so with the understanding that the Miranda warnings must be accommodated to other objectives of the criminal justice system. They did not discuss whether the Miranda warnings were, in themselves, constitutionally required.
See also
Miranda v. Arizona
Miranda warning
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 542
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "United States v. Payner" ==> """
United States v. Payner, 447 U.S. 727 (1980), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court reversed a district court's suppression of evidence in the criminal prosecution of an Ohio businessman charged with tax evasion. The case concerned both issues of criminal procedure and the application of the exclusionary rule derived from the Fourth Amendment. By a 6–3 margin the Court both reaffirmed its earlier rulings' holding that only the party whose Fourth Amendment protections may have been violated has standing to challenge the evidence seized in the search, and barred lower courts from exercising their supervisory power to exclude such evidence at the trial of third parties.
The case had been brought as the fruit of Operation Trade Winds, a lengthy Internal Revenue Service (IRS) investigation into the use of offshore accounts in tax havens by American citizens attempting to evade tax liability and hide assets, some of which were believed to have been derived from criminal activities. At one point, a private investigator working with a Florida IRS agent had taken the executive's briefcase for the IRS to open and duplicate the documents within, then returned the briefcase. (This aspect was described by the district judge as the "briefcase caper", a sobriquet  which has subsequently become attached to the case as a whole).Sharon Davies, , 73 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1275, 1306 (2000). Subpoenas based on the information in those documents yielded the documents used in a prosecution later of Ohio businessman Jack Payner.
Lewis Powell wrote for the majority that prior case law gave Payner no reasonable expectation of privacy in the documents used to build the case against him. While the Court, too, was outraged by the IRS agent's disregard for the law, the judicial branch's supervisory power was meant to be used only against its own excesses, and Congress was better equipped to remedy such breaches of the Constitution since there were no ways to limit how a court might apply such a rule. Thurgood Marshall's dissent noted not only the extent to which the IRS had gone in planning the briefcase caper but that its agents had purposely been instructed to take advantage of the loophole created by the court's standing rule. Later commentators read the case as expanding the standing rule, and indicating a shift to focusing on the deterrence effect of applying the exclusionary rule instead of the courts' supervisory role.
Initial investigation
In 1965 the IRS initiated "Operation Trade Winds", a broad investigation into the use of offshore tax havens by American citizens, some of whom had links to organized crime. Agents in the Jacksonville office, where the investigation was headquartered, began to focus on Castle Bank & Trust, in Nassau, Bahamas, when they learned a suspected drug trafficker had opened an account there. Richard Jaffe, one of the special agents involved in Trade Winds, asked Norman Casper, a private investigator he sometimes used as a source, to look into Castle.United States v. Payner, 434 F. Supp 113, 118 (N.D. Ohio 1977).
Casper made the acquaintance of Michael Wolstencroft, one of Castle's vice presidents. He introduced Wolstencroft to Sybol Kennedy, a former employee of his who also did private investigative work. In 1973 Wolstencroft came to Miami for a few days, and Casper came up with a plan to get information on who Castle's depositors were. Jaffe approved the basic outline.Payner, 434 F. Supp at 119.
Upon Wolstencroft's arrival in Miami, he went to Kennedy's apartment and took her out for a dinner date. While they were out, Casper entered the apartment with a key Kennedy had given him and took Wolstencroft's briefcase to Jaffe. A locksmith created a duplicate key to the briefcase. Once it was opened Jaffe and other IRS personnel microfilmed 400 of the documents within. They were replaced and returned to Kennedy's apartment before she and Wolstencroft returned from dinner.Payner, 434 F. Supp at 120.
The documents revealed extensive cooperation between Castle and the Bank of Perrine in Florida. Later, at Casper's instruction, Kennedy stole a rolodex from Castle's office in Nassau during a visit to Wolstencroft. Among those with contact information in it was Cleveland-area businessman Jack Payner. The IRS let him know that it was investigating his tax returns for four years. Subpoenas were issued to the Bank of Perrine. In response to one the bank produced a 1972 letter from Payner pledging the $100,000 in his Castle account as collateral for a loan. Since Payner had said he did not have any offshore accounts on his tax return for that year, the case was referred to the United States Attorney for the Northern District of Ohio. Based on that evidence, Payner was indicted in 1976 on a charge of filing a false tax return, a felony.Payner, 434 F. Supp at 122.
Trial
A year after the indictment, Payner moved to suppress the government's evidence against him as fruit of the poisonous tree, developed from evidence obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment's prohibition of unreasonable search and seizure. Federal prosecutors argued in response that the evidence was developed from sources other than the documents in Wolstencroft's briefcase, and that even if those had been the only source Payner had no standing to invoke the exclusionary rule because his rights had not been violated when the documents were copied.Wolstencroft was also indicted for aiding and abetting Payner, but was never prosecuted because he never returned to the United States (Payner, 447 U.S. at 746 n.13 (Marshall, J., dissenting)).  With the agreement of both parties, Judge John Michael Manos conducted the proceedings as a bench trial, with himself as sole trier of fact, considering both the government's case on the merits and the defendant's motion to suppress concurrently, in order to determine whether or not any of the government's evidence was obtained independently of the contents of Wolstencroft's briefcase or the rolodex.Payner, 434 F. Supp at 118 n.2.
After both parties had presented their cases, Manos granted the motion to suppress. Prosecutors appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. A three-judge panel headed by the circuit's chief judge, Harry Phillips, dismissed the appeal for lack of jurisdiction. Phillips wrote that the federal statute limiting the government's right of appeal in criminal prosecutions was explicit that rulings suppressing evidence could only be appealed before trial, not afterwards. He criticized Manos's handling of the case, saying that the motion to suppress should have been heard first in any event, in order to preserve the government's right of appeal.United States v. Payner, 572 F.2d 144, 145–46 (6th Cir. 1978).
With the case before him again, Manos amended his rulings accordingly. He first found Payner guilty, then granted the motion to suppress and, on his own initiative, set aside the verdict. In a memorandum opinion on the suppression, he set forth his reasoning.
"This Court finds that the United States, through its agents, Richard Jaffe, and others, knowingly and willfully participated in the unlawful seizure of Michael Wolstencroft's briefcase", Manos declared. He did not accept the government claim that Casper had acted on his own, since Jaffe had been not only involved and aware but had gone so far as to clear the plan with his own superior. The government had also not proved its case that the evidence against Payner was developed independently of the theft of the briefcase. At trial he had not found Jaffe a trustworthy or credible witness. The IRS agent had, in fact, told a congressional committee that the evidence from the briefcase was unavailable from any other source, and the timing of the subpoenas reinforced that claim.Payner, 434 F. Supp at 122–23.
Manos then turned to the legal issues surrounding the exclusionary rule. He cited the three circumstances under which the Supreme Court had said it was to be applied: when defendants' rights had been violated, when the court found the government's conduct outrageous, and as part of the courts' supervisory power over the operations of government, under which "to allow admission of the evidence calls into question the integrity of the entire federal judicial system".Payner, 434 F. Supp at 125.
The first instance did not apply. In Alderman v. United States,Alderman v. United States,  the first Fourth Amendment case decided by the Supreme Court after it shifted the root of the Amendment's protection from property to privacy in Katz v. United States,Katz v. United States, . the Court had broadened an earlier holding, Goldstein v. United States,Goldstein v. United States, . into a principle that the exclusionary rule could not be invoked vicariously. It had reaffirmed that holding recently in Rakas v. Illinois.Rakas v. Illinois, . And in United States v. Miller,United States v. Miller, . it had held that there was no reasonable expectation of privacy in banking records.
All the same Manos believed just as strongly that Payner's due process rights had been violated by the unlawful copying of the record's in Wolstencroft's briefcase. Drawing on a line of cases starting with Rochin v. California,Rochin v. California, . where the Court had been so outraged by police officers' forced use of a stomach pump to retrieve two swallowed morphine capsules that they overturned the conviction, and clarified in United States v. JanisUnited States v. Janis, . when the Court declined to exclude evidence from a civil proceeding that had been seized in a good-faith belief it was permissible, he held that the jurisprudence on the issue:
For the same reasons, the supervisory power of the courts first outlined in McNabb v. United StatesMcNabb v. United States, . required suppression of the evidence.Payner, 434 F. Supp at 133–35.
The government appealed the suppression order again. After hearing arguments late in 1978, another Phillips-chaired panel affirmed Manos early the following year. In a short per curiam opinion, the panel concurred with the district court's findings of fact. It found the suppression a permissible use of the court's supervisory power and declined to consider the constitutional questions.United States v. Payner, 590 F.2d 206 (6th Cir. 1979) (per curiam).
A petition for rehearing, either by another panel or en banc, was denied in March. The government then petitioned the Supreme Court for certiorari, which was granted later in the year.444 U.S. 822. Oral arguments were heard in February 1980.
Decision
The Court announced its ruling in June 1980, near the end of term. A majority of six justices had agreed with the government and reversed Manos and the appeals court, holding that the evidence was admissible. Lewis F. Powell, Jr., reaffirmed earlier holdings that only the aggrieved party could challenge the constitutionality of evidence, and that even the deliberate, sustained nature of the violation in the instant case did not change that. He also outlined reasons why the Court did not think it wise to extend the exclusionary rule in that direction, since its supervisory power was properly limited to actions of the judicial branch, and Congressional hearings had already exposed the excesses of Operation Trade Winds and led the IRS to shut it down. Chief Justice Warren Burger added a short concurring opinion emphasizing the latter point but also distancing the Court from the conduct of the agents.
Thurgood Marshall wrote for the dissenting justices. He felt that the deliberate and calculated plans of Jaffe and Casper, as well as the former's admission to Congress that he had been made aware of the standing provision during training and encouraged to take advantage of it, required that the Court act. The Court's supervisory power was about protecting the integrity of the judicial process, he reminded the majority.
A later petition for rehearing was denied. The Sixth Circuit remanded the case to the district court for further proceedings in the fall of 1980.United States v. Payner, 629 F.2d 1181 (6th Cir. 1980).
Majority opinion
After reviewing the facts of the case, Powell found no reason to doubt or add to Manos's conclusion that Payner lacked Fourth Amendment standing. In a footnote, he dismissed an argument in Payner's brief that Bahamian banking secrecy laws gave him an expectation of privacy. None of the stolen documents would have been covered by it, and even if they were the cited section of law was outdated, the current statute was "hardly a blanket guarantee of privacy" since it had limited scope, many exceptions and the brief had cited no authority on how to construe it.United States v. Payner, 447 U.S. 727, 732 n.4.
He turned to the legal issues. "We certainly can understand the District Court's commendable desire to deter deliberate intrusions into the privacy of persons who are unlikely to become defendants in a criminal prosecution," he wrote. "No court should condone the unconstitutional and possibly criminal behavior of those who planned and executed this 'briefcase caper.'"Payner, 447 U.S. at 733.
But the Court's many precedents in that area "do not command the exclusion of evidence in every case of illegality. Instead, they must be weighed against the considerable harm that would flow from indiscriminate application of an exclusionary rule." Thus its use was properly restricted to instances where it would most be useful in remedying the violation, wrote Powell. "Our cases have consistently recognized that unbending application of the exclusionary sanction to enforce ideals of governmental rectitude would impede unacceptably the truthfinding functions of judge and jury."Payner, 447 U.S. 727, 734.
Similarly, Powell wrote, the supervisory power should be carefully used. The Court had said as such in Elkins v. United StatesElkins v. United States, . nearly two decades before, and demonstrated that restraint most recently in United States v. CaceresUnited States v. Caceres, . "Were we to accept this use of the supervisory power," he concluded, "we would confer on the judiciary discretionary power to disregard the considered limitations of the law it is charged with enforcing."Payner, 447 U.S. at 734–37. In a footnote, he also pointed out that five years earlier, in 1975, the House Government Operations Committee had held hearings on Trade Winds and other related IRS investigations which had revealed the briefcase caper and other abusive investigatory practices. In response the investigations had been called off.Payner, 447 U.S. at 733 n5.
Concurrence
"Orderly government under our system of separate powers calls for internal self-restraint and discipline in each [b]ranch," Burger wrote. "[T]his Court has no general supervisory authority over operations of the [e]xecutive [b]ranch, as it has with respect to the federal courts." He emphasized his agreement with the majority, but noted that its opinion "should not be read as condoning the conduct of the IRS 'private investigators' disclosed by this record, or as approval of their evidence-gathering methods."Payner, 447 U.S. at 737–38 (Burger, C.J., concurring).
Dissent
The majority's holding, Marshall wrote, "effectively turns the standing rules created by this Court for assertions of Fourth Amendment violations into a sword to be used by the Government to permit it deliberately to invade one person's Fourth Amendment rights in order to obtain evidence against another person." Courts should, he said, be allowed to prevent that.Payner 447 U.S. at 738 (Thomas, J., dissenting).
He reviewed the facts of the case as Manos had outlined them, believing fuller detail was necessary to appreciate the extent to which the IRS agents had been involved in planning and executing the briefcase caper. He reiterated that they had been fully aware of the standing rule when they planned the investigation. "It is in the context of these findings", he wrote, "that the suppression issue must be considered."Payner, 447 U.S. at 738–43.
In support of the use of supervisory powers to suppress, he cited Louis Brandeis's famous dissent in Olmstead v. United States: "If the Government becomes a lawbreaker, it breeds contempt for law; it invites every man to become a law unto himself; it invites anarchy."Payner, 447 U.S. at 745 (Marshall, J., dissenting) (citing Olmstead v. United States, , 471 (1928)). He distinguished the cases where the Court had exercised its powers and suppressed evidenced obtained unconstitutionally as those cases where, like the instant one, the seizure of the evidence had come about through deliberate violation of law. "If the federal court permits such evidence, the intended product of deliberately illegal Government action, to be used to obtain a conviction, it places its imprimatur upon such lawlessness, and thereby taints its own integrity."Payner, 447 U.S. at 745–46 (majority opinion).
Since the purpose of the supervisory power was to allow the courts to protect their own integrity, Marshall continued, he was all the more puzzled by the majority's focus on the Fourth Amendment's standing provisions. "The only way the IRS can benefit from the evidence it chose to obtain illegally is if the evidence is admitted at trial against persons such as Payner; that was the very point of the criminal exercise in the first place", he wrote. "Such a pollution of the federal courts should not be permitted."Payner, 447 U.S. at 747–48.
He attacked the notion that the courts were improperly intruding on the prerogatives of the executive branch:
Lastly, to respond to charges that this was potentially an indiscriminate application of the exclusionary rule, he quoted from one of Powell's own opinions, in Hampton v. United StatesPayner, 447 U.S. at 751 (Marshall, J., dissenting) (quoting Hampton v. United States, , 495 (Powell, J., concurring)). to the effect that at some point a case where the Court would have to take a stand against abusive investigative methods. "That appropriate case has arrived, and the Court should prevent the Government from profiting by use in the federal courts of evidence deliberately obtained by illegal actions taken in bad faith hostility to constitutional rights."Payner, 447 U.S. at 750–51.
Subsequent jurisprudence
No later holdings modified Payner, but it has been among the cases that have guided the Court in other tests of the supervisory power and the exclusionary rule. Several years later, when the Court created the good-faith exception to the exclusionary rule in United States v. Leon, Byron White's majority opinion quoted Powell's criticism of the inflexible application of the rule in support of allowing good-faith exceptions.United States v. Leon, , 907 (1984). The next year, Thomas would himself cite Powell as to how the supervisory power could not be exercised in conflict with existing statutory or constitutional provisions in Thomas v. Arn, upholding a Sixth Circuit rule that required parties appealing a district court judgement to have filed timely written objections to a magistrate's report.Thomas v. Arn, , 184, (1985).
During those years, two appellate courts would rely on Payner in reaching opposite conclusions about when to allow the use of the supervisory power. A few months after it was handed down, the Seventh Circuit upheld a district court's suppression of evidence during the prosecution of a Chicago gambling ring in United States v. Cortina. An evidentiary hearing found that FBI agent William Brown had greatly exaggerated much of the information used to prepare an affidavit used to obtain the search warrant that had uncovered most of the evidence.United States v. Cortina, 630 F.2d 1207, (7th Cir. 1980).
Judge William J. Bauer discussed Payner at length in his opinion. He found that the instant case fell within the scope of the supervisory power as delineated by Powell's opinion, since it was evidence seized from the defendants themselves. The government had argued, however, that none of them had suffered a violation of their privacy expectations and therefore the supervisory power could not be invoked. But Payner "did not hold that defendants must establish a legitimate expectation of privacy to invoke the supervisory powers if it is proven that the challenged evidence was seized from defendants", Bauer wrote, and had explicitly rejected a notion that it was identical with the Fourth Amendment. "We recognize that the supervisory power is a complement to, not a substitute for, the Fourth Amendment."Cortina, 630 F.2d 1207, 1215–16.
Bauer felt it was even more important to deter illegal conduct in this case since it "was committed within the sanctity of the court itself". He noted that it was very difficult to uncover falsification in search warrant affidavits, and that it had only been the good faith and cooperation of the federal prosecutors that had made it possible to do so in the instant case. In that vein, he also felt that enough damage had been done to the judicial process by that falsification to outweigh any harm that might be done by excluding the evidence. He concluded:
In 1984 District of Columbia Circuit judge Antonin Scalia, later elevated to the Supreme Court himself, would also rely on Payner to allow some contested evidence. In United States v. Byers, the appellee sought the exclusion, on several grounds, of evidence from a psychiatric interview used to convict him of murder. Scalia found Powell's point that the balance between the deterrent value and social harm of excluding the evidence does not change whether they are considered against the supervisory power or the exclusionary rule "relevant" in holding the evidence admissible.United States v. Byers, 740 F.2d 1104, 1122 (D.C. Cir. 1984).
Analysis and commentary
Kevin Michael Carome has argued that Payner gave insufficient consideration to judicial integrity in allowing the tainted evidence. "Even where the defendants' rights are not violated," he wrote in a Boston College Law Review article, "courts should be permitted to rely on the supervisory power to exclude evidence seized by grossly improper means". He believed the evidence could have been suppressed even under a more limited exclusionary rule.Michael Kevin Carome, Limiting Exclusion of Evidence Under the Federal Court's Supervisory Power with a Fourth Amendment Sword, 22 B.C. L. Rev. 567, 572 (1981).
Prior to Payner, there had been arguments that the supervisory power should be thought of only as the judicial branch's self-policing ability. But, Carome argued, from the time the Court first invoked it in McNabb, "it has been used to counteract improprieties of the executive branch that do not amount to constitutional violations." Courts have also recognized that Congress can limit its application, and have used it sparingly, limiting the power's potential to upset the balance of powers. It also was not intrusive, checking the actions of the executive branch only insofar as it reached criminal prosecutions.
In Payner, the government's brief had also suggested Federal Rule of Evidence 402 barred the exercise of the supervisory power, since it holds that only statutory or constitutional provisions may be used to justify suppressing evidence. Powell did not even mention it in his majority opinion. Carome speculated that while the Court may not want to expand the supervisory power, it does not want to surrender it either.Carome, at 585 n.169.
He further argued that the supervisory power could, unlike the exclusionary rule, be applied on behalf of defendants whose rights had not been violated personally. "Because the supervisory power is non-constitutional in nature," he wrote, "federal courts may utilize it to create standards that exceed minimum constitutional levels. Hence, the power need not be doctrinally confined to the vindication of personal rights ... [T]he supervisory
power enables federal courts, in proper circumstances, to shift the focus from the rights of particular litigants and place it upon governmental conduct or institutions threatening the courts' integrity."Carome, at 586–87.
Carome pointed to cases where this had been done. In Thiel v. Southern Pacific Corp.,Thiel v. Southern Pacific Corp. . and Ballard v. United States,Ballard v. United States, . the Court had overturned a civil verdict and criminal convictions respectively where certain categories had been unlawfully excluded from the jury pool—without requiring parties to demonstrate they were prejudiced by the exclusions, since they had done enough damage to the judicial system. More recently, a Sixth Circuit case had excluded evidence obtained by a government informant who violated attorney–client privilege, conduct he called "more outrageous than Payner" from trials of several defendants.Valencia v. United States, 541 F.2d 618 (6th Cir. 1976). Based on those cases, Carome said,
Cortina showed that courts nevertheless felt there was a need for the power, and Carome proposed that the cases where it had initially been exercised called for the creation of a standard. He suggested it be used:
Having standards would allay the Court's concerns, and send clear signals to law enforcement as to what conduct would not be tolerated. He called on the Court to re-evaluate Payner at some point in the future. "The Court's failure to so act would allow such abuses to continue to taint the integrity of [the] courts," he said. "A nation pledged to obey the rule of law cannot ignore such threats to its basic order."Carome, at 593.
A later commentator, Ohio State law professor Sharon Davies, also found Payner's narrow approach to the issue troubling. She looked at it through the lens of law and economics, particularly the work of Robert Cooter on prices and sanctions. Both could be applied to undesirable conduct, but the former permits it by requiring a party to personally bear costs that would otherwise be borne by others, whereas the latter is meant to discourage undesirable conduct as strongly as possible by imposing a high price.Davies, at 1283–86.
Had the Court, she asked, considered violations of the Fourth Amendment an unconscionable wrong to be deterred with sanctions or a sometimes necessary evil that could be minimized with a price? The language various Supreme Court majorities had used in describing the infractions suggested, to her, the former.Davies, at 1294–98. At the time of Mapp v. Ohio, when the exclusionary rule was applied to proceedings in state courts, its imposition was defended as much for its role in protecting judicial integrity as well as deterring unconstitutional investigative practices. "[E]vidence collected in violation of Fourth Amendment limits", Davies recounts, "was so imbued with the potential to smear that even judicial robes normally infused with an aura of impartiality and fairness would be tarnished by it."Davies, at 1299–301.
As the Court shifted over time to deterrence as the sole basis for the exclusionary rule, requiring a balancing test that is essentially a cost-benefit analysis, Davies argues that more and more exceptions to it have been createdDavies, at 1301–06. that another observer has described as "inclusionary rules."Davies, at 1301 n.146. She found Payner to be "[a]n example of government officials engaged in precisely this type of overt cost-benefit analysis ... If, as in Payner, police are truly free to choose whether to abide by or violate the constitutional requirements, the penalty for the decision to inflict the constitutional harm begins to look less and less like a sanction for wrongful conduct."Davies, at 1306–07. She did not find the scope of the violation surprising either, since "when viewed from the perspective of a self-interested actor, these developments make perfect economic sense, for '[o]nce it pays to fall short of the legal standard, it pays to fall significantly short of it.'"Davies, 1322–23 (quoting Robert Cooter, Prices and Sanctions, 84 Colum. L. Rev. 1523, 1531 (1984)).
See also
Nilon Limited v Royal Westminster Investments S.A.: a similar British case
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 447
Notes
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Bahamas–United States relations
Category:Banking in the Bahamas
Category:Money laundering
Category:Offshore finance
"""

From "United States v. Perez" ==> """
United States v. Josef Perez, 22 U.S. (9 Wheat) 579 (1824), is a case of the Supreme Court of the United States. The decision held that when a criminal trial results in a hung jury, the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment does not prevent the defendant from being retried.
Background of the case
Josef Perez (born in 1800) was tried in 1822 for piracy—at that time a capital offense. Perez had been accused of boarding and robbing the schooner Bee as she was docked at San Juan de los Remedios, Cuba.
His trial originally resulted in a mistrial because the jury were unable to agree on a verdict.  The judge dismissed the jury, and Perez' attorney claimed that Perez should be discharged since he had been tried once and not convicted.
The decision
The Supreme Court held that courts should be cautious and exercise sound discretion in discharging a jury prior to a verdict.  However, doing so does not bar retrial for the same offense.  The Supreme Court declined to order Perez released from custody, and declared it fit to retry him on the original indictment.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 22
References
External links
Category:1824 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:Criminal cases in the Marshall Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
"""

From "United States v. Perkins" ==> """
United States v. Perkins, 116 U.S. 483 (1886), was a decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning the removal power under the Appointments Clause. 
 References 
 External links 
Category:1880 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
"""

From "United States v. Peters (1795)" ==> """
United States v. Peters, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 121 (1795), was a United States Supreme Court case determining that the federal district court has no jurisdiction over a foreign privateer where the intended captured ship was not within the jurisdiction of the court. The Supreme Court may prohibit the district court from proceeding in such a matter. In the decision the court held:
The district court has no jurisdiction of a libel for damages, against a privateer, commissioned by a foreign belligerent power, for the capture of an American vessel as prize—the captured vessel not being within the jurisdiction.
The supreme court will grant a writ of prohibition to a district judge, when he is proceeding in a cause of which the district court has no jurisdiction.Reports of cases ruled and adjudged in the several courts of the United States, and of Pennsylvania: held at the seat of the federal government, Volume 3, Banks Law Pub. Co., 1905, pg. 120
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 3
 Richard Peters (Continental Congress)
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1795 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rutledge Court
"""

From "United States v. Philadelphia National Bank" ==> """
United States v. Philadelphia National Bank, 374 U.S. 321 (1963), also called the Philadelphia Bank case, was a 1963 decision of the United States Supreme Court that held Section 7 of the Clayton Act, as amended in 1950,15 U.S.C. § 15. applied to bank mergers. It was the first case in which the Supreme Court considered the application of antitrust laws to the commercial banking industry.374 U.S. at 324. In addition to holding the statute applicable to bank mergers,374 U.S. at 342. the Court established a presumption that mergers that covered at least 30 percent of the relevant market were presumptively unlawful.374 U.S. at 365.
Background
The defendant, Philadelphia National Bank (PNB), was a commercial bank, a unique type of financial institution because "they alone are permitted by law to accept demand deposits. This distinctive power gives commercial banking a key role in the national economy."374 U.S. at 326. In addition, commercial banks engage in the important services of "the creation of additional money and credit, the management of the checking account system, and the furnishing of short-term business loans."374 U.S. at 326-27.
PNB and Girard Trust Corn Exchange Bank, which were respectively the second- and the third-largest of the 42 commercial banks with head offices in the Philadelphia metropolitan area, proposed to merge. PNB had assets of over $1 billion, making it the 21st-largest bank in the nation. Girard had assets of about $750 million. If the two banks merged, the resulting bank would be the largest in the Philadelphia metropolitan area, with 36% of the area banks' total assets (nearly $2 billion), 36% of deposits, and 34% of net loans. It and the second-largest bank (First Pennsylvania Bank and Trust Company, now the largest) would have between them 59% of the total assets, 58% of deposits, and 58% of the net loans. After such a merger, the four-largest banks in the area would have 78% of total assets, 77% of deposits, and 78% of net loans.374 U.S. at 331.
Both merging banks owed their present size to previous mergers. A trend toward concentration was noticeable in the Philadelphia area generally: the number of commercial banks declined from 108 in 1947 to 42 in 1960. Since 1950, PNB acquired nine formerly-independent banks and Girard had acquired six. The acquisitions accounted for 59% and 85% of the respective banks' asset growth during the period, 63% and 91% of their deposit growth, and 12% and 37% of their loan growth. During that period, the seven largest banks in the Philadelphia area increased their combined share of the area's total commercial bank resources from about 61% to about 90%.374 U.S. at 331.
The Comptroller of Currency approved the merger, despite reports from two other banking agencies and the Attorney General that the proposed merger would have substantial anticompetitive effects in the Philadelphia metropolitan area.374 U.S. at 333-34. The Comptroller explained the basis for his decision to approve the merger:
Since there will remain an adequate number of alternative sources of banking service in Philadelphia, and in view of the beneficial effects of this consolidation upon international and national competition it was concluded that the over-all effect upon competition would not be unfavorable. ... [Also, the consolidated bank] would be far better able to serve the convenience and needs of its community by being of material assistance to its city and state in their efforts to attract new industry and to retain existing industry.374 U.S. at 334.
The US Justice Department's Antitrust Division then sued PNB to enjoin the merger, invoking Section 1 of the Sherman Act and Section 7 of the Clayton Act. The district court ruled for PNB and the government appealed to the Supreme Court.
Supreme Court ruling
thumb|right|150px|Justice William Brennan
The Supreme Court reversed the judgment below, in an opinion authored by Justice William J. Brennan, joined by four other members of the Court.Justices John M. Harlan and Potter Stewart dissented. Justice Byron R. White, who had been Deputy Attorney General when the case was brought, recused himself. Justice Arthur Goldberg filed a separate memorandum not dissenting from the judgment but disagreeing with the Court's interpretation of the Clayton Act.
Applicability of § 7 to bank mergers
The present § 7 reaches acquisitions of corporate stock or share capital by any corporation engaged in commerce, but it reaches acquisitions of corporate assets made only by corporations "subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Trade Commission." The FTC has no jurisdiction over banks.See FTC  Act § 5(a)(6), 15 U.S.C. § 45(a)(6). Therefore, if the proposed merger were considered an assets acquisition, it would not be within § 7.  The Court said:
[A] merger fits neither category neatly. Since the literal terms of § 7 thus do not dispose of our question, we must determine whether a congressional design to embrace bank mergers is revealed in the history of the statute. The question appears to be one of first impression; we have been directed to no previous case in which a merger or consolidation was challenged under § 7 of the Clayton Act, as amended, where the acquiring corporation was not subject to the FTC's jurisdiction.374 U.S. at 336-37.
Courts, prior to 1950, held that § 7 did not reach mergers, even though that device had supplanted stock acquisitions for corporate amalgamation. Therefore, Congress in 1950 amended § 7 to include an assets-acquisition provision.Act of December 29, 1950 (Celler-Kefauver Antimerger Act), c. 1184, 64 Stat. 1125-1126, 15 U.S.C. § 18. The legislative history mentions Congress's intent to cover asset acquisitions but fails to mention mergers. Nonetheless, the Court said, Congress intended to reach substantially all corporate amalgamations:
In other words, Congress contemplated that the 1950 amendment would give § 7 a reach which would bring the entire range of corporate amalgamations, from pure stock acquisitions to pure assets acquisitions, within the scope of § 7. Thus, the stock-acquisition and assets-acquisition provisions, read together, reach mergers, which fit neither category perfectly but lie somewhere between the two ends of the spectrum.374 U.S. at 341-42.
The Court noted that "after the passage of the [1950] amendment, some members of Congress, and for a time the Justice Department, voiced the view that bank mergers were still beyond the reach of the section." But this was just their misunderstanding of the scope of § 7, the Court said.374 U.S. at 348-49. The Court also held that the Bank Merger Act of 1960 was not intended to displace the Clayton Act: "Congress plainly did not intend the 1960 Act to extinguish other sources of federal restraint of bank acquisitions having anticompetitive effects."374 U.S. at 349, 354.
Application of § 7
Relevant market
The Court began by defining the relevant market: "the 'line of commerce' (relevant product or services market) and 'section of the country' (relevant geographical market) in which to appraise the probable competitive effects of appellees' proposed merger." It found the cluster of services and financial products termed commercial banking to be the appropriate line of commerce—they "are so distinctive that they are entirely free of effective competition from products or services of other financial institutions."374 U.S. at 357.
The district court erred, the Court said, in defining the geographic market as the whole Northeastern US: "The proper question to be asked in this case is not where the parties to the merger do business or even where they compete, but where, within the area of competitive overlap, the effect of the merger on competition will be direct and immediate."374 U.S. at 357. Quoting the Tampa Electric case, the Court explained that "area of effective competition in the known line of commerce must be charted by careful selection of the market area in which the seller operates, and to which the purchaser can practicably turn for supplies."374 U.S. at 360 (quoting Tampa Elec. Co. v. Nashville Coal Co., 365 U.S. 320, 327 (1961)).  The Court said purchasers could practically turn only to banks in the Philadelphia Metropolitan Area, even if PNB and other banks might be able to complete in the larger Northeastern US area.374 U.S. at 358-62.
Likely competitive impact
Having determined the relevant market, the Court turned to "the ultimate question under § 7: whether the effect of the merger 'may be substantially to lessen competition' in the relevant market."374 U.S. at 362.  Citing the Standard Stations case, the Court warned that "we must be alert to the danger of subverting congressional intent by permitting a too-broad economic investigation."374 U.S. at 362 (citing Standard Oil Co. v. United States, 337 U.S. 293, 313 (1949). Therefore, "in any case in which it is possible, without doing violence to the congressional objective embodied in § 7, to simplify the test of illegality, the courts ought to do so in the interest of sound and practical judicial administration."374 U.S. at 362.
The Court pointed to the fact pattern of the PNB-Girard merger:
The merger . . . will result in a single bank's controlling at least 30% of the commercial banking business in the four-county Philadelphia metropolitan area. Without attempting to specify the smallest market share which would still be considered to threaten undue concentration, we are clear that 30% presents that threat. Further, whereas presently the two largest banks in the area (First Pennsylvania and PNB) control between them approximately 44% of the area's commercial banking business, the two largest after the merger (PNB-Girard and First Pennsylvania) will control 59%. Plainly, we think, this increase of more than 33% in concentration must be regarded as significant.374 U.S. at 365.
The Court justified its inference from market percentages by pointing to language in the legislative history "that the tests of illegality under amended § 7 'are intended to be similar to those which the courts have applied in interpreting the same language as used in other sections of the Clayton Act.'" The Court therefore looked to § 3 of the Clayton Act and the Standard Stations case. In that case, "the defendant company, which accounted for 23% of the sales in the relevant market and, together with six other firms, accounted for 65% of such sales, maintained control over outlets through which approximately 7% of the sales were made." The Court also cited another exclusive dealing case, FTC v. Motion Picture Adv. Serv. Co.,344 U.S. 392 (1953). in which "the four major firms in the industry had foreclosed 75% of the relevant market; the respondent's market share, evidently, was 20%."374 U.S. at 366 (citing Friedrich Kessler and Richard H. Stern, Competition, Contract, and Vertical Integration, 69  L.J. 1, 53 n.231 (1959)). The Court compared these market shares to those of the present case, in which "the four largest banks after the merger will foreclose 78% of the relevant market."374 U.S. at 366. The market share data from the exclusive-dealing, contract-integration cases was valid support, the Court concluded, for "the inference we draw in the instant case from the figures disclosed by the record."374 U.S. at 366.
The Court did not say that the presumption of unlawfulness was conclusive. It next looked to the record to ascertain whether any facts rebutted the presumption that the 30% and 78% market shares created, but "nothing in the record of this case [] rebut[s] the inherently anticompetitive tendency manifested by these percentages.374 U.S. at 366.
That some alternatives still existed for dissatisfied customers among the remaining small banks in the area did not rebut the inference:
In every case short of outright monopoly, the disgruntled customer has alternatives; even in tightly oligopolistic markets, there may be small firms operating. A fundamental purpose of amending § 7 was to arrest the trend toward concentration, the tendency to monopoly, before the consumer's alternatives disappeared through merger, and that purpose would be ill-served if the law stayed its hand until 10, or 20, or 30 more Philadelphia banks were absorbed.374 U.S. at 367.
The Court also rejected an argument that the district court had accepted—that the merger would stimulate economic development in Philadelphia:
We are clear, however, that a merger the effect of which "may be substantially to lessen competition" is not saved because, on some ultimate reckoning of social or economic debits and credits, it may be deemed beneficial. A value choice of such magnitude is beyond the ordinary limits of judicial competence, and in any event has been made for us already, by Congress when it enacted the amended § 7. Congress determined to preserve our traditionally competitive economy. It therefore proscribed anticompetitive mergers, the benign and the malignant alike, fully aware, we must assume, that some price might have to be paid.374 U.S. at 371.
Dissent
Justice Harlan, joined by Justice Stewart, dissented. Their principal objection was that Congress did not intend § 7 to apply to bank mergers:
For 10 years everyone—the department responsible for antitrust law enforcement, the banking industry, the Congress, and the bar—proceeded on the assumption that the 1950 amendment of the Clayton Act did not affect bank mergers. This assumption provided a major impetus to the enactment of remedial legislation, and Congress, when it finally settled on what it thought was the solution to the problem at hand, emphatically rejected the remedy now brought to life by the Court.374 U.S. at 384.
Justice Goldberg wrote separately that he disagreed with the Court majority that Clayton Act § 7 applied to bank mergers, but he did not disagree with "the judgment invalidating the merger." He said, further:
In my opinion there is a substantial Sherman Act issue in this case, but since the Court does not reach it and since my views relative thereto would be superfluous in light of today's disposition of the case, I express no ultimate conclusion concerning it.374 U.S. at 396-97.
Subsequent developments
In the 40 years since the Philadelphia Bank case was decided, its presumption of likelihood of adverse competitive impact and consequent violation of Clayton Act § 7, based on market share and concentration data, has undergone swings in various directions. The swings have mostly been toward an erosion of the presumption and more ready rebuttal of the presumption, as the following decisions illustrate.
Baker Hughes case
In United States v. Baker Hughes Inc.,908 F.2d 981 (D.C. Cir. 1990). a 1990 decision of the D.C. Circuit authored by future Justice Clarence Thomas,The panel also included future Justice Ruth B. Ginsburg. the court considered a § 7 challenge that the government brought against a proposed acquisition of Houston-based Baker Hughes's French subsidiary Secoma by Finnish Oy Tampella's subsidiary Tamrock. The companies manufactured and sold hardrock hydraulic underground drilling rigs (HHUDRs) in the United States and throughout the world. Tamrock had approximately 41% of the HHUDR US market and Secoma had approximately 17%. In 1988, however, the combined share of the two firms was 78%. The acquisition greatly increased concentration in the already concentrated HHUDR market.908 F.2d at _. The government lost the case in the district courtUnited States v. Baker Hughes Inc., 731 F. Supp. 3 (D.D.C. 1990). and appealed to the D.C. Circuit.
The appellate court summarized the current state of the applicable law, based on evolution from the Philadelphia Bank case:
The basic outline of a section 7 horizontal acquisition case is familiar. By showing that a transaction will lead to undue concentration in the market for a particular product in a particular geographic area, the government establishes a presumption that the transaction will substantially lessen competition. The burden of producing evidence to rebut this presumption then shifts to the defendant. If the defendant successfully rebuts the presumption, the burden of producing additional evidence of anticompetitive effect shifts to the government, and merges with the ultimate burden of persuasion, which remains with the government at all times.908 F.2d at _ (internal citations omitted).
The government challenged the district court's conclusion that the defendants rebutted the presumption, arguing that as a matter of law a defendant "can rebut a prima facie case only by a clear showing that entry into the market by competitors would be quick and effective."908 F.2d at _.
The appellate court rejected the government's asserted legal standard:
We find no merit in the legal standard propounded by the government. It is devoid of support in the statute, in the case law, and in the government's own Merger Guidelines. Moreover, it is flawed on its merits in three fundamental respects. First, it assumes that ease of entry by competitors is the only consideration relevant to a section 7 defendant's rebuttal. Second, it requires that a defendant who seeks to show ease of entry bear the onerous burden of proving that entry will be "quick and effective." Finally, by stating that the defendant can rebut a prima facie case only by a clear showing, the standard in effect shifts the government's ultimate burden of persuasion to the defendant.908 F.2d at _.
The court said that "a variety of factors can rebut a prima facie case." The fact that the government can establish a prima facie case through evidence on only one factor, market concentration, does not negate the possible breadth of the analysis: "Evidence of market concentration simply provides a convenient starting point for a broader inquiry into future competitiveness." The court pointed to examples such as United States v. General Dynamics Corp.,415 U.S. 486 (1974). in which the Court held that the presumption raised by a combined market share of 50% in a concentrated market was rebutted by evidence of "weak competitive stature." The court cited other cases in which a "multiplicity of relevant factors" were considered as rebutting the presumption. In the case before it, the HHUDR market involved sales of from 20 to 40 units a year, so that market share statistics were unreliable and misleading. Further, the customers were highly sophisticated and purchased on the basis of competitive bidding. This too undercut the significance of the government's statistics.908 F.2d at _.
The court noted that immediately after Philadelphia Bank "the Supreme Court construed section 7 to prohibit virtually any horizontal merger or acquisition." The court said that later decisions "discarded Philadelphia Bank'''s insistence that a defendant 'clearly' disprove anticompetitive effect, and instead described the rebuttal burden simply in terms of a 'showing.' " The court said the later Supreme Court decisions changed § 7 jurisprudence: "Without overruling Philadelphia Bank, then, the Supreme Court has at the very least lightened the evidentiary burden on a section 7 defendant."908 F.2d at _.
Heinz case
In FTC v. H.J. Heinz Co.,246 F.3d 708, 720 (D.C. Cir. 2001). the D.C. Circuit again revisited the Philadelphia Bank presumption, in the context of whether the FTC showed a sufficient likelihood of success to get a preliminary injunction against a "duopoly" merger while it conducted an administrative proceeding under Clayton Act § 7.See generally FTC v. Dean Foods, Inc., the first proceeding of this type (before passage of statute providing for FTC preliminary injunctions in merger cases). In this case the court veered back toward the Philadelphia Bank standard.
thumb|right|150px|Gerber baby food jar
The Heinz case involved the Heinz baby food organization's proposed acquisition of the Beech-Nut baby food business. That approximately $1 billion annual business is dominated by three brands, Gerber, Heinz, and Beech-Nut. Gerber, the industry leader, enjoys a 65% market share while Heinz and Beech-Nut come in second and third, with 17.4% and a 15.4% share respectively. Gerber enjoys the greatest brand recognition with a brand loyalty greater than any other baby food sold in the United States. Gerber baby food is found in over 90% of all US supermarkets.246 F.3d at 711.  Heinz, although the largest seller worldwide, is sold in 40% of US supermarkets. Heinz lacks Gerber's brand recognition; it markets its baby food with a shelf price several cents below Gerber's. Third-place Beech-Nut is carried in approximately 45% of US supermarkets. While Gerber sells nationwide, the sales of Heinz and Beech-Nut are confined largely to the East and Midwest.246 F.3d at 711-12. The FTC sought to block the merger by preliminary injunction while it conducted a § 7 Clayton Act proceeding, but the district court refused to grant the preliminary injunction, concluding that it was "more probable than not that consummation of the Heinz/Beech-Nut merger will actually increase competition in jarred baby food in the United States."FTC v. H.J. Heinz, Co., 116 F. Supp. 2d 190, 200 (D.D.C. 2000).
The FTC then appealed to the D.C. Circuit, which evaluated the case in terms of the statutory standard for FTC preliminary injunctions—whether a preliminary injunction is in the public interest, considering the FTC's likelihood of success on the merits.See FTC Act § 13(b),  15 U.S.C. § 53(b). The court said that the standard for likelihood of success on the merits is met if the FTC "has raised questions going to the merits so serious, substantial, difficult and doubtful as to make them fair ground for thorough investigation, study, deliberation and determination by the FTC in the first instance and ultimately by the Court of Appeals."246 F.3d at 714-15. Commentators have suggested that this standard is more lenient than that applied to the Justice Department's Antitrust Division. David Balto, The Efficiency Defense in Merger Review: Progress or Stagnation, 16  74, 79 (Fall 2001) ("This is substantially weaker than the burden faced by the Antitrust Division in seeking either a preliminary or permanent injunction, under which they must demonstrate that the merger may substantially leesen competition.); Tefft W. Smith, Remarks Before the ABA Antitrust Section Annual Meeting (Aug. 7, 2001) (advising counsel "Pray your merger is assigned to DOJ!").
The court began by reviewing the Baker Hughes case, and said that it would use that case's legal standard to determine whether the FTC made a prima facie case and whether Heinz rebutted it. An important factor was market concentration. Here, the jarred baby food market was very concentrated; after the merger it would be a duopoly (a two-firm market). The court said that Heinz had considered three possible options "to end the vigorous wholesale competition with Beech-Nut: two involved innovative measures while the third entailed the acquisition of Beech-Nut." The court added that "Heinz chose the third, and least pro-competitive, of the options," acquisition of Beech-Nut. The fact that high barriers exist to the entry of new competition, the court explained, "largely eliminates the possibility that the reduced competition caused by the merger will be ameliorated by new competition from outsiders and further strengthens the FTC's case. The court noted that "no court has ever approved a merger to duopoly under similar circumstances."246 F.3d at 716-17.
Turning to Heinz's rebuttal, which led the district court to conclude that the merger would not harm competition, the appellate court found that the district court committed legal errors. It wrongly insisted that the FTC show that prices to consumers would rise, which no court has ever held and which is contrary to precedent.246 F.3d at 719. The district court also concluded that "the anticompetitive effects of the merger will be offset by efficiencies resulting from the union of the two companies, efficiencies which they assert will be used to compete more effectively against Gerber." This can be a defense, the court said, but "the high market concentration levels present in this case require, in rebuttal, proof of extraordinary efficiencies, which the appellees failed to supply." Moreover, the district court credited speculative and questionable  claims about post-merger efficiencies.246 F.3d at 720-22. The district court also found that "without the merger the two firms are unable to launch new products to compete with Gerber because they lack a sufficient shelf presence," and that this defense helped rebut the prima facie case. The appellate court found this kind of defense speculative and not supported by probative evidence.246 F.3d at 722-23. In summary: "Because the district court incorrectly assessed the merits of the appellees' rebuttal arguments, it improperly discounted the FTC's showing of likelihood of success."246 F.3d at 725.
The parties abandoned the transaction after the D.C. Circuit's decision, and on remand the district court dismissed the case as moot.Thomas B. Leary, An Inside Look at the Heinz Case 16  32 (Spring 2002).
Commentary
Some commentators expressed concern that the FTC's success in the Heinz case amounted to a "root-and-branch repudiation of the 'efficiencies defense.'"Leary, 16  at 34 (citing William J. Kolasky, Lessons from Baby Food: The Role of Efficiencies in Merger Review, 16  82 (Fall 2001)). Another commentator argued that after the Heinz case, the agencies are pressing courts to require too high a level of proof as to rebuttal evidence.Balto, 16  at 79.
Another recent commentary, however, asserts that the FTC and Justice Department, as well as courts, give weight to properly-presented efficiency arguments, which may tip the balance in favor of a merger, even if they are not dispositive. The conclusion is drawn that "there are numerous examples where efficiencies tipped the scale in favor of clearing the merger (collecting cases)."Michael B. Bernstein and Justin P. Hedge, Maximizing Efficiencies: Getting Credit Where Credit Is Due,  3, 6-7 (Dec. 2012).
An Antitrust Division official recently insisted that the decision's "presumption remains the best way for courts to implement the concern for increasing concentration that motivated" the 1950 amendment of Section 7. He argued that the presumption simplifies and  provides a "more workable structure" for addressing horizontal merger cases, he added:
This remains a sensible way of reflecting Congress's concern with trends toward increased concentration. Where the merged firm would gain an especially large share of the market, and potentially an enhanced ability to control output and price—or market power—courts should be less tolerant of the merger.  Moreover, the presumption . . . gives useful guidance to businesses about how section 7 will likely be
applied.  The presumption—grounded in economics—serves as a useful screen for courts that are not experts at determining the anticompetitive effects of a merger.  And the likelihood of any error is reduced by allowing defendants the opportunity to rebut the presumption.Remarks by Assistant Attorney General Bill Baer at the American Bar Association Clayton Act 100th Anniversary Symposium.
Steven Salop, of Georgetown University, also recently praised Philadelphia Bank'' and concluded:
All in all, the 1963 formulation of the PNB structural presumption was a forward-looking analytic approach to antitrust jurisprudence. This use of legal and enforcement presumptions based on economic presumptions arising from economic theory and evidence and judicial experience has now
spread across all of antitrust. The PNB presumption for mergers also has evolved as economic theory and evidence have advanced. Looking forward, merger presumptions should be neither abandoned nor set in stone; instead, they should be permitted to continue to evolve, based on new or additional economic factors besides market shares and concentration.Steven C. Salop, The Evolution and Vitality of Merger Presumptions: A Decision-Theoretic Approach at 50.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:United States antitrust case law
"""

From "United States v. Pink" ==> """
United States v. Pink, 315 U.S. 203 (1942), was a  United States Supreme Court  decision related to the Litvinov Assignment, wherein the US government recognised Soviet Russia as the successor of the previous Russian government.. The United States sued Louis H. Pink,United States v. Pink, 284 N.Y. 555, 32 N.E.2d 552 (C.A.N.Y. 1940). the Superintendent of Insurance of the State of New York, for claims regarding the First Russian Insurance Company.
The First Russian Insurance Company was organized under the former Russian government. The company opened an American branch in New York in 1907.   After the Russian Revolution, the Russian government nationalized all insurance companies, including First Russian. The case concerned the return of over $1 million in assets held by the Superintendent of Insurance pursuant to the Litvinov Assignment. New York law granted marshalling preference of the nationalized assets to foreign creditors over American creditors.
The court stated that the action of New York 
The court ruled that rights to the property in question passed from the Soviet government to the United States by the Litvinov Assignment.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 315
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1942 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Place" ==> """
United States v. Place, 462 U.S. 696 (1983), is a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court held that it does not violate the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution for a trained police dog to sniff of a person's luggage or property in a public place.
On August 17, 1979, suspected drug trafficker Raymond Place had his luggage seized at LaGuardia Airport by agents with the Drug Enforcement Administration, which they kept for several days and exposed to a drug-sniffing dog without a search warrant. Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote for the unanimous Court that the sniff of a dog is sui generis, or "uniquely pervasive", and thus police do not need probable cause for their dogs to sniff a person's belongings in a public place. The Court did rule, however, that detaining a person's belongings while waiting for a police dog to arrive did constitute a "seizure" under the Fourth Amendment.
The decision was the first case to uphold the constitutionality of police use of drug-sniffing dogs, and the Court would revisit the decision several times in the following decades. In Illinois v. Caballes (2005), the Court held that it did not violate the Fourth Amendment to use a drug-detection dog during a legal traffic stop, as long as it did not unreasonably prolong the duration of it.Illinois v. Caballes, . In 2013, the Court held that the police may not bring a police dog to the front door of a private residence without reasonable suspicion (Florida v. Jardines), but upheld that police dogs are generally accurate enough of the time for evidence gathered from them to stand in court (Florida v. Harris).
Background
thumb|238px|right|A police dog in the state of Wisconsin.
On August 17, 1979, Raymond J. Place bought a ticket at Miami International Airport to fly to LaGuardia Airport in New York City. While standing in line, he aroused the suspicion of two Miami-Dade County detectives, who approached him and asked for identification. Place gave consent for them to search his luggage, but the detectives opted not to because his flight was set to depart in five minutes. The detectives notified Drug Enforcement Administration agents at LaGuardia Airport to Place's suspicious activity, alerting them of his arrival. When Place landed in New York, DEA agents monitored him before approaching as he claimed his luggage. The DEA agents asked Place for identification, which he produced. They then asked to search Place's luggage, but he refused. The agents informed Place that they were going to take his suitcases to a federal judge to obtain a search warrant. Place denied their invitation to come with them.
The agents took Place's luggage to John F. Kennedy International Airport. About 90 minutes later, Place's luggage was subject to a "sniff test" by a trained drug-sniffing police dog, who alerted to the presence of illegal narcotics at one of the suitcases. As the luggage was detained on a Friday, agents kept the suitcases in police custody until a search warrant could be issued by a federal judge the following Monday, on August 20. Upon execution of the search warrant, agents found 1,125 grams of cocaine. Place was indicted for possession of cocaine with intent to distribute.
When tried in the district court, Place moved to suppress the cocaine, arguing that the warrantless seizure of his luggage violated his Fourth Amendment rights. The district court disagreed, holding that the police having reasonable suspicion that the luggage contained narcotics justified the detention of his belongings, and exposing it to a trained drug-sniffing dog was an acceptable escalation of their investigation. Place pleaded guilty to the possession charge and was sentenced to three years in prison. On appeal, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals reversed, holding that the prolonged seizure of Place's bags violated the principles of Terry v. Ohio (1968). Attorneys appealed to the Supreme Court, who granted certiorari in 1983.
Opinion of the Court
The Fourth Amendment protects the interest people have in keeping their persons, houses, papers, and effects free from unreasonable searches and seizures. Though most of the Court's container jurisprudence deals with the search of the container rather than the initial seizure, there existed some general principles. First, the seizure may not take place without a warrant, supported by probable cause, and describing particularly the things to be seized. Second, over time, exceptions to the warrant requirement had evolved, allowing for seizure without probable cause in exigent circumstances not allowing for the time to obtain a warrant.
The Court first had to consider whether, as the lower courts had assumed, the framework of Terry v. Ohio, under which a limited detention of a person can be justified in the face of reasonable suspicion, can apply to the temporary seizure of a person's luggage. Indeed, when government agents have reason to suspect (but not probable cause to believe) that, for instance, a traveler's luggage contains narcotics, it has a substantial interest in confirming or denying that suspicion. In order to dispel that suspicion, the Court reasoned a brief seizure of the luggage could be justified. This brief seizure could not encompass a full-blown "search," just as a Terry stop may not increase in seriousness to a full-blown arrest, unless probable cause to perform the search arose during the brief detention.
In this case, the whole reason the DEA agents seized Place's luggage was so they could subject it to the dog sniff. The sniff, in turn, would violate Place's Fourth Amendment rights if it constituted a "search." A "search" is an unwarranted intrusion on a person's objectively reasonable expectation of privacy. But the sniff did not require opening the luggage; it did not expose things that are not contraband to public view. The sniff was thus far more limited than the typical search. Moreover, the sniff merely revealed the presence or absence of narcotics. Thus, it was sui generis, and did not constitute a "search" under the Fourth Amendment.
However, even though the DEA agents did not "search" Place's luggage when they subjected it to the dog sniff, their seizure of the luggage was unreasonable because it exceeded the limits of a Terry-type investigative stop. The length of time the agents had possession of Place's luggage was too great—90 minutes before the dog sniff had been conducted. Also, the agents knew what time Place's plane was scheduled to land at LaGuardia, and thus had ample time to arrange their investigation accordingly, so that taking Place's luggage from LaGuardia to Kennedy airports should not have been necessary. Thus, the seizure of Place's luggage was unreasonable in this case.
Brennan's concurrence
Justice Brennan concurred in the Court's judgment because he agreed with the Second Circuit that the scope of the agents' seizure of Place's luggage was unreasonable. Furthermore, Brennan noted that while Terry may authorize seizures of personal effects incident to a lawful seizure of the person, nothing in the Terry line of cases authorizes the police to seize personal property, such as luggage, independent of the seizure of the person. For Brennan, it was therefore unnecessary for the Court to decide whether the dog sniff constitutes a "search" under the Fourth Amendment. It was Brennan's view that dog sniffs can reveal more information than just the presence or absence of narcotics, and therefore constituted a "search." But Brennan did not feel that this case was an appropriate vehicle for the Court to decide how to handle dog sniffs under the Fourth Amendment.
Blackmun's concurrence
Justice Blackmun also felt that this case was not appropriate for deciding the status of dog sniffs under the Fourth Amendment. For one thing, Blackmun observed, Place had not raised the issue in either the district court or the Second Circuit. For another, Blackmun agreed with Brennan that it was not necessary to decide whether a dog sniff is a "search" in order to decide the case, because the seizure of Place's luggage was unreasonable in any event.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 462
 Illinois v. Caballes, 
 Florida v. Harris, 
 Florida v. Jardines, 
References
External links
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:Cocaine in the United States
Category:Detection dogs
Category:Drug Enforcement Administration litigation
Category:Miami International Airport
Category:History of Miami-Dade County, Florida
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:LaGuardia Airport
"""

From "United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group, Inc." ==> """
United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group, 529 U.S. 803 (2000), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court struck down Section 505 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which required that cable television operators completely scramble or block channels that are "primarily dedicated to sexually-oriented programming" or limit their transmission to the hours of 10 pm to 6 am.United States v.  Playboy Entm't Grp., Inc., . 
 Background 
In order to shield children from hearing or seeing images resulting from signal bleed, the U.S. Congress enacted Section 505 of the  Telecommunications Act of 1996 on the basis of a handful of complaints. No congressional hearing was held.
Section 505 required cable television operators providing channels “primarily dedicated to sexually-oriented programs” either to completely scramble or otherwise block those channels, or to limit their transmission hours to when children were unlikely to view. Administrative regulations defined children as unlikely to view programming between 10 pm to 6 am..
Playboy Entertainment Group, Inc. challenged Section 505's constitutionality, claiming that the provision violated the First Amendment.
Procedural history
A three-judge panel of the United States District Court for the District of Delaware held that Section 505 was a content-based restriction on speech that was subject to strict scrutiny. In order to satisfy a strict scrutiny analysis, the Government was required to prove that it was “narrowly tailored to promote a compelling government interest.”
The Government offered three interests to justify Section 505: (1) protecting children from being exposed to sexually explicit material; (2) supporting parents' rights to raise their children as they see fit; and (3) ensuring an individual's right to privacy in the home.
The District Court agreed that the interests the statute advanced were compelling but concluded that it violated the First Amendment because the Government might further its interests through less restrictive alternatives. One less restrictive means is Section 504 of the Act, which requires a cable operator, upon the request of a subscriber, to fully scramble or otherwise block a channel that the subscriber does not wish to receive.
The United States appealed directly to the Supreme Court, seeking to have the judgment reversed.
A group of sexologists filed an amicus brief on behalf of Playboy arguing that there was no state interest in shielding minors from sexually explicit signal bleed. The brief's authors included Elizabeth Rice Allgeier, Vern L. Bullough, Milton Diamond, Harold I. Lief, John Money, and Ira L. Reiss.
 Opinion of the Court 
Affirming the District Court, the Supreme Court held, in an opinion authored by Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, that Section 505 was a content-based restriction because the provision singled out not only particular programming but also particular programmers.
Moreover, although the Court accepted the Government's compelling interests, it nevertheless concluded that the provision violated the First Amendment's free speech clause because the Government failed to prove that Section 505 was the least restrictive means of preventing children from hearing or seeing images resulting from signal bleed. 
The Court stated that Section 504 presented such an alternative means of regulation.
The Government argued that Section 504 was less effective than the blocking and time-channeling provision of Section 505. However, the Court held that Section 504, combined with “market-based solutions such as programmable televisions, VCR's, and mapping systems” can eliminate signal bleed without restricting a cable operator's ability to transmit its programming to those who want to receive it.Playboy Entm't Grp., Inc., 529 U.S. at 821.
The Court concluded that because of the existence of such alternatives, which could be equally effective at furthering the Government's interest, the overly restrictive Section 505 violated the First Amendment.
Justices Stevens, Souter, Thomas, and Ginsburg joined with Kennedy in the majority.
 Concurrences 
Stevens and Thomas filed concurring opinions. Stevens's concurrence specifically addressed Scalia's criticisms of the majority opinion. Stevens argued that Scalia defined obscenity too broadly and could include practices that were merely deceptive.
Thomas noted in his concurrence that he would have decided the case differently if the broadcasts were of obscene material. He posited that the government had merely argued that the broadcasts were indecent. First Amendment protections have more sway over merely indecent material than outright obscene material. Thus, the balancing of interests weighed in favor of upholding First Amendment protection.
 Dissents 
Justice Stephen G. Breyer authored a dissent, arguing that the majority of the court had not made a "realistic assessment of the alternatives."Playboy Entm't Grp., Inc., 529 U.S. at 846 (Breyer, J., dissenting). Breyer was joined in his dissent by Justices Rehnquist, O'Connor, and Scalia.
Justice Scalia also authored his own dissent arguing that Section 505 is constitutional because it regulates the business of obscenity.
 See also 
 AMC Networks#Rainbow Media
References
External links
 First Amendment Center, Supreme Court Sides With Playboy Television
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Internet case law
Category:Playboy litigation
Category:United States pornography law
Category:2000 in United States case law
"""

From "United States v. Price" ==> """
United States v. Cecil Price, et al., also known as the Mississippi Burning trial or Mississippi Burning case, was a criminal trial where the United States charged a group of 18 men with conspiring in a Ku Klux Klan plot to murder three young civil rights workers – Michael Schwerner, James Chaney, and Andrew Goodman – in Philadelphia, Mississippi on June 21, 1964 during Freedom Summer. The trial, conducted in Meridian, Mississippi with U.S. District Court Judge W. Harold Cox presiding, resulted in convictions of 7 of the 18 defendants.
Initial proceedings
Indictments were originally presented against 18 defendants, three of whom were officials of the Mississippi government, for conspiracy to commit as well as substantial violations of deprivation of rights secured or protected by the Constitution. The District Court initially dismissed the indictments, but the dismissal was unanimously reversed by the Supreme Court upon appeal. The trial then proceeded.  The Supreme Court declared that the victims had been denied due process under the terms of the Civil Rights Act of
1866. That law was still in effect and it made it a federal crime for state
officials to deny a person any of the rights and privileges guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution because of race. The Court further stipulated that actions by any private citizen who participated with the state official also came under the scope of the act.David Bradley and Shelley Fisher Fishkin, eds.  The Encyclopedia of Civil Rights in America (Shapre, 1998) 3:703. 
Verdict
Guilty verdicts were returned against:
 Cecil Price, the chief deputy sheriff of Neshoba County, Mississippi
 Sam H. Bowers, Jr., of Laurel, the Imperial Wizard of the White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan
 Horace Doyle Barnette, a one-time Meridian salesman
 Jimmy Arledge, a Meridian truck driver
 Billy Wayne Posey, a Williamsville service station operator
 Jimmy Snowden, a Meridian laundry truck driver
 Alton W. Roberts, a Meridian salesman who shot two of the three civil rights workers
Not guilty verdicts were returned for:
 Lawrence A. Rainey, the sheriff of Neshoba County
 Bernard L. Akin, a Meridian housetrailer dealer
 Travis M. Barnette, a Meridian mechanic and half-brother of Horace Doyle Barnette
 James T. Harris, a Meridian truck driver
 Frank J. Herndon, the operator of a Meridian drive-in restaurant
 Olen Lovell Burrage, the owner of the farm on which the bodies of Schwerner, Chaney, and Goodman were buried
 Herman Tucker, the builder of the dam in which the bodies were found
 Richard A. Willis, a one-time Philadelphia policeman
No verdict was reached for:
 Ethel Glen Barnett, the Democratic nominee for Neshoba County sheriff
 Jerry McGrew Sharpe, a pulpwood hauler
 Edgar Ray Killen, a fundamentalist minister and sawmill operator. In the case of Killen, the jury deadlocked after a lone juror stated she "could never convict a preacher". The case against Killen was reopened in 1999, and on June 21, 2005 he was found guilty of three counts of manslaughter for orchestrating the killings.
Jury
An all-white, mostly working-class jury consisting of five men and seven women heard the case. The jurors were:
 Langdon Smith Anderson (foreman), a Lumberton oil exploration operator and member of the State Agricultural and Industrial Board
 Mrs. S.M. Green, a Hattiesburg housewife
 Mrs. Lessie Lowery, a Hiwannee grocery store owner
 Howard O. Winborn, a Petal pipefitter
 Harmon W. Raspberry, a Stonewall textile worker
 Mrs. Gussie B. Staton, a Union housewife
 Jessie P. Hollingsworth, a Moss Point electrician
 Mrs. James C. Heflin, a Lake production worker
 Mrs. Nell B. Dedeaux, a Lumberton housewife
 Willie V. Arneson, a Meridian secretary
 Edsell Z. Parks, a Brandon clerk
 Adelaide H. Comer, a cook at an Ocean Springs school cafeteria
Penalties
The penalties exacted by the federal penal system were,
 for Price: sentenced to six years in prison, and served four years
 for Bowers: sentenced to ten years in prison, and served six years
 for Barnette: sentenced to three years in prison
 for Arledge: sentenced to three years in prison
 for Posey: sentenced to six years in prison
 for Snowden: sentenced to three years in prison, and served two years
 for Roberts: sentenced to ten years in prison, and served six years
Film adaptation
In 1988, the film Mississippi Burning was loosely based on the trial and the events surrounding the murder. It starred Gene Hackman and Willem Dafoe as two FBI agents who travel to Mississippi to uncover the events surrounding the disappearance of three civil rights workers.
Several of the fictitious characters in the movie were based on real-life defendants in the trial. Deputy Sheriff Clinton Pell (played by Brad Dourif) was based on Cecil Ray Price, Sheriff Ray Stuckey (played by Gailard Sartain) was based on Sheriff Lawrence Rainey, and Frank Bailey (played by Michael Rooker) was based on Alton W. Roberts. The film also starred R. Lee Ermey and Frances McDormand.
See also
 Civil Rights Movement
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 383
 United States v. Shipp, 1906 federal criminal case
Further reading
References
External links
 U. S. vs Cecil Price et al.. ("Mississippi Burning" Trial)
Category:1964 crimes in the United States
Category:1966 in Mississippi
Category:1966 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:Ku Klux Klan crimes in Mississippi
Category:Legal history of Mississippi
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "United States v. Quiver" ==> """
United States v. Quiver, 241 U.S. 602 (1916), is a case decided by the United States Supreme Court after first appearing in United States District Court for the District of South Dakota.  The case argued on February 28, 1916 and decided on June 12, 1916 concerned adultery committed on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota between two enrolled members of the Oglala Sioux Tribe.  The district court had held that adultery committed by an Indian with another Indian on an Indian reservation was not punishable under the act of March 3, 1887, c. 397, 24 Stat. 635, now § 316 of the Penal Code.  This decision was made because the offense occurred on a Sioux Indian reservation which is not said to be under jurisdiction of the district court.  The United States Supreme Court affirmed the judgment of the district court saying that the adultery was not punishable as it had occurred between two American Indians on an American Indian reservation.United States Courts, Supreme Court Reporter Digest of decisions of the United States courts, Volume 11. p.461, West Publishing Company (1920)
Justice Willis Van Devanter delivered the opinion of the court:
This is a prosecution for adultery committed on one of the Sioux Indian Reservations in the state of South Dakota. Both participants in the act were Indians belonging to that reservation. The statute upon which the prosecution is founded was originally adopted as part of the act of March 3, 1887 (chap. 397, 24 Stat. at L. 635), and is now § 316 of the Penal Code [35 Stat. at L. 1149, chap. 321, Comp. Stat. 1913, § 10,489]. The section makes no mention of Indians, and the question for decision is whether it embraces adultery committed by one Indian with another Indian, on an Indian reservation. The district court answered the question in the negative.
...counsel for the government invite attention to the letter of the statute, and urge that adultery is not an offense 'by one Indian against the person or property of another Indian,' and therefore is not within the exception in § 2146 of the Revised Statutes (Comp. Stat. 1913, § 4149). 
...And are they not intended to be in accord with the policy reflected by the legislation of Congress and its administration for many years, that the relations of the Indians among themselves-the conduct of one toward another-is to be controlled by the customs and laws of [241 U.S. 602, 606] the tribe, save when Congress expressly or clearly directs otherwise? In our opinion this is the true view.
References
External links
Category:United States Native American criminal jurisdiction case law
Category:1916 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:Native American history of South Dakota
"""

From "United States v. R. Enterprises, Inc." ==> """
United States v. R. Enterprises, Inc., 498 U.S. 292 (1991), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court held that the three prong test for the issuance of a subpoena in United States v. Nixon does not apply to subpoenas issued by a grand jury. The Court concluded by stating that when a grand jury subpoena is challenged on relevancy grounds, the motion to quash must be denied "unless the district court determines that there is no reasonable possibility that the materials sought will produce information relevant to the grand jury's investigation."Lance Cole, The Fifth Amendment and Compelled Production of Personal Documents After United States v. Hubbell - New Protection for Private Papers?, 29 Am. J. Crim. L. 123, 175 (2002)
Case background
A federal grand jury was investigating the shipment of pornographic materials from the state of New York into Virginia.
R. Enterprises, Inc. (a pornographic distributor) filed a motion to quash the grand jury subpoenas duces tecum (document production orders). The judge of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia denied the defendant's motion to quash. Nevertheless, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit reversed the District Court's decision.
Holding
The Supreme Court held that the trial standard of United States v. Nixon doesn't apply to grand juries.
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:United States grand jury case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "United States v. Rabinowitz" ==> """
United States v. Rabinowitz, 339 U.S. 56 (1950), was a United States Supreme Court case which the Court held that warrantless searches immediately following an arrest are constitutional. The decision overturned Trupiano v. United States (1948), which had banned such searches.
 Background 
Albert J. Rabinowitz was arrested in his office on February 16, 1943, for selling forged U.S. postage stamps to an undercover federal officer. Federal agents then conducted a warrantless 90 min search of the office, finding an additional 573 forged stamps. Rabinowitz unsuccessfully moved to exclude this evidence from his subsequent trial, but the motion was denied. He was convicted, but the appellate court reversed the verdict and ruled his rights under the Fourth Amendment had been violated.
 Opinion of the Court 
The US Supreme Court reversed the Appeals Court ruling in a 5–3 decision. Writing for the majority, Justice Sherman Minton wrote that only "unreasonable" searches were banned under the Fourth Amendment; searching the office of a suspected forger at the site of his lawful arrest was held to be reasonable.
 References 
 External links 
Category:1950 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
"""

From "United States v. Raines" ==> """
United States v. Raines, 362 U.S. 17 (1960), was a United States Supreme Court decision relating to civil rights. The Court overturned the ruling of a U.S. District Court, which had held that a law authorizing the Federal Government to bring civil actions against State Officials for discriminating against African-Americans citizens was unconstitutional.
Attorney General brought suit to enjoin (issue injunction) against Raines and other Georgia public officials from discriminating against African Americans wanting to vote.  District court dismissed the complaint from Raines, et al. because this could be brought by private citizens.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 362
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1960 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "United States v. Ramsey (1926)" ==> """
United States v. Ramsey, 271 U.S. 467 (1926), was a U.S. Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the government had the authority to prosecute crimes against Native Americans (Indians) on reservation land that was still designated Indian Country by federal law.  The Osage Indian Tribe held mineral rights that were worth millions of dollars.  A white rancher, William K. Hale, devised a plot to kill tribal members to allow his nephew, who was married to a tribal member, to inherit the mineral rights.  The tribe requested the assistance of the federal government, which sent Bureau of Investigation agents to solve the murders.  Hale and several others were arrested and tried for the murders, but they claimed that the federal government did not have jurisdiction.  The district court quashed the indictments, but on appeal, the Supreme Court reversed, holding that the Osage lands were Indian Country and that the federal government therefore had jurisdiction.  This put an end to the Osage Indian murders.
Background
Federal law
In 1834, Congress passed the Indian Trade and Intercourse ActIndian Trade and Intercourse Act of 1834, June 30, 1834, chap. 161, § 25, , amended by Act of Mar. 27, 1854, chap. 26,§ 3, , codified at R.S. § 2145; 1  18 (Charles J. Kappler ed. 1904). to regulate trade with the Indians and to provide the United States with criminal jurisdiction for crimes committed by or against Indians.  This law provided for trial in a federal court for crimes committed by an Indian against a non-Indian or vice versa.  At the time of passage, federal jurisdiction over the Indian Territory was given to the U.S. court in Arkansas and, in 1851, this was clarified as the western district court in Arkansas.Genetin-Pilawa, at 1830. In 1890, this law was amended to create the Oklahoma Territory and to give the federal courts in western Arkansas, southern Kansas, and eastern Texas jurisdiction over the Indian Territory.Oklahoma Organic Act, May 2, 1890, chap. 182, ; Kappler at 51.
Territory, statehood and allotment
thumb|400px|left|alt=Oklahoma and Indian Territory map, circa 1890s, created using Census Bureau Data|Oklahoma and Indian Territory map, circa 1890s, created using Census Bureau Data
In 1870, the federal government purchased the Kansas reservation from the Osage Nation.  The tribe then purchased 1,470,559 acres of land in the Indian Territory from the Cherokee Nation.,  28 (1998); ,  44–45 (1994).  The land was not suited for farming, but had abundant game.,  at 28–29.  In 1890 when Congress passed the Oklahoma Organic Act forming both the Oklahoma and Indian territories, the Osage Indian Reservation was part of the Oklahoma Territory.  In 1887, Congress passed the Dawes Act,Dawes Act of 1887, Feb. 8, 1887, chap. 119, ; Kappler at 33–36. which served to break up reservations and allot the land to tribal members.  The act did not apply to the Five Civilized Tribes or other tribes in the Indian territory nor to the Osage tribe in the Oklahoma territory.  In 1898 the Curtis ActCurtis Act of 1898, June 28, 1898, chap. 517,  Kappler at 90–100. applied allotment to the Five Civilized Tribes, leaving the Osage tribe as the only tribe with a reservation in Oklahoma.,  294 (1998);  at 220.
Under the provisions that Congress had established, Oklahoma could not become a state until all reservations were eliminated. at 46.  The Osage tribe, seeing the disastrous effects of allotment, resisted it until 1906,  at 34.  when they negotiated an allotment different in two major respects. First, no Osage land would be opened up for white settlement as surplus land at 47. because the tribe had purchased it, at 47.  and second, mineral rights were retained by the tribe, and not in a trust status through the federal government. at 47; Jon D. May, Osage Murders  (Apr. 7, 2007) (archived from original, July 29, 2013).  Even though the Osage reservation remained, this allotment was deemed sufficient and Oklahoma became a state in 1907.
Reign of terror
This ownership of the land and mineral rights had another consequence.  In 1896, Edwin B. Foster signed an oil lease for the entire Osage reservation.,  at 30–31; Gerald Forbes, History of the Osage Blanket Lease, in 19  70 (Mar. 1941) (archived from original, July 11, 2013).  By 1902 he was shipping 37,000 barrels of oil and by 1906 his companies were producing over 5 million barrels annually.,  at 32; Forbes at 73.  The Osage tribe was one of the wealthiest in the United States, but with the mineral rights transferring to the land owners in 1926, their murder rates also became the highest in the United States. at 220.  By 1925, Osage families were earning about $65,000 per year, compared to white families that were averaging $1,000.,  101 (2012).  Congress also passed a law providing that an Osage Indian who was less than half blood, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, did not have to wait to sell his or her land.,  at 37.
In the early 1920s, Osage Indians who owned headrights, or land where they would obtain mineral rights, began to be murdered—the first two were Charles Whitehorn and Anna Brown, both Osage Indians but killed separately.,  440 (2004); May; Molly Stephey, The Osage Murders: Oil Wealth, Betrayal and the FBI’s First Big Case(Mar. 1, 2011) (archived from original  Aug. 15, 2013).  In February 1923, Henry Roan, another Osage, was found in his car, shot once in the back of the head with a .45 caliber pistol. at 440–41; May; Stephey.  Less than a month later, an explosion in an Osage home killed Reta Smith, an Osage, her white husband W.E. Smith, and their white maid. at 441; May; Stephey.  Reta Smith was Brown's sister and the daughter of Lizzie Q. Kyle (also known as Lizzie Que), who had died and was thought to have been poisoned. at 440–41; May; Stephey.  Roan was Reta Smith's cousin. at 440–41.  Que had three headrights and both daughters had a full headright and a fractional headright, worth a considerable amount of money.May.  These would be inherited by a third daughter, Molly Burkhart, who was married to a white man, Ernie Burkhart. at 440–41.  Ernie Burkhart was the nephew of a wealthy Texas rancher, William K. Hale, who had moved to the Osage area. at 440–41.
Federal investigation
Following these deaths and several others, the Osage Tribal Council requested federal assistance since local authorities were apparently making no effort to solve the crimes. at 14; May; Stephey.  The U.S. Bureau of Investigation (BOI), which later became the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), was assigned to conduct the investigation.,  at 39;  at 14.  The BOI responded by sending in undercover agents disguised as cattle buyers and cowhands and, through their investigation, determined that the murders had been planned and executed at the direction of Hale.,  at 39;  at 14; Stephey.  Hale was implicated in the murder of Brown when Kelsie Morrison confessed in court.,  at 40–41.  The BOI also discovered that Hale held a $25,000 insurance policy on Roan and noted that his nephew's wife had inherited all of the Kyle headrights.,  at 42; Stephey.  Hale and John Ramsey were charged in federal court with the murder of Roan; Ernie Burkhart was charged in state court with arranging the Smith bombing.,  at 42.
The trials
Ernie Burkhart was tried first.  Two weeks into the trial, realizing that he could not win, he changed his plea to guilty and became a witness for the state in exchange for a life sentence.,  at 42–43; May.  Burkhart testified that Hale was behind the scheme, that Asa "Ace" Kirby was the bomber, and that Henry Grammer was the go-between.
Hale and Ramsey were transferred to Guthrie, Oklahoma in 1926, where they stood trial in state court for the murder of Roan. The trial resulted in a hung jury and a mistrial.,  at 44.  The United States Attorney then transferred the case to Oklahoma City and indicted Hale and Ramsey for murder on federal land for the death of Roan.United States v. Ramsey, ; ,  at 44.  On being indicted, both demurrered on the grounds that the federal government did not have jurisdiction.  The U.S. District Court sustained the defendants' motion and the government made a direct appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.Ramsey, 271 U.S. at 468.
Opinion of the court
left|thumb|100px|alt=Justice Sutherland, author of the majority opinion|Justice Sutherland, author of the majority opinion
Justice George Sutherland delivered the opinion of the court.  He noted that the indictment was drawn under Revised Statute § 2145, which provides for federal jurisdiction of crimes committed in "Indian Country".Ramsey, 271 U.S. at 469.  This section was no longer applicable to general crimes in Oklahoma after statehood.  Crimes committed by or against Indians could still be prosecuted under § 2145 if the crime occurred in Indian Country.Ramsey, 271 U.S. at 469–70.  The question before the court was whether allotted land, with a restriction on sale by the Indian it was allotted to, was still Indian Country.  Since the government controlled whether the land could be sold or otherwise alienated, it was no different from land held in trust and was therefore still Indian Country.Ramsey, 271 U.S. at 470–72.  The judgment of the district court was in error and was reversed.Ramsey, 271 U.S. at 472.
Subsequent developments
Trial in U.S. District Court
Following the decision of the Supreme Court, Hale, Burkhart, and Ramsey were tried in federal court.  Ernie Burkhart testified that Hale hired Ramsey to kill Roan.,  at 45.  Burkhart also testified to Hale's involvement in the Smith bombing, while Hale testified that he was in Fort Worth, Texas at the time of the killings.Hale v. United States, 25 F.2d 430, 440 (8th Cir. 1928); ,  at 44.  All three defendants were convicted and sentenced to life in prison; within days, both Hale and Ramsey appealed.,  at 44–45.
Appeal
Hale's appeal was heard first in 1928.  It was based on improper procedure in admitting Burkhart's testimony as to the Smith bombing and again on the contention that the federal government did not have jurisdiction to try the case.Hale, 25 F.2d at 435, 440; ,  at 45.  The Eighth Circuit Court denied the plea to the jurisdiction, noting that the Supreme Court had ruled on that very issue earlier in the case.Hale, 25 F.2d at 435.  The court did find that the testimony as to the Smith bombing was not relevant to the Roan murder, was prejudicial against Hale, and required that the case be remanded for retrial.Hale, 25 F.2d at 440; ,  at 45.  Ramsey's appeal was likewise successful on the same grounds in 1929.Ramsey v. United States, 33 F.2d 699 (8th Cir. 1929); ,  at 45.
Retrial
In 1929, both Hale and Ramsey were retried for the murder.,  at 45–47.  Ramsey testified in court and explained how Hale hired him to kill Roan, but later changed his story to claim another person killed Roan.  Hale again testified that he had nothing to do with the crime.,  at 45–47.  Both were convicted and again sentenced to 99 years in prison.,  at 46; Stephey.
Aftermath
Hale entered the Fort Leavenworth Federal Prison on May 30, 1929, and, over the protests of the Osage tribe, was paroled on July 31, 1947.,  at 47; May; Stephey.  Ramsey was paroled four months later.,  at 47; May.  Burkhart was released in October 1959.
,  at 47; May.  Morrison was sentenced to life in prison in 1926 for Brown's murder. His conviction was later reversed and he was released in 1931 in exchange for becoming a witness. Morrison was killed in a shootout with police on May 25, 1937.May. In 1965, Governor Henry Bellmon granted Burkhart a full pardon.May; Stephey.
Footnotes
References
External links
FBI Case files on Osage Hills Murders, 3,274 pages.
Category:1926 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:United States Native American criminal jurisdiction case law
Category:Native American history of Oklahoma
"""

From "United States v. Ramsey (1977)" ==> """
United States v. Ramsey, 431 U.S. 606 (1977), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the search of letters or envelopes from foreign countries falls under the border exception to the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures.United States v. Ramsey, .
 Background 
United States customs agents, investigating a "mail-order" drug business, opened eight envelopes from Thailand. This search was conducted without a warrant. The envelopes were found to contain heroin. Under established United States law and tradition, the protection from government search did not extend to borders: "the historical practice of warrantless searches and their acceptance at the time the Bill of Rights was adopted indicate that border searches are inherently 'reasonable,' and thus exempt from the Fourth Amendment's probable cause and warrant requirements."
 Case 
The government used the evidence it obtained from opening the letters when charging Charles W. Ramsay and James W. Kelly with violating federal laws related to drug trafficking. Ramsay and Kelly argued that the evidence was inadmissible, as the result of an illegal search. At issue was whether opening mailed letters was within the scope of the border search exception to the Fourth Amendment's requirement of either a search warrant or probable cause to conduct a search.
In a six to three decision, the Supreme Court ruled that "searches made at the border, pursuant to the longstanding right of the sovereign to protect itself by stopping and examining persons and property crossing into this country, are reasonable simply by virtue of the fact that they occur at the border," declaring the warrantless search of the envelopes to be legal and the evidence to be admissible.
 References 
External links
Category:1977 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "United States v. Reese" ==> """
United States v. Reese, 92 U.S. 214 (1876), was a voting rights case in which the United States Supreme Court narrowly construed the 15th Amendment to the United States Constitution, which provide that suffrage for citizens can not be restricted due to race, color or the individual having previously been a slave.
This was the Supreme court voting rights case under the Fifteenth Amendment and the Enforcement Act of 1870. A Kentucky electoral official had refused to register an African‐American's vote in a municipal election and was indicted under two sections of the 1870 act: section 1 required that administrative preliminaries to elections be conducted without regard to race, color, or previous condition of servitude; section 2 forbade wrongful refusal to register votes where a prerequisite step “required as foresaid” had been omitted.
The Court held that the Fifteenth Amendment did not confer the right of suffrage, but it prohibited exclusion from voting on racial grounds. The justices invalidated the operative section 3 of the Enforcement Act since it did not repeat the amendment's words about race, color, and servitude. They ruled that the section exceeded the scope of the Fifteenth Amendment.
Results
Following the ruling, states began to adopt measures that were designed to exclude Black Americans from voting, while keeping within the constraints of the Fourteenth Amendment as interpreted by the Court. They adopted devices such as poll taxes (which many poor black and white sharecroppers, who lived on credit, did not have ready cash to pay); literacy tests, usually subjectively administered by white election officials, who tended in practice to exclude even educated Black people which was often very rare; grandfather clauses, which admitted voters whose grandfathers had voted as of a certain date, chosen to also excluded Black Americans; and more restrictive residency requirements, which disqualified people who had to move to follow work. 
As these measures were challenged in court, beginning with Mississippi's new constitution in 1890 that included them, the Supreme Court upheld their use, as formally they applied to all voters. The court did not believe it had a role in overseeing the practice or effect of these measures, which white Democrats quickly used to disenfranchise most black voters across the South. Through 1910, all the former Confederate states passed new constitutions or amendments to achieve disfranchisement.
External links
Category:United States Fifteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:Criminal cases in the Waite Court
Category:1876 in United States case law
Category:African-American history between emancipation and the civil rights movement
"""

From "United States v. Reidel" ==> """
United States v. Reidel, 402 U.S. 351 (1971), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a postal regulation that banned the sale of adult materials was constitutionally permissible..
Background
At the time of this case, § 1461 of Title 18 prohibited the mailing of any "obscene, lewd, lascivious, indecent, filthy or vile article, matter, thing, device, or substance..." § 1461 provided for fines and/or up to five years imprisonment for first offenders, and up to ten years for later offenses.
Two years earlier, in Stanley v. Georgia (1969), the Court had found a constitutional right to possess pornographic materials.
In 1970, Norman Reidel advertised, sold, and mailed copies of his $1 booklet, The True Facts about Imported Pornography, to adult-identified customers. Reidel was prosecuted under three counts of violating § 1461. The United States District Court for the Central District of California dismissed the case, whereupon the U.S. appealed directly to the Supreme Court.
The Court heard and decided this case along with United States v. Thirty-seven Photographs.
Opinion of the Court
Associate Justice Byron White penned the Court's opinion reversing the district court and finding the postal regulation Constitutional. While individuals still retain a right to possess pornography, as the Court had found in Stanley v. Georgia, the government still had the power to regulate the distribution and sale of obscene materials, as it had found in Roth v. United States (1957).
Justice Hugo Black, joined by Justice William O. Douglas, dissented in both this case and in Thirty-seven Photographs case, arguing that § 1461 was unconstitutional, that the First Amendment to the United States Constitution "denies Congress the power to act as censor".
References
External links
Category:1971 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States obscenity case law
"""

From "United States v. Reynolds" ==> """
United States v. Reynolds, 345 U.S. 1 (1953), is a landmark legal case decided in 1953, which saw the formal recognition of the state secrets privilege, a judicially recognized extension of presidential power. The US Supreme Court confirmed that "the privilege against revealing military secrets ... is well established in the law of evidence".
 Overview 
Three employees of the Radio Corporation of America, an Air Force contractor, were killed when a B-29 Superfortress crashed in 1948 in Waycross, Georgia. Their widows brought an action in tort seeking damages in federal court, under the Federal Tort Claims Act. As part of this action, they requested production of accident reports concerning the crash, but were told by the Air Force that the release of such details would threaten national security. Because of the failure of the government to produce the documents, a directed verdict in favor of the plaintiffs was granted by the trial court. The judgment was affirmed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. The United States Supreme Court reversed the decision, and remanded it to the trial court. After this, a settlement was reached with the widows, who received an aggregate sum of $170,000 in exchange for a release of liability to the Government.
Issues
 Are the Judge Advocate General of the United States Air Force and the Secretary of the Air Force allowed to assert privilege in the face of a suit brought under the Federal Tort Claims Act and the application for production of documents under Rule 34 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure?
 Does the doctrine in federal criminal cases of letting the defendant go free by dismissing the criminal charges in cases where evidence is not produced by the government apply to federal civil (tort) cases brought under the Federal Tort Claims Act?
 Was the judgment entered by the District Court under the Federal Tort Claims Act against the United States Government and in favor of the plaintiffs for failure to produce the documents in question proper?
 Was the affirmation of the  judgment of the Third Court of Appeals proper?
Holdings
In this case, there was a valid claim of privilege under Rule 34; and a judgment based under Rule 37 on refusal to produce the documents subjected the United States to liability which Congress did not consent by the Federal Tort Claims Act.Reynolds, 345 U.S. at 2-12.
 As used in Rule 34, which compels production only of matters "not privileged," the term "not privileged" refers to "privileges" as that term is understood in the law of evidence.Reynolds, 345 U.S. at 6.
 When the Secretary lodged his formal claim of privilege, he invoked a privilege against revealing military secrets – one which is well established in the law of evidence.Reynolds, 345 U.S. at 6-7.
 When a claim of privilege against revealing military secrets is invoked, the courts must decide whether the occasion for invoking the privilege is appropriate, and yet do so without jeopardizing the security which the privilege was meant to protect.Reynolds, 345 U.S. at 7-8.
 When the formal claim of privilege was filed by the Secretary, under the circumstances indicating a reasonable possibility that military secrets were involved, there was a sufficient showing of privilege to cut off further demand for the documents on the showing of necessity for its compulsion that had been made.Reynolds, 345 U.S. at 10.
 In this case, the showing of necessity was greatly minimized by plaintiffs' rejection of the Judge Advocate General's offer to make the surviving crew member available for examination.Reynolds, 345 U.S. at 11.
 The doctrine in the criminal field that the Government can invoke its evidence privileges only at the price of letting the defendant go free has no application in a civil forum, where the Government is not the moving party, but is a defendant only on terms to which it has consented.Reynolds, 345 U.S. at 12.
In a suit under the Tort Claims Act, the District Court entered a judgment against the Government.10 F.R.D. 468.   The Court of Appeals affirmed.Reynolds v. United States,  The Supreme Court reversed and remanded.
Facts and background
thumb|right|The case United States v. Reynolds involved the refusal of the Government to release reports concerning a B-29 Superfortress crash in 1948.
A military aircraft on a flight to test secret electronic equipment crashed, and certain civilian observers aboard were killed. Their widows sued the United States under the Federal Tort Claims Act and moved under Rule 34 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for production of the Air Force's accident investigation report and statements made by surviving crew members during the investigation. The Secretary of the Air Force filed a formal claim of privilege, stating that the matters were privileged against disclosure under the Air Force regulations issued under R. S. section 161, and that the aircraft and its personnel were "engaged in a highly secret mission." The Judge Advocate General filed an affidavit stating that the material could not be furnished "without seriously hampering national security," but he offered to produce the surviving crew members for examination by the plaintiffs and to permit them to testify as to all matters except those of a "classified nature." In the absence of the documents which the Air Force failed to produce, the trial court directed a summary judgment for the plaintiffs against the Government. The Appeals Court of the Third Circuit affirmed the decision. The United States appealed to the Supreme Court in certiorari.
Opinion
Majority opinion by Justice Vinson
The majority opinion was written by Justice Fred M. Vinson. He wrote, "We have had broad propositions pressed upon us for decision. The Government has claimed privilege to withhold information in their custody, if it is in the public interest to do so. Respondents [plaintiffs] have asserted that the executive's power to withhold documents was waived by the Tort Claims Act. Both positions have constitutional overtones which we find it unnecessary to pass upon, there being a narrower ground for decision."
"The Federal Tort Claims Act expressly makes the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure applicable to suits against the United States. The judgment in this case imposed liability upon the Government by operation of Rule 37, for refusal to produce documents under Rule 34. Since Rule 34 compels production only of matters "not privileged," the essential question is whether there was a valid claim of privilege under the Rule. We hold that there was, and that, therefore, the judgment below subjected the United States to liability on terms to which Congress did not consent by the Tort Claims Act."
Dissenting opinion
Justice Hugo Black, Justice Felix Frankfurter and Justice Robert H. Jackson filed a one sentence dissent indicating they agreed with the decision by Judge Maris in the earlier Court of Appeals decision.
Subsequent declassification of documents
left|250px|thumb|The B-29 crashed while testing classified electronic equipment. 
The declassified accident report, released in 2000, is available online, and indicates that the B-29 crashed because a fire started in an engine.US District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, Appendix to Civil Action No. 9793, on the Federation of American Scientists' website, accessed 5 April 2023 This document also reports that the plaintiffs received a settlement of $170,000. The settlement date was effective June 22, 1953, some three months after the Supreme Court ruling. In consideration for the money paid by the government, the case was dismissed with prejudice, meaning all future litigation on this case was forfeited. The radio program This American Life reported in 2009, that, contrary to claims made in the case, the accident report contained no information on the secret equipment on the plane except to note that secret equipment was present, a fact which had been reported in the press at the time. The program interviewed the daughter of one of the crash victims who described the government's claims in the case as fraudulent.
After release of the classified documents, new litigation was attempted, based in part on a complaint that the classified material contained no secret information. Monetary damages were sought as a remedy. The initial new claim was to the Supreme Court for a writ of error in coram nobis, based on the claim that the use of the "secret" label in the original crash report was a fraud on the court. This was an attempt to overturn the settlement agreement of June 1953. This motion was denied on June 23, 2003 in In re Herring.. The case was refiled as Herring v. United States in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania on October 1, 2003. The trial court found no fraud in the government's claim of privilege in 1953.
In 2005, the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit upheld the decision in the new litigation, in which District Court determined "there was no fraud because the documents, read in their historical context, could have revealed secret information about the equipment being tested on the plane and, on a broader reading, the claim of privilege referred to both the mission and the workings of the B-29". Even without the broad reading that the claim included secrecy concerning the aircraft itself, the court found it possible that the documents' revelations "that the mission required an 'aircraft capable of dropping bombs' and that the mission required an airplane capable of 'operating at altitudes of 20,000 feet and above'" could have been "seemingly insignificant pieces of information [that] would have been of keen interest to a Soviet spy fifty years ago."
Discussion and criticism of privilege in Reynolds
There has been much discussion about the use of government privilege to classify information. On the one hand, there is the need to protect government secrecy. On the other, there is always suspicion that "classified documents" are merely a way to cover-up government malfeasance or bad faith actions of the executive branch.
 Prosser and Keaton 
thumb|right|300px|The 1953 Supreme Court decision in Reynolds is still contentious.  
Privilege is the modern term applied to those considerations which avoid liability where it might otherwise follow.Second Restatement of Torts, section 10. As it is generally used, the term applies to any circumstance used to justify or excuse a prima facie tort, such as an assault, battery or trespass. It signifies that the defendant has acted to further an interest of such social importance that it is entitled to protection, even at the expense of damage to the plaintiff. The defendant is allowed freedom of action because his own interests, or those of the public, require it, and because social policy will best be served by permitting it. The privilege is bounded by current ideas of what will most effectively promote the general welfare. The question of "privilege" as a defense arises almost exclusively in connection with intentional torts. Negligence is a matter of risk and probability of harm; and where the likelihood of injury to the plaintiff is relatively slight, the defendant will necessarily be allowed greater latitude than where the harm is intended, or substantially certain to follow. It is the bare value of the respective interests involved and the extent of the harm from which the act is intended to protect the one as compared with that which it is intended to cause to the other which determines the existence or nonexistence of the privilege.
The relative social value given to an interest which the defendant seeks to further can affect the nature and extent of a privilege. Occasionally, the defendant may act at his peril if he makes a mistake of fact or law; at other times, an actor is justified in acting on the basis of what the facts reasonably appear to be. At other times, the defendant is justified so long as he was acting in good faith. Or, the privilege may be regarded as absolute in the sense that the court will not permit an inquiry into motive or purpose, since this could result in subjecting the honest person to harassing litigation and claims. When no inquiry is permitted into motive or purpose, it is sometimes said that defendant has an absolute privilege; when the defendant can act in either good or bad faith, with impunity, it is more properly called "immunity" rather than "privilege".
Judiciary Hearing, 2008
Many commentators have alleged government misuse of secrecy in the wake of the Supreme Court decision in the case of Reynolds. Senator Leahy in his opening remarks for the Senate Judiciary Committee's February 13, 2008, hearing on the State Secrets Privilege called the Third Circuit's decision in Herring v. United States "a little mystifying". The hearing featured testimony from several experts in the field of government privilege.
Carl J. Nichols
Testimony of Carl J. Nichols, Deputy Assistant Attorney General of the Department of Justice Civil Division.  
thumb|Example of a redacted, declassified version of a top secret document released by the U.S. government.
The state secrets privilege serves a vital function by ensuring that private litigants cannot use litigation to force the disclosure of information that, if made public, would directly harm the national security of the United States. The privilege has a long-standing history and has been invoked to protect such information. The privilege is firmly rooted in the constitutional authorities and obligations assigned to the President under Article II to protect the national security of the United States.
Accountability is preserved by a number of procedural and substantive requirements that must be satisfied before a court may accept an assertion of the state secrets privilege. The Supreme Court in Reynolds held that such information should be protected from disclosure when there is a "danger that compulsion of the evidence will expose military matters which, in the interest of national security, should not be divulged." The Court noted that the privilege was absolute, even if the need in the plaintiff was compelling. The Fifth Circuit has noted, "the greater public good – ultimately the less harsh remedy" is to protect the information from disclosure, even where the result might be dismissal of the lawsuit.
It is well established that the President is constitutionally charged with protecting information relating to national security. As the Supreme Court has stated, "[t]the authority to protect such information falls upon the President as the head of the Executive Branch and as Commander in Chief.". The state secrets privilege is not a mere "common law" privilege. Instead the courts have long recognized the privilege has a firm foundation in the Constitution as was noted in United States v. Nixon. where the Supreme Court noted the claim of privilege "relates to the effective discharge of the President's powers, it is constitutionally based."Nixon, 418 U.S. at 711.
In the case of Herring v. United States, where it was disclosed that the declassified accident report from Reynolds was reviewed, Judge Davis found, "[d]etails of flight mechanics, B-29 glitches, and technical remedies in the hands of the wrong party could surely compromise national security," and thus "may have been of great moment to sophisticated intelligent analysts and Soviet engineers alike."Herring, 2004 WL 2040272 The Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit agreed. (Note that the first Tupolev Tu-4, a Russian copy of the B-29 developed from captured aircraft, had flown in 1947. In the instant case, it was the electronic equipment which was classified as top secret, not the basic airframe of the B-29.)
The assertion of the privilege is not lightly entertained, and there are multiple administrative hurdles which have to be overcome once it is chosen to be asserted. There are multiple internal reviews, and the court has the final oversight. Still, the Executive Branch is given the utmost deference, and the courts cannot get into the business of second-guessing national security and foreign policy questions.
Patricia M. Wald
Testimony of Patricia M. Wald, Former Judge, United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit (1979–1999).
The states secrets privilege is a common law privilege originating with the judiciary which enunciated its necessity and laid down some directions for its scope in cases going back to the 19th century but more recently highlighted in United States v. Reynolds. In the criminal area, the Classified Information Procedures Act (CIPA) provides a relevant model for alternatives to full disclosure of classified information which allow a prosecution to continue while affording a defendant his or her due process rights. The time is now ripe for such legislation in the civil arena; litigants and their counsel are confused and unsure as to how to proceed in cases where the government raises the privilege; the courts themselves are confronted with precedent going in many different directions as to the scope of their authority and the requirements exercising it.
It is my opinion that the Freedom of Information Act should allow a judge to review the material and make a determination whether the assertion of privilege is warranted.  The goal should be flexibility in the interpretation, leaving the determination to the judge in the federal court.
Louis Fisher
250px|thumb|right|Another redacted government document, this from CIA 1953 LSD experiments.
Testimony of Louis Fisher, Constitutional Law Expert, Library of Congress.
A "state secret" refers to any information that, if disclosed publicly, would be reasonably likely to cause significant harm to the national defense or foreign relations of the United States.S. 2533, section 4051 Few judges, reading this language, will be likely to challenge the government. I would prefer to add a second sentence to the definition: "The assertion of a state secret by the executive branch is to be tested by independent judicial review."
Concerning "immunity", I would like to see a third sentence added to the definition: "The 'states secrets privilege' may not shield illegal or unconstitutional activities."  I see no reason privilege should sanction violations of statutes, treaties, or the Constitution.
Our experience with state secrets cases underscores the need for judicial independence in assessing executive claims.
Michael A. Vatis
Testimony of Michael A. Vatis, Partner, Steptoe & Johnson LLP.
There are two bedrock principles which are in natural tension. Secrecy in government can be an absolute necessity to the protection of our national security. This is especially so today, where the surveillance of terrorist groups is essential.
At the same time, the second principle is equally true. Secrecy in government is antithetical to democratic governance. Too much secrecy shields officials from oversight and inevitably breeds abuse and misconduct; it thus can fatally weaken the system of checks and balances that defines our system of government.
Add to this the corollary: there are secrets, then there are secrets. Too often, information deemed classified by the Executive Branch merely echoes what was in last week's newspapers.  Classified material is frequently released to the public for strictly political reasons. In truth, many "classified" documents have no reason to be called such.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 345
Jencks v. United States
Halkin v. Helms
Declassification
Classified information in the United States
 References 
 Further reading 
 "Daughters of the Cold War" by Michael Freedman. Legal Affairs, January/February 2004. An easy-to-read summary of the case.
External links
 Summary of case from OYEZ
 "Supreme Court Filing Claims Air Force, Government Fraud in 1953 Case," via Federation of American Scientists
 Herring v USA - Decision finding there was no fraud in the Government's 1953 claim of privilege.
 Declassified case appendix which contains the allegedly sensitive documents, via Federation of American Scientists
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States government secrecy
Category:1953 in United States case law
Category:Boeing B-29 Superfortress
Category:United States state secrets privilege case law
"""

From "United States v. Richardson" ==> """
United States v. Richardson, 418 U.S. 166 (1974), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning standing in which the Court held  a taxpayer's interest in government spending was generalized, and too "undifferentiated" to confer Article III standing to challenge a law which exempted Central Intelligence Agency funding from Article I, Section 9 requirements that such expenditures be audited and reported to the public.
 Background 
In 1949, Congress passed the Central Intelligence Agency Act, which exempted funding for the CIA from financial disclosure.
William B. Richardson, an insurance claims adjuster, first attempted to challenge the CIA Act in 1968, in Richardson v. Sekel, 408 F.2d 844 (3rd Cir. 1969), but the case was unsuccessful at District court and the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit denied certiorari.  In 1972, he tried again, filing suit in the United States District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania.  Richardson argued that the Act was in violation of the penultimate clause of  Article I, Section 9 of the United States Constitution, which states "No Money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in Consequence of Appropriations made by Law; and a regular Statement and Account of Receipts and Expenditures of all public Money shall be published from time to time." The District Court dismissed the case for standing; the Third Circuit, hearing the case en banc, reversed;  in 1973, the Supreme Court granted certiorari..
Representatives
 Robert H. Bork for the United States et al.
 Osmond K. Fraenkel for the respondent
 Opinion of the Court 
140px|right|thumb|Chief Justice Burger delivered the opinion of the Court.
Chief Justice Warren Burger delivered the opinion of the Court, which found that Richardson lacked standing to challenge the Act. noting that any "impact on him  is plainly undifferentiated and "common to all members of the public."  This failed to meet the standard enunciated in Flast v. Cohen and its predecessor, Frothingham v. Mellon. Burger concluded:
 References 
External links
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "United States v. Riverside Bayview" ==> """
United States v. Riverside Bayview, 474 U.S. 121 (1985), was a United States Supreme Court case challenging the scope of federal regulatory powers over waterways as pertaining to the definition of "waters of the United States" as written in the Clean Water Act of 1972. The Court ruled unanimously that the government does have the power to control intrastate wetlands as waters of the United States.. This ruling was effectively revised in Rapanos v. United States (2006),. in which the Court adopted a very narrow interpretation of "navigable waters."
Prior history
The case involves developer Riverside Bayview Homes Inc., which began placing fill materials on its property near the shores of Lake St. Clair, Michigan. The Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) filed suit in Federal District Court to prevent Riverside Bayview from filling its property without dredge and fill exception from the Corps as required under Clean Water Act §404.
The Eastern Michigan District Court held that the property was freshwater wetlands under the Corps's regulatory definition, which reads, "those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions", and as such is subject to the Corps's permit authority because the lands were characterized by those conditions, and the property was adjacent to a body of navigable water. The Court of Appeals reversed, arguing that the Corps overstepped the definition of "waters of the United States", and took the view that the Corps's authority under the Clean Water Act and its implementing regulations must be narrowly construed to avoid a taking without just compensation in violation of the Fifth Amendment, and therefore Riverside Bayview was free to fill its property without obtaining a permit.
Decision
Writing the opinion for a unanimous Court, Justice Byron White ruled that neither the imposition of the permit requirement itself nor the denial of a permit would constitute taking, and that other legislation such as the Tucker Act exist to provide compensation for takings that may result. The Court ruled that the District Court did not err in its finding that the property falls within the Corps's regulatory definition of wetlands. White added that the Clean Water Act's language, policies, and history compel a holding that the Corps acted reasonably in its interpretation of its authorities over discharge material in wetlands.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 474
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1985 in the environment
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States Army Corps of Engineers
Category:Legal history of Michigan
Category:United States water case law
"""

From "United States v. Robel" ==> """
United States v. Robel, 389 U.S. 258 (1967), was a case heard by the Supreme Court of the United States. The court ruled that the United States government cannot deprive the people of constitutional rights - in this case, freedom of association - even in the interests of national security.
The petitioner, Eugene Frank Robel, who worked at Todd Shipyards in Seattle, was indicted on May 21, 1963, for being a member of the Communist Party of the United States (CPUSA) and thus affiliated with it, without being registered with the Subversive Activities Control Board in violation of the McCarran Internal Security Act section 5 (a) (I) (D). Since the act required CPUSA to register as a Communist Party, he was told because of his affiliation with the Party, he also had to register as well, and that he could no longer work at the shipyard because of his affiliation with the Communist Party; Todd Shipyards had been designated a "defense" facility, otherwise known as federal employment, which was illegal under the McCarran Act. Robel appealed his conviction to the Supreme Court.
The Court found the McCarran Internal Security Act violates the defendant's right to free association that is guaranteed by the First Amendment.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 389
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States freedom of association case law
Category:1967 in United States case law
