"""

From "Feist Publications, Inc., v. Rural Telephone Service Co." ==> """
Feist Publications, Inc., v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991), was a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States establishing that information alone without a minimum of original creativity cannot be protected by copyright.. In the case appealed, Feist had copied information from Rural's telephone listings to include in its own, after Rural had refused to license the information. Rural sued for copyright infringement. The Court ruled that information contained in Rural's phone directory was not copyrightable and that therefore no infringement existed.
Background
thumb|The "white pages" of a telephone directory
Rural Telephone Service Company, Inc. is a telephone cooperative providing services for areas in northwest Kansas, with headquarters in the small town of Lenora, in Norton County. The company was under a statutory obligation to compile and distribute a "white pages" phone directory of all its customers free of charge as a condition of its monopoly franchise.
Feist Publications, Inc. specialized in compiling telephone directories from larger geographic areas than Rural from other areas of Kansas. It had licensed the directory of 11 other local directories, with Rural being the only holdout in the region. Despite Rural's denial of a license to Feist, Feist copied 4,000 entries from Rural's directory. Because Rural had placed a small number of phony entries to detect copying, Feist was caught.
Before this case, the substance of copyright in United States law followed the sweat of the brow doctrine, which gave copyright to anyone who invested significant amount of time and energy into their work. At trial and appeal level the courts followed this doctrine, siding with Rural.
Ruling of the court
The ruling of the court was written by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor. It examined the purpose of copyright and explained the standard of copyrightability as based on originality.
The case centered on two well-established principles in United States copyright law: that facts are not copyrightable, and that compilations of facts can be.
"There is an undeniable tension between these two propositions", O'Connor wrote in her opinion. "Many compilations consist of nothing but raw data—i.e. wholly factual information not accompanied by any original expression. On what basis may one claim a copyright upon such work? Common sense tells us that 100 uncopyrightable facts do not magically change their status when gathered together in one place. … The key to resolving the tension lies in understanding why facts are not copyrightable: The ″Sine qua non of copyright is originality."
Rural claimed a collection copyright in its directory. The court clarified that the intent of copyright law was not, as claimed by Rural and some lower courts, to reward the efforts of persons collecting information—the so-called "sweat of the brow" or "industrious collection" doctrine—but rather "to promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts" (U.S. Const. Art. I, § 8, cl. 8)—that is, to encourage creative expression.
The standard for creativity is extremely low. It need not be novel; it need only possess a "spark" or "minimal degree" of creativity to be protected by copyright.
In regard to collections of facts, O'Connor wrote that copyright can apply only to the creative aspects of collection: the creative choice of what data to include or exclude, the order and style in which the information is presented, etc.—not to the information itself. If Feist were to take the directory and rearrange it, it would destroy the copyright owned in the data. "Notwithstanding a valid copyright, a subsequent compiler remains free to use the facts contained in another's publication to aid in preparing a competing work, so long as the competing work does not feature the same selection and arrangement", she wrote.
The court held that Rural's directory was nothing more than an alphabetic list of all subscribers to its service, which it was required to compile under law, and that no creative expression was involved. That Rural spent considerable time and money collecting the data was irrelevant to copyright law, and Rural's copyright claim was dismissed.
All the justices joined O'Connor's opinion except Harry Blackmun, who concurred only in judgment, but did not file a separate opinion.
Implications
The ruling has major implications for any project that serves as a collection of knowledge. Information (facts, discoveries, etc.) from any source is fair game, but cannot contain any of the "expressive" content added by the source author. That includes not only the author's own comments, but also their choice of which facts to cover, which links to make among the bits of information, the order of presentation (unless it is something obvious like alphabetical), evaluations of the quality of various pieces of information, or anything else that might be considered the author's "original creative work" rather than mere facts.
For example, a recipe is a process, and not copyrightable, but the words used to describe it are; see idea-expression divide and Publications International v. Meredith Corp. (1996).Publications International v. Meredith Corp., 88 F.3d 473 (7th Cir., 1996) Therefore, a recipe can be rewritten with different wording and be published without infringing copyright. If an individual rewrote every recipe from a particular cookbook, they might be found to have infringed the author's copyright in the choice of recipes and their "coordination" and "presentation", even if they used different words, but the West decisions below suggest that this is unlikely unless there is some significant creativity carried over from the original presentation. A sufficiently novel, useful, and unique (i.e. non-obvious) recipe can be granted protection under patent law."The Law of Recipes: Are Recipes Patentable?" (Feb 10, 2012) IPWatchdog
Feist proved most important in the area of copyright of legal case law publications. One might assume that the text of U.S. case law is in public domain, but Thomson West claimed a copyright as to the first-page citations and internal pinpoint page citations of its versions of court opinions (case law) found in its printed versions of the case law ("West's citation claims"). West also claimed a copyright in the text of its versions of the case law, which included parallel citations and typographical corrections ("West's text claims"). The text claim would have barred anyone from copying the text of a case from a West case law reporter, since the copied text would include West enhancements to which West claimed copyright.
In a 1986 pre-Feist case, West's citation copyright claim was affirmed by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit in a preliminary injunction case brought by West against Mead Data, owner of Lexis (West v. Mead),<ref>West Publishing Co. v. Mead Data Central, 799 F.2d 1219  (United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, 1986)</ref> but in a case commenced in 1994 in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit found Feist to have undermined the reasoning in West v. Mead.  West's citation claims were challenged in 1994 by legal publisher Matthew Bender & Company and by a small CD-ROM publisher HyperLaw, Inc. HyperLaw intervened, joining Matthew Bender in the citation challenge and separately challenging West's text copyright claims. In 1998, the Second Circuit found that West did not have a protectable copyright interest in its first-page citations or its internal pagination citations (Matthew Bender v. West, Citation Appeal).Second Circuit - Citation Appeal:  Matthew Bender  v. West, 158 F.3d 693 (2d Cir. 1998), cert. denied, 526 U.S. 1154 (1999) . The Second Circuit thereby rejected a Minnesota district court's 1996 determination (Oasis Publishing Co. v. West Publishing Co., 924 F.Supp. 918, D. Minn.) that Feist does not change the outcome of West.
In the same case, but in separate decisions in which Matthew Bender was not involved, HyperLaw successfully challenged West's text claims. Judge John S. Martin ruled HyperLaw's favor against West in the May 1996 U.S. District Court decision Matthew Bender v. West, No. 94 Civ. 0589, 1997 WL 266972 (S.D.N.Y. May 19, 1997), aff'd, 158 F. 3d 674 (2nd Cir. 1998), cert. denied sub. nom. West v. Hyperlaw, 526 U.S. 1154 (1999).District Court - HyperLaw Text Decision: Matthew Bender v. West, No. 94 Civ. 0589, 1997 WL 266972 (S.D.N.Y. May 19, 1997), aff'd, 158 F. 3d 674 (2nd Cir. 1998), cert. denied sub. nom. West v. Hyperlaw, 526 U.S. 1154 (1999). West lost to HyperLaw on appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit and the U.S. Supreme Court denied certiorari.Second Circuit - HyperLaw Text Appeal Decision:  Matthew Bender v. West, 158 F. 3d 674 (2nd Cir. 1998), aff'g, No. 94 Civ. 0589, 1997 WL 266972 (S.D.N.Y. May 19, 1997), cert. denied sub. nom. West v. Hyperlaw, 526 U.S. 1154 (1999) 
After West v. Mead, Mead Data and Lexis were acquired by Reed Elsevier, a large English-Dutch based publisher. During Matthew Bender v. West, Reed Elsevier and Matthew Bender entered into a strategic relationship, culminating in Reed Elsevier's acquisition of Matthew Bender in 1998, just after the Second Circuit appeals were argued. Reed Elsevier was now on West's side and filed an amicus brief opposing HyperLaw and supporting West. Thus, though the name of the case might suggest that Matthew Bender challenged West on the text claim, by the middle of the case Matthew Bender was on West's side on the text issue. Reed Elsevier's support of West's claims to a copyright in text was consistent with the initiatives, discussed below, to sidestep Feist by implementing database protection, through legislation and treaties discussed below. Similarly, during the case, West was acquired by the Canadian-based international publisher the Thomson Corporation.
Another case covering this area is Assessment Technologies v. Wiredata (2003),Assessment Technologies v. Wiredata, 350 F.3rd 640  (7th Cir., 2003) in which the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that a copyright holder in a compilation of public domain data cannot use that copyright to prevent others from using the underlying public domain data, but may only restrict the specific format of the compilation if that format is itself sufficiently creative. Assessment Technologies also held that it is a fair use of a copyrighted work to reverse engineer that work in order to gain access to uncopyrightable facts. Assessment Technologies also created new law, stating that it is a copyright misuse and an abuse of process to attempt to use a contract or license agreement based on one's copyright to protect uncopyrightable facts.
In the late 1990s, Congress attempted to pass laws to protect collections of data,H.R. 2652, Collections of Information Antipiracy Act 1998 but the measures failed.Armageddon on the Potomac: the Collections of Information Antipiracy Act 1999 By contrast, the European Union has a sui generis (specific to that type of work) intellectual property protection for collections of data.
 Other countries 
The applicability of copyright to phone directories has come up in several other countries.
In Canada, the appeal-level case of Tele-Direct (Publications) Inc. v. American Business Information Inc. (1997) 76 C.P.R. (3d) 296 (F.C.A.) reached a similar result to Feist's. But the Supreme Court partially backed away from the originality doctrine in CCH Canadian Ltd. v. Law Society of Upper Canada. Under CCH Canadian, someone may assert protection in a database where the facts are themselves not copied from another source. For example, a person may assert protection in a collection of their own recipes, but may not assert protection in a database of facts about persons and their ancestry compiled from census records.
In Australia, the Federal Court decision Desktop Marketing Systems v Telstra followed the UK approach in Walter v Lane and ruled that copyright law did, in fact, follow the "sweat of the brow" doctrine. But Desktop v Telstra held, like CCH Canadian, that collections of facts must not be copied from other sources to be eligible for protection. In 2010, the Telstra decision was overturned by Justice Gordon in Telstra v Phone Directories, following the decision of the High Court in IceTV v Nine Network.
In India, the Supreme Court case Eastern Book Company & Ors vs D.B. Modak & Anr (where the respondents had compiled CD-ROMs of Supreme Court rulings with text sourced from copyedited publications of them by Eastern Book Company, albeit with copyrightable headnotes and other original content removed) cited both Feist and CCH Canadian, establishing that a work needed to demonstrate labor or effort—but not only labor—in order to be an "original", copyrightable work. In this case, the Court held that the copy-edited text of public domain court documents did not "depict independent creation even a modicum of creativity." This ruling contrasted previous rulings such as Govindan v E.M. Gopalakrishna Kone and Burlington Home Shipping Pvt Ltd v Rajnish Chibber, which followed the British approach of skill and labor.
Relation with treaties
Congress has been considering whether to implement a treaty negotiated at the World Trade Organization. Part of the Uruguay Round Agreement resulted in text that reads, in Part II, Section 1, Article 10:
The text mirrors that of Article 2(5) of the Berne Convention, which applies to "collections of literary or artistic works".
This treaty provision is broadly in line with the United States Copyright Act and the Act's case law, which protects compilations of data whose "selection and arrangement" is sufficiently original. See  ("compilation" as defined by the United States Copyright Act includes compilations of data). The standard for such originality is fairly low; for example, business listings have been found to meet this standard when deciding which companies should be listed and categorizing those companies required some kind of expert judgment. See Key Publ'ns, Inc. v. Chinatown Today Pub. Enters., 945 F.2d 509 (2d Cir. 1991) (applying Feist). As such, implementation of this treaty would not overrule Feist''.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 499
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Idea–expression divide
 Threshold of originality
 Sui generis database right
References
Further reading
External links
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Yellow pages
"""

From "Felder v. Casey" ==> """
Felder v. Casey, 487 U.S. 131 (1988), was a United States Supreme Court case that held that a state notice-of-claim statute could not be applied to a civil rights suit under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 in state court.
 Background 
A Wisconsin statute required people wishing to sue a state or local government entity or officer to give notice at least 120 days in advance of filing suit. The claimant must provide an itemized statement of the relief sought, and the lawsuit must be filed within six months of receiving notice that the claim has been disallowed. Failure to comply with the statute's requirements was grounds for dismissing the suit.
Bobby Felder, a black Milwaukee resident, alleged that he was beaten and arrested by white Milwaukee Police Department officers on July 4, 1981. Nine months later, he filed a lawsuit in Wisconsin state court against the city of Milwaukee and the police officers under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, a federal law that allows lawsuits for violations of constitutional rights. The officers moved to dismiss Felder's lawsuit because he had not complied with the state notice-of-claim statute, and on appeal the Wisconsin Supreme Court agreed that the statute applied and Felder had not adequately complied with it, so the case must be dismissed.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court held that Wisconsin's notice-of-claim statute was preempted because it "conflicts in both its purpose and effects with the remedial objectives of § 1983, and because its enforcement in such actions will frequently and predictably produce different outcomes in § 1983 litigation based solely on whether the claim is asserted in state or federal court." The state statute essentially imposed an exhaustion requirement, which the Court had previously held did not apply to § 1983 suits in Patsy v. Board of Regents of Florida, 457 U.S. 496 (1982).
 See also 
 Exhaustion of remedies
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
Category:Milwaukee Police Department
"""

From "United States v. Felix" ==> """
United States v. Felix, 503 U.S. 378 (1992), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that "a[n]…offense and a conspiracy to commit that offense are not the same offense for double jeopardy purposes." The Supreme Court rejected the Tenth Circuit's reversal of Felix's conviction, finding that the Court of Appeals read the holding in Grady v. Corbin (1990) too broadly.
 Facts and procedural history 
In the spring of 1987, the defendant Frank Felix was illegally manufacturing methamphetamine in his Oklahoma facility. The facility was raided and shut down by federal agents in July of the same year where they found and seized precursor materials for methamphetamine production. While still a free man, Felix was arrested a month later by DEA agents conducting an operation in Joplin, Missouri where he was arrested with chemicals and equipment consistently used in the production of methamphetamine. Subsequently, Felix was charged in the United States District Court for the Western District of Missouri and was indicted for attempting to manufacture a controlled substance. At trial Felix presented the defense that "he never had criminal intent, but had the mistaken belief that he was working in a covert DEA operation." Prosecutors then presented evidence of prior acts committed by Felix in Oklahoma to counter his defense. Prosecutors introduced the evidence of the methamphetamine labs from Oklahoma, and the jury convicted Felix for those crimes.
Subsequently, in 1989, the government filed an eleven-count indictment in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Oklahoma against Felix and other parties for his role in the methamphetamine labs in Oklahoma. This indictment included the substantive charges of manufacturing and possessing methamphetamine with intent to distribute. At trial, prosecutors presented the same evidence from the trial in Missouri. Felix was found guilty on all counts by the jury.
Felix appealed his Oklahoma conviction to the Tenth Circuit where a divided panel ruled in favor of Felix and reversed the ruling. The tenth circuit, relying heavily on Grady v. Corbin, 495 U.S. 508 (1990), held that any subsequent prosecution is barred by the Double Jeopardy Clause, if the government would need to establish an essential element of the offense charged evidenced by conduct of the defendant for which the defendant has already been prosecuted for.
Proceeding the 10th circuit ruling, the government appealed to the Supreme Court where certiorari was granted.
 Decision 
 Opinion 
Chief Justice Rehnquist writing the opinion for the court joined by Justices White, O'Connor, Scalia, Kennedy, Souter, and Thomas. The court focused on two issues; first, whether Double Jeopardy bars prosecution of Felix for the substantial drug offenses contained in the Oklahoma indictment, and second, whether the Double Jeopardy clause bars the prosecution of Felix for the conspiracy charges contained in the Oklahoma indictment. Justice Rehnquist held that The Double Jeopardy Clause does not bar Felix's prosecution on either the substantive drug offenses or the conspiracy charge. The court reasoned that "a mere overlap in proof between two prosecutions does not establish a double jeopardy violation". A relevant fact the court focused on was of both the time and location of Felix's conduct for the two separate indictments. The Oklahoma indictment relied upon the conduct of Felix in regards to the Beggs methamphetamine lab in June and July, while the Missouri indictment focused on Felix's attempt to buy materials  to facilitate the methamphetamine operations, two months after the Beggs lab had closed. Thus, the court held that the Court of Appeals erred in their judgement when they extended the "same conduct" test in Grady to mean the "same offense" and invoked the protection of Double Jeopardy. The court's drew a distinction between conduct and offense, and reversed the judgement.
 Concurrence 
The concurrence was written by Justice Stevens, who was joined by Justice Blackmun in averring from the majority regarding the conspiracy charge. While the majority steps away from Grady, Justice Stevens argues that Grady can still be applied and would still result in the same conclusion. The concurrence reasoned, like the majority, that the double jeopardy clause does not bar the prosecution of Felix, however the interpretation of the "same conduct" test in the Grady dissent was the appropriate interpretation. The dissent in Grady states that when the "same conduct" mentions "conduct to establish an essential element" of the crime, the conduct must constitute the entirety of the element. Justice Stevens argues that double jeopardy does not apply under this reasoning as Felix's two overt acts in both prosecutions do not meaningfully establish the entirety of the element.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 503
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
United States v. Dixon (1993)
Further reading
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:1992 in United States case law
"""

From "Fellers v. United States" ==> """
Fellers v. United States, 540 U.S. 519 (2004), is a United States Supreme Court case regarding the Sixth Amendment's right to counsel..
Facts
After John Fellers was indicted  on February 24, 2000, by a grand jury,  a police sergeant named Michael Garnett  and a deputy sheriff named Jeff Bliemeister from the Lincoln, Nebraska Police Department and the Lancaster County Sheriff's Office respectively,  came to his home to arrest him. When they came to his house, they knocked on the door and identified themselves. They requested to enter his house, and Fellers invited them to his living room. When the officers went into the living room, they advised him that they were here to question him on his involvement in a methamphetamine distribution conspiracy, a federal crime. During the discussion, the officers informed him that he had a warrant for his arrest and was indicted by a grand jury. The conspiracy charge was related to his association with four named individuals and many unknown suspects. Fellers told the officers that he knew that the four individuals used methamphetamine during his association. Fifteen minutes later, Fellers was formally arrested and transported to the Lancaster County Jail. It was only at this time that he was read his Miranda rights.  A waiver form was signed, the statements were reiterated, and Fellers admitted that he had loaned money to a female individual, even though he suspected that she was involved in drug transactions.
Trials and Appeals
At a pre-trial hearing, Fellers moved to suppress the statements he made to the officers from evidence. During the hearing, the magistrate in charge of the case recommended that portions of  Fellers' statements, including the statement he made at his house,  should be suppressed as fruits of the poisonous tree. The District Court subsequently suppressed the statement made during the initial confrontation, but admitted the jailhouse statement into evidence, arguing that under Oregon v. Elstad,. Fellers knowingly and voluntarily waived his Miranda rights before making the statement. At the actual trial itself, Fellers was convicted by a jury for conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute methamphetamine. Fellers appealed, arguing that the statement made in the jailhouse should be suppressed just like the statement at the house as a violation of the Sixth Amendment. The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit affirmed the initial verdict, concluding,
Fellers argues that the district court should have suppressed his inculpatory statements made at the jail because the primary taint of the improperly elicited statements made at his home was not removed by the recitation of his Miranda rights at the jail.
The voluntariness of a confession is a legal inquiry subject to plenary appellate review. United States v. Robinson, 20 F.3d 320, 322 (8th Cir.1994). To determine if Fellers's inculpatory statements at the jail were voluntary, we must determine if, "in light of the totality of the circumstances, the pressures exerted by the authorities overwhelmed the defendant's will. Coercive police activity is a necessary predicate to finding that a confession is not voluntary in the constitutional sense." Id. (citing , 107 S. Ct. 515, 93 L. Ed. 2d 473 (1986)) (internal citation omitted).
Contrary to Fellers's contention otherwise, we conclude that , 105 S. Ct. 1285, 84 L. Ed. 2d 222 (1985), renders admissible the statements made by Fellers at the jail.
In that case, two officers went to Elstad's residence with a warrant to arrest him for the burglary of a neighbor's home. One of the officers told Elstad that he believed that Elstad had been involved in the burglary, whereupon Elstad responded "Yes, I was there." The officers then transported Elstad to the sheriff's office, where, approximately one hour later, they advised Elstad of his Miranda rights. Elstad indicated that he understood his rights and that he wished to waive them. Elstad then signed a written statement explaining his role in the burglary. The trial court suppressed Elstad's initial oral statement, but admitted his written confession. Id. at 300-302, 105 S.Ct. 1285. In holding that the statement given at the sheriff's office was admissible, the Court stated:
It [would be] an unwarranted extension of Miranda to hold that simple failure to administer the warnings, unaccompanied by any actual coercion or other circumstances calculated to undermine the suspect's ability to exercise his free will, so taints the investigatory process that a subsequent voluntary and informed waiver is ineffective for some indeterminate period. Though Miranda requires that the unwarned admission must be suppressed, the admissibility of any subsequent statement should turn in these circumstances solely on whether it is knowingly and voluntarily made.
Elstad, 470 U.S. at 309, 105 S.Ct. 1285.
Citing , 108 S. Ct. 2389, 101 L. Ed. 2d 261 (1988), Fellers argues that the officers' failure to administer the Miranda warnings at his home violated his sixth amendment right to counsel inasmuch as the encounter constituted a post-indictment interview. Patterson is not applicable here, however, for the officers did not interrogate Fellers at his home.
Finally, we conclude that the record amply supports the district court's finding that Fellers's jailhouse statements were knowingly and voluntarily made following the administration of the Miranda warning. See Elstad, 470 U.S. at 314-15, 105 S.Ct. 1285; Robinson, 20 F.3d at 322. Accordingly, the district court did not err in denying the motion to suppress the statements made at the jail."
Judge Riley concurred, writing,
In all respects but one, I concur in the Court's well-reasoned opinion. My disagreement, which does not affect the ultimate resolution of this case, concerns whether the arresting officers violated Fellers's right to counsel under the Sixth Amendment.
Because Fellers was under indictment at the time of his arrest, he had a constitutional right to the presence of counsel during police interrogation. , 84 S.Ct. 1199, 12 L. Ed. 2d 246 (1964). For purposes of this right, an interrogation takes place when agents of law enforcement deliberately attempt to elicit incriminating information from the indicted defendant. See id. at 206, 84 S. Ct. 1199. Although the officers in this case did not ask Fellers any questions, they deliberately elicited incriminating information by telling Fellers they wanted to discuss his involvement in the use and distribution of methamphetamine. This post-indictment conduct outside the presence of counsel violated Fellers's right to counsel under the Sixth Amendment. See United States v. Henry, 447 U.S. 264, 270-71, 100 S.Ct. 2183, 65 L. Ed. 2d 115 (1980); , 97 S. Ct. 1232, 51 L. Ed. 2d 424 (1977); cf. , 100 S.Ct. 1682, 64 L. Ed. 2d 297 (1980).
Nevertheless, I do not believe this constitutional violation takes Fellers's case outside the rationale of , 105 S.Ct. 1285, 84 L. Ed. 2d 222 (1985). The Supreme Court "has never held that the psychological impact of voluntary disclosure of a guilty secret ... compromises the voluntariness of a subsequent informed waiver." Id. at 312, 105 S.Ct. 1285. Fellers knowingly and voluntarily waived his Sixth Amendment rights at the jail, and his subsequent statements were thus admissible at his criminal trial. Accordingly, I concur in the judgment of the Court."United States v. Fellers, 285 F.3d at 726-27 (Riley, J., concurring).
Holding
In a unanimous decision written by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, the Supreme Court held that the 8th Circuit Court of Appeals had erred in their decision that an "absence of an interrogation" had foreclosed Fellers' claim that the jailhouse statement should have been suppressed. While there was no question that incriminating statements were "deliberately elicited" at the house, the fact that Fellers was formally indicted and the statements in the house were without presence of counsel and there was an absence of a Sixth Amendment waiver, meant that the Court of Appeals made an error in their decision that the officers' actions did not violate the Sixth Amendment.  Secondly,  the Court of Appeals improperly analyzed the "fruits of the poisonous tree" under the Fifth Amendment. Specifically,  it relied on Oregon v. Elstad to hold that the jailhouse statement was admissible under the notion that it was "knowingly and voluntarily made". The Court of Appeals did not consider the question of whether the jailhouse statement should be suppressed on the grounds that they were the fruits of the statement made at the house. The question of whether Oregon v. Elstead should apply notwithstanding earlier questioning that violated a suspect's rights was not looked into at the Court, leading to the case to be remanded back into the Court of Appeals.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 540
List of United States Supreme Court cases
Further reading
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2004 in United States case law
Category:Massiah doctrine case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:History of Lincoln, Nebraska
Category:Law enforcement in Nebraska
"""

From "Fellows v. Blacksmith" ==> """
Fellows v. Blacksmith, 60 U.S. (19 How.) 366 (1857), is a United States Supreme Court decision involving Native American law. John Blacksmith, a Tonawanda Seneca, sued agents of the Ogden Land Company for common law claims of trespass,John Edward Barry, Oneida Indian Nation v. County of Oneida: Tribal Rights of Action and the Indian Trade and Intercourse Act, 84  1852, 1873 (1984); Shelby D. Green, Specific Relief for Ancient Depravations of Property, 36  245, 280 n.193 (2003); Allan Kanner, Ryan Casey & Barrett Ristroph, New Opportunities for Native American Tribes to Pursue Environmental and Natural Resource Claims, 14  155, 175 n.133 (2003). assault, and battery after he was forcibly evicted from his sawmill by the Company's agents. The Court affirmed a judgement in Blacksmith's favor, notwithstanding the fact that the Seneca had executed an Indian removal treaty and the Company held the exclusive right to purchase to the land by virtue of an interstate compact ratified by Congress.G. William Rice, Teaching Decolonization: Reacquisition of Indian Lands Within and Without the Box—An Essay, 82  811, 833 (2006).
Citing the trust relationship between the federal government and the tribes, the Court held that removal treaties could only be enforced against the tribes by the federal government, not private parties (whether through self-help or through the courts).Bethany R. Berger, "Power over This Unfortunate Race": Race, Politics, and Indian Law in United States v. Rogers, 45  1957, 2006 (2004); Reid Peyton Chambers, Judicial Enforcement of the Federal Trust Responsibility to Indians, 27  1213, 1213 n.1 (1975); Matthew L.M. Fletcher, The Supreme Court and Federal Indian Policy, 85  121, 141 n.111 (2006); Ford, 1995, at 147 n.42; Robert B. Porter, The Jurisdictional Relationship Between the Iroquois and New York State: An Analysis of 25 U.S.C. ss 232, 233, 27  497, 503 n.32, 514 n.100 (1990). In other words, the federal government retained the discretion not to enforce such treaties.Jay Donald Jerde, Learning to Sell Grandmother: Why City of Sherrill, New York v. Oneida Indian Nation of New York Should be Upheld to Preserve Tax-Free Status of Tribal Real Estate Acquisitions, 28  341, 366 (2005). At the same time, the Court held that enrolled treaties are conclusively valid, and refused to consider the plaintiffs claim that the Treaty of Buffalo Creek (1838) was fraudulent.
Fellows was one of several encounters of the Taney Court with the aboriginal title.Robert N. Clinton, Isolated in Their Own Country: A Defense of Federal Protection of Indian Autonomy and Self-Government, 33  979, 1042 n.321; Michael L. Ferch, Indian Land Rights: An International Approach to Just Compensation, 2  301, 310 n.55 (1992). It was the first litigation of aboriginal title in the United States in the Court by an indigenous plaintiff since Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831).Richard B. Collins & Karla D. Miller, A People Without Law, 5  83, 87 & n.24 (2006). According to a contemporary New York Times article: "The questions involved are of great magnitude, and affect more or less the title to a large portion of the State of New York." In Fellows, the court found "its first opportunity to consider the power of the federal government over Indian lands in New York."Francis J. O'Toole & Thomas N. Tureen, State Power and the Passamaquoddy Tribe: A Gross National Hypocrisy, 23  1, 27 (1971). Following the precedents of the Marshall Court, Fellows was "decided at a time when the government was still dealing with Indian tribes as if they were semi-sovereign nations."
The plaintiffs' lawyer John H. Martindale (future New York Attorney General) also represented the interests of the Tonawanda Band of Seneca Indians in three companion cases in the New York state courts. The third such case, New York ex rel. Cutler v. Dibble (1858), also reached the Supreme Court, which held that state nonintercourse acts (U.S. state laws prohibiting non-Indians from acquiring Indian lands) are not preempted by the Commerce Clause, the federal Nonintercourse Act, or federal treaties. Ely S. Parker, one of the administrators of the Blacksmith estate, went on to draft the surrender at Appomattox and to become the first indigenous Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
Background
Precedent
The Marshall Court (1801—1835) had repeatedly taken up the issue of aboriginal title in the United States. 153–188, 214–24 (2005). However, with the exception of Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831), which was dismissed for lack of original jurisdiction, all the disputes had been between non-Indians—typically between those who derived their title from the government and those who derived their title from private purchases from Indians.Howard R. Berman, The Concept of Aboriginal Rights in the Early Legal History of the United States, 27  637, 637–666 (1978). The uniform rule of these cases, enunciated most clearly in Johnson v. M'Intosh (1823), was that non-Indians could not acquire valid land title from such private purchases.Eric Kades, History and Interpretation of the Great Case of Johnson v. M'Intosh, 19  67 (2001). However, the purchase at issue in Fellows, the Treaty of Buffalo Creek (1838), had been ratified by the federal government.
The Court had not yet encountered a party claiming to actually possess aboriginal title in a case in which it had jurisdiction, so it had not yet definitively resolved the question of whether the holders of aboriginal title could avail themselves of the common law causes of action of trespass or ejectment.  At the end of his opinion in Fletcher v. Peck (1810), Marshall had stated that ejectment could not be obtained against the holder of aboriginal title.. The Taney Court (1836—1864), in Marsh v. Brooks (1850), went further in declaring that the holder of aboriginal title could obtain ejectment, stating: "That an action of ejectment could be maintained on an Indian right to occupancy and use, is not open to question.". In the oral arguments of that case, Cherokee Nation had been cited as authority for the argument that "Indians cannot sue on their aboriginal title in court of the United States."Marsh, 49 U.S. at 229 (oral argument). The plaintiffs in Fellows had sued under the related cause of action of trespass.See  237, 328 (2005).
An 1821 opinion of U.S. Attorney General William Wirt, interpreting Fletcher and Johnson, argued that:  "The Seneca Indians must be protected in the enjoyment of exclusive possession of their lands, as defined and bounded in the Treaty of Canandaigua, until they have voluntarily relinquished it."The Seneca Lands, 1 U.S. Op. Atty. Gen. 465, 465 (Apr. 26, 1821).
Dispute
thumb|right|A map showing the Phelps and Gorham Purchase|alt=A map of the Phelps and Gorham Purchase
Both the sovereignty over and land title to modern-day western New York was disputed between the colonies, and then states, of New York and Massachusetts, both claiming the lands by virtue of their colonial charters.Blacksmith v Fellows, 7 N.Y. (3 Seld.) 401, 411 (1852) ("There was originally a dispute between the states of New York and Massachusetts as to a large tract of land of which the locus in quo was a part. In 1786 that dispute was settled by a cession from Massachusetts to New York of the government, sovereignty and jurisdiction of the lands in controversy, and by a cession from New York to Massachusetts of 'the right of preemption of the soil from the native Indians and all other right or title of New York' to the same.").  This dispute was resolved on December 16, 1786 by the Treaty of Hartford, an interstate compact providing that the lands would be part of the territory of New York, but Massachusetts would retain the pre-emption rights, the exclusive right to purchase the Indian lands.See Massachusetts v. New York, 271 U.S. 65 (1926). The compact was approved by the Congress of the Confederation on October 8, 1787.33 Journals of the Continental Congress 617 (1787). Text See also  52 (2000).
Oliver Phelps and Nathaniel Gorham acquired the right of pre-emption to the lands at issue in Fellows v. Blacksmith from Massachusetts in 1788 as part of the Phelps and Gorham Purchase. However, Phelps and Gorham only consummated the right of pre-emption for a tract east of the Genesee River in 1788.  Phelps and Gorham defaulted on their payments to Massachusetts in 1790, causing the pre-emption rights to return to the state. Massachusetts then conveyed the pre-emption rights to Samuel Ogden on behalf of Robert Morris on May 12, 1791. Morris retained the pre-emptive right to the Morris Reserve for himself, but sold the pre-emptive right to the lands in question to the Holland Land Company on July 20, 1793 (the Holland Purchase). 321–22 (2007).
The Holland Land Company consummated much of its pre-emptive right in the Treaty of Big Tree (1797), extinguishing all Seneca aboriginal title west of the Genesee River except in ten reservations. The dispute concerned one of those reservations.  The Treaty of Buffalo Creek (1838)Treaty with the New York Indians, Jan. 15, 1838., 7 Stat. 550. had provided for the relocation of the Seneca people from New York to present-day Kansas, with the exception of four reservations: the Buffalo Creek Reservation, the Cattaraugus Reservation, the Allegany Reservation, and the Tonawanda Reservation.. However, the Seneca refused to be relocated.  Another treaty with the Senecas from 1842 modified the prior treaty:Treaty with the Seneca, May 20, 1842, 7 Stat. 586.  the Senecas were to keep Cattaraugus and Allegany, but still cede Buffalo Creek and Tonawanda.Fellows v. Blacksmith, 60 U.S. at 369 ("Some difficulty occurred in carrying this treaty into execution, which it is not important to refer to.  These difficulties raised by the Indians resulted in a modification of it by a second treaty . . . ."). The Seneca Nation of New York was established in 1848. The Tonawanda Band of Seneca Indians seceded from the Seneca Nation and achieved independent federal recognition (after the decision) in 1857.
Prior history
thumb|right|The Holland Land Office|alt=A photo of the Holland Land Office
Facts
John Blacksmith was a member of the Tonawanda Band of Seneca Indians and the sachem of the Wolf Clan. Blacksmith had constructed a "Indian sawmill and yard" on his enclosed tract within the Tonawanda Reservation in Pembroke, Genesee County, New York circa 1826. Blacksmith had not received compensation for the value of his improvements (the sawmill and yard), as provided for by the 1838 and 1842 treaties,Blacksmith v Fellows, 7 N.Y. at 411–12 ("It is enough for the purposes of the question now before us to know that in May 1842 . . . was agreed that the Indian title to four different tracts of land known as the Buffalo, the Cattaraugus, the Allegany and the Tonawanda reservations was valued at $202,000, that the Indians should retain the occupation and enjoyment of the Allegany and Cattaraugus reservations, and they thereby conveyed to Ogden and Fellows the whole of the Buffalo and Tonawanda reservations; that the Indians should be paid the consideration for that grant as follows: $100,000 should be regarded as the value of their title to the whole four tracts, and $102,000 as the value of their improvements on the same four tracts, and so much of those sums should be paid by Ogden and Fellows as the value of the title and improvements on the Buffalo and Tonawanda tracts should bear to the value of the title and improvements on all the tracts; such amount to be determined by arbitrators to be chosen as therein mentioned."). because he forcibly refused to let the treaty arbitrators onto his property for the survey.Blacksmith v Fellows, 7 N.Y. at 413 ("[The arbitrators] were unable to award as to the amount to be paid to each individual for his improvements on the Tonawanda tract, for the reason that that portion of the nation which was in possession of that tract refused to let them perform their duty in this respect, and removed them by force from the tract when they went there, as they did twice, for the purpose of making their examinations and award."). The Ogden Land Company claimed title to the Tonawanda Reservation by virtue of its right of pre-emption, consummated by the treaties.Fellows v. Blacksmith, 60 U.S. at 367; Blacksmith v. Fellows, 7 N.Y. at 411 ("This right was duly vested in Ogden and Fellows by proper conveyances from the state of Massachusetts, and they thus became seized of all the white man's right over these lands, except that of sovereignty which still remains in the state of New York. The Indian title, however, was not yet extinguished and the Indians were in the actual possession of the land, and before Ogden and Fellows could enjoy any benefit from this grant from the state of Massachusetts, it was necessary for them to acquire the Indian right."). Agents of the company "expelled and dispossessed" Blacksmith "with force of arms."Fellows v. Blacksmith, 60 U.S. at 367 ("John Blacksmith [sued] Joseph Fellows and Robert Kendle, for entering, with force and arms, into the close of the plaintiff, commonly known as an Indian sawmill and yard, at the town of Pembroke, county of Genesee, and then and there having expelled and dispossessed the said plaintiff.").
Supreme Court (trial court)
The suit was originally brought by John Blacksmith in 1846.Supreme Court of the United States, , Jan. 19, 1857 (correspondence of the ). Represented by lawyer John H. Martindale, Blacksmith sued Joseph Fellows and Robert Kendle, agents of the Land Company, for the torts of assault and battery and trespass, quare clausum fregit, with the sawmill as the locus in quo. Blacksmith's wife and Ely S. Parker (Blacksmith's successor as sachem of the Wolf Clan), together the administrators of Blacksmith's estate, succeeded Blacksmith as plaintiffs.Fellows v. Blacksmith, 60 U.S. at 367.
After a jury trial, the New York Supreme Court held for Blacksmith.Fellows v. Blacksmith, 60 U.S. at 367; Blacksmith v. Fellows, 7 N.Y. at 413 ("Upon this state of facts the jury under the charge of the court found a verdict for the plaintiff. On the trial below the court ruled that the defendants had failed to make out any title or right of possession and refused to charge that Fellows had made out a title to the close in question: that Fellows at the end of the two years was entitled to the possession notwithstanding the omission of the arbitrators to award as to the amount to be paid to the plaintiff as the value of his improvements: that such failure of the arbitrators could not prejudice Fellows unless it had been caused by him; and that the plaintiff as an individual Indian could not maintain the action.").
Supreme Court, General Term
The New York Supreme Court General Term ("circuit court") denied a new trial, holding that the payment of the appraisal value of the improvements determined by the arbitrator was a condition precedent to the conveyance in the treaty.Blacksmith v. Fellows, 7 N.Y. at 413 ("The supreme court at general term denied the motion for a new trial on the ground that the award of the arbitrators in full, as required by the indenture of conveyance and the treaty, was a condition precedent to the grantee's right of possession."); id. at 420 (Welles, J., dissenting) ("The circuit court decided and ruled generally without passing upon the objections separately, that the defendants had failed to establish any right or title to the close in question in the defendant Fellows.").
Court of Appeals
Before the New York Court of Appeals, Fellows was represented by J. C. Spencer, who made three arguments.Blacksmith v. Fellows oral arguments, 7 N.Y. at 409–11. First, he argued that the right to bring an action for trespass based on aboriginal title accrued only to an Indian nation, not an individual Indian. As Spencer noted, the Seneca Nation itself was prohibited by law from bringing an action "by a private attorney."Blacksmith v. Fellows oral arguments, 7 N.Y. at 401 (citing Laws 1841, ch. 234, § 8; 2 R. S. 3d ed. 432; Laws 1845, p. 147). Second, he argued that Fellows' title was valid.Blacksmith v. Fellows oral arguments, 7 N.Y. at 410 ("The defendant Fellows had the legal title in fee in the premises; Ogden and Fellows were the owners of the preemptive right granted to Massachusetts, and by virtue of the treaty and grant of 1842 they acquired a perfect title to the Tonawanda reservation. It was 'released and confirmed' to them."). Third, he argued that the Seneca's rights under the treaty were only enforceable against the federal government, and did not affect the defendant's title as a condition precedent.Blacksmith v. Fellows oral arguments, 7 N.Y. at 410 ("The distribution of the moneys awarded for individual improvements was an arrangement between the government of the United States and the Seneca nation with which Ogden and Fellows had no concern. Their obligation was discharged by payment of the gross sum into the treasury. Nothing in the treaty required the appraisement of the individual improvements to be made at the same time with the other, nor that the report of it should be made in the same instrument."). The court reporter did not publish Martindale's responses.
The Court of Appeals, 6-1, sided with Blacksmith.  Judge John Worth Edmonds delivered the majority opinion, joined by Chief Judge Charles H. Ruggles and Judges Addison Gardiner, Freeborn G. Jewett, Alexander S. Johnson, and Watson.  Judge Welles dissented and Judge Gridley was absent.
The Court of Appeals held that Blacksmith could independently bring the claim for trespass, for which he need only show a right to possession.Blacksmith v. Fellows, 7 N.Y. at 414 ("This might be true if the action was founded only upon title. So it might be true if it was founded upon the occupancy in common which we know is usual with the Indian tribes. But this action is not founded upon either basis, but upon the separate possession of the plaintiff. The bill of exceptions shows that he was alone and separately from all others, in possession of the locus in quo when the trespass was committed, and that was enough to enable him to maintain an action for a wrong done to that possession."). The Court of Appeals also held that Fellows' title was invalid, because the payment of compensation was a condition precedent.Blacksmith v. Fellows, 7 N.Y. at 414–15 ("There is no particular form of words necessary to constitute a condition precedent. The true test is the intention of the parties. And it is very evident to me that it was the intention of the parties that the occupiers of the land should not be compelled to give up the possession of them until two conditions had been complied with; one that such an award should be obtained and filed in the war office; and the other that the value of the improvements should be paid to the president, and the consideration for the conveyance be paid or secured to the satisfaction of the secretary of war."). Welles, in dissent, agreed that Blacksmith could individually sue for trespass, but disagreed that the appraisal was a condition precedent; he would have reversed and granted a new trial, with costs.Blacksmith v. Fellows, 7 N.Y. at 418–19 (Welles, J., dissenting). The Court of Appeals remanded back to the Supreme Court, after which a writ of error was granted by the U.S. Supreme Court.Fellows v. Blacksmith, 60 U.S. at 366–67.
U.S. Supreme Court oral argument
John H. Martindale argued the case for the Tonawanda Senecas before the Court.  Commissioner R.H. Gillet and J.L. Brown of the Ogden Land Company argued for the defendants. Arguments started on January 15, 1857 and were adjourned until January 17.United States Supreme Court, , Feb. 16, 1857.
One of the plaintiffs, Ely S. Parker personally attended the oral arguments before the U.S. Supreme Court in Washington, D.C. According to the New York Times:
All who heard their cases argued before the Supreme Court of the United States, a few months since, will recollect seeing this same Indian, and that he was well posted on the points he desired his counsel to press upon the attention of the Court.
thumb|right|Chief Justice Taney skipped the opinion announcement to work on Dred Scott v. Sandford, announced the next day.|alt=A portrait of Chief Justice Roger B. Taney 
A letter to the editor of the New York Times—which criticizes a previous article for creating the "impression that the Indians at Tonawanda are very nearly the equal in agriculture, general intelligence, and in the customs of civilized life, of their white neighbors"—concurs with this assessment of Parker's role:
I have not a word to say in the disparagement of the intellectual ability of Ely S. Parker, their head chief, and cheerfully unite with "W.H.P." in awarding him the credit for making valuable suggestions to his counsel on the argument of the case in the Supreme Court of the United States[.]  Indeed, I am inclined to the belief, that to him is due the credit of originating and suggesting to his counsel the only available point in the case, and the one on which it was there decided, for the case had been ten years in the Courts of this State, and this point was never before made, nor was it made in the Supreme Court of the United States, in the original brief of counsel for the Indians, filed pursuant to the rules of the Court.  It was first made in a supplementary brief printed after the opening argument of counsel on the other side had been commenced, and not handed in until the second day, just previous to its conclusion.Joshua L. Brown, The Tonawanda Indians, , Feb. 4, 1858 (letter to the editor).
Opinion announcement
Chief Justice Roger Taney was not present at the opinion announcement for Fellows because he was at home working on the opinion in Dred Scott v. Sandford, which was announced the next day.Armstrong, 1990, at 60. The Taney court had inherited from the preceding Marshall Court voluminous decisions on the status of aboriginal title in the United States.  None of those decisions was cited in either opinion.  Dred Scott, in dicta, opined the following on aboriginal title:
The situation of [blacks] was altogether unlike that of the Indian race. The latter . . . were situated in territories to which the white race claimed the ultimate right of dominion. But that claim was acknowledged to be subject to the right of the Indians to occupy it as long as they thought proper, and neither the English nor colonial Governments claimed or exercised any dominion over the tribe or nation by whom it was occupied, nor claimed the right to the possession of the territory, until the tribe or nation consented to cede it..
Justice John Catron, concurring in Dred Scott, also noted in dicta that:
[B]ecause Congress has express power to regulate commerce among the Indian tribes and to prohibit intercourse with the Indians, that therefore Dr. Emerson's title might be defeated within the country ceded by the Indians to the United States as early as 1805 . . . .Dred Scott, 60 U.S. at 528 (Catron, J., concurring).
Opinion of the Court
thumb|right|Justice Samuel Nelson delivered the opinion of the Court.|alt=A photo of Justice Samuel Nelson
Justice Samuel Nelson delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court, affirming the judgment of the New York Court of Appeals.
Effect of the Treaty
The Court observed:
Neither treaty made any provision as to the mode or manner in which the removal of the Indians or surrender of the reservations was to take place. The grantees have assumed that they were authorized to take forcible possession of the two reservations, or of the four, as the case would have been under the first treaty. The plaintiff in this case was expelled by force; and unless this mode of removal can be sustained, the recovery against the defendants for the trespass was right, and must be affirmed.Fellows v. Blacksmith, 60 U.S. at 370.
The Court noted that previous removals of Indians had been undertaken by the federal government "according to the usage and practice of the Government, by its authority and under its care and superintendence."Fellows v. Blacksmith, 60 U.S. at 370–71. "[A]ny other mode of a forcible removal," the Court argued, would not "be consistent with the peace of the country, or with the duty of the Government to these dependent people, who have been influenced by its counsel and authority to change their habitations."Fellows v. Blacksmith, 60 U.S. at 371.
Because the treaty had been negotiated "with them as a quasi nation, possessing some of the attributes of an independent people, and to be dealt with accordingly," the Court held that "unless otherwise expressly stipulated" only the federal government had the "authority or power" to execute the agreement.  The Court remarked that the Senecas were "in a state of pupilage, and hold the relation to the Government as a ward to his guardian." The nature of that relationship between the Seneca and the federal government was incompatible with the Seneca being expelled by "irregular force and violence," or even "through the intervention of the courts of justice."  Thus, the court held that the private beneficiaries of Native American treaties could neither expel tribes by force or by a cause of action for ejectment.Fellows v. Blacksmith, 60 U.S. at 372. The court observed that "this interpretation is in accordance with the usages and practice of the Government in providing for the removal of Indian tribes from their ancient possessions, with the fitness and propriety of the thing itself," and with the text of the treaty.
The Court concluded:  "We hold that the performance was not a duty that belonged to the grantees, but for the Government under the treaty."
Validity of the Treaty
The Court did not accept the plaintiffs' arguments that the treaty was invalid because it was not signed by tribal leaders with the authority to cede the relevant lands or because the signatories were fraudulently induced to sign. Analogizing to the enrolled bill rule (the only citation of case law in the opinion), the Court held that "the treaty, after executed and ratified by the proper authorities of the Government, becomes the supreme law of the land, and the courts can no more go behind it for the purpose of annulling its effect and operation."
Conditions Precedent
Because its aforementioned holdings required affirmance, the Court did not reach the alternate ground for decision of the trial court that the appraisal and the payments were conditions precedent.
Companion cases
thumb|right|The Seneca's lawyer John H. Martindale, brought four suits against the Land Company and its grantees.|alt=A photo of lawyer John H. Martindale
Lawyer John H. Martindale, of Verplank & Martindale, also represented Tonawanda Seneca plaintiffs in three other contemporary suits against the Land Company and its grantees: People ex rel. Blacksmith v. Tracy (N.Y. Sup. 1845); People ex rel. Waldron v. Soper (N.Y. 1852); and New York ex rel. Cutler v. Dibble (U.S. 1858). At the time, Martindale (the future New York Attorney General) was well known for litigating personal injury torts against railroads, especially New York Central Railroad., 1890, at 60.
Whereas Fellows was brought in the New York Supreme Court under the common law cause of action of trespass, these three suits were brought (as required by statute) in the Genesee County Court under a state statute prohibiting non-Indians from residing on Indian lands. That statute provided:
[I]t shall be unlawful for any person or persons, other than Indians, to settle or reside upon any lands belonging to or occupied by any nation or tribe of Indians within this state; and that all leases, contracts and agreements made by any Indians, whereby any person or persons, other than Indians, shall be permitted to reside upon such lands, shall be absolutely void; and if any person or persons shall settle or reside on any such lands, contrary to this act, it shall be the duty of any judge of any court of Common Pleas of the county within which such lands shall be situated, on complaint made to him, and on due proof of the fact of such settlement or residence, to issue his warrant, under his hand and seal, directed to the sheriff of such county, commanding him, within ten days after the receipt thereof, to remove such person or persons so settling or residing, with his, her or their families, from such lands.People ex rel. Cutler v Dibble, 16 N.Y. (2 E.P. Smith) 203, 204 (1857) (citing Laws of 1821, 183, §§ 1, 5).
The statute further provided:
that it shall be the duty of the district attorneys respectively of the several counties in this state in which any lands belonging to any Indian tribe shall be situated, (among other things) to make complaint of all intrusions upon Indian lands, forbidden by the act; and from time to time to make inquiries whether any persons other than Indians are settled upon such lands, and to cause them to be removed in the manner therein prescribed.People ex rel. Blacksmith v. Tracy, 1 How. Pr. 186 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1845) (citing §§ 5, 6).
From 1821–1846, the district attorney would have been appointed; thereafter, the office was elected. Martindale was the district attorney of Genesee County from 1842–1844 and again from 1847–1849., 1890, at 46. Thus, Martindale himself filed the complaints in People ex rel. Blacksmith v. Tracy and People ex rel. Waldron v. Soper, and his successor, Seth Wakeman (1850–1855) filed the complaint in New York ex rel. Cutler v. Dibble. Although Martindale was district attorney when the complaint in Tracy was filed, he lost the election and attempted to litigate the mandamus issue as a private attorney.Tracy, 1 How. Pr. 186 ("An alternative writ of mandamus was issued, tested the first Monday of January, 1845, by Verplank & Martindale, as attorneys for the relator; neither of whom being district attorney of Genesee county, which was served on the judge the 25th day of March last; it recited that on the 8th day of January, 1845, John H. Martindale, then district attorney of the county of Genesee, made complaint to said judge . . . .").
The results of the three suits were mixed.  Martindale was defeated in the New York Supreme Court and New York Court of Appeals, respectively, in the first two, but had prevailed in the Court of Appeals and, ultimately, the U.S. Supreme Court in the third.
thumb|right|The Genesee County Courthouse, a structure built by the Holland Land Company|alt=A photo of the Genesee County Courthouse
People ex rel. Blacksmith v. Tracy
Martindale (in his final days as district attorney) filed the complaint on January 8, 1845.Tracy, 1 How. Pr. 186. Evidence, including the testimony of Ely S. Parker, was presented on January 11.  Judge Phineas L. Tracy, of the Genesee County Court (1841–1845), declined to issue a warrant to the Genesee County Sheriff to remove the Ogden grantees.
Still in January, Martindale applied to the Supreme Court for mandamus, and the court issued an alternative mandamus (essentially, an order to show cause why peremptory mandamus should not issue) on March 6, 1845, which was served March 25. On April 19, the deadline was extended to the first Tuesday in June. Before the Supreme Court, Martindale was joined by New York Attorney General John Van Buren and opposed by A. Taber and J. L. Brown.
That June, Judge Jewett granted Tracy's motion to quash, without costs. The court held that only the district attorney could bring such an action to enforce the statute:
I am of opinion that by the terms and spirit of the statute under which this proceeding has been had, no other than the district attorney of the county of Genesee (in which the lands intruded upon are situated) could regularly be a relator. The remedy for the act complained of is provided by the statute, as well as the officers to carry it into execution. It is made the duty of the district attorney to make complaint of all intrusions upon Indian lands forbidden by the act, and from time to time to make inquiries whether any persons other than Indians are settled upon such lands, and to cause them to be removed in the manner therein prescribed. Without the act, John Blacksmith or any other person could not claim such summary proceedings to remove intruders upon Indian lands; and with the act, no other person is authorized by its provisions to make complaint of such intrusions, or to cause the intruders to be removed, but the district attorney of the county in which the lands are situated.Tracy, 1 How. Pr. 186 (emphasis removed).
The court also found the affidavit of Parker to be insufficient as a factual matter to comply with the terms of the statute.Tracy, 1 How. Pr. 186 ("The deponent Parker does not profess to have any knowledge of the fact: he swore to nothing beyond information and belief." (emphasis removed)). However, even if the district attorney had brought the action and the affidavit had been sufficient, the Supreme Court still would have denied mandamus as a matter of law.Tracy, 1 How. Pr. 186 ("I am of opinion that the decision of the judge in this case, if erroneous, cannot be corrected by mandamus, the judge in his refusal acted judicially.").
People ex rel. Waldron v. Soper
In the second suit, Martindale—in a second term, this time as an elected district attorney—filed the complaint under the same statute on January 3, 1849. Judge Horace U. Soper, of the Genesee County Court (1847–1850), granted the writ of removal on January 9, 1849. The New York Supreme Court General Term (Judges Mullet, Sill, and Marvin), sitting in Buffalo, New York, granted a writ of certiorari, and affirmed in March 1849. "Waldron" is the only party subject to the writ of removal named in the Court of Appeals opinion (the only reported opinion) and only by last name.
The Court of Appeals reversed and annulled the writ in October 1852. Judge John Worth Edmonds, for a unanimous court, gave two reasons. First, it held that the court had no power to proceed against the majority of the defendants because they were not properly summoned and caused to appear. Second, with respect to defendant Waldron (who had voluntarily appeared), the court held that "it does not appear that these lands were owned by the Indians."People ex rel. Waldron v. Soper, 7 N.Y. (3 Seld.) 428 (1852).
New York ex rel. Cutler v. Dibble
In a third suit, Martindale's successor as district attorney, Seth Wakeman (1845–1850), filed a complaint against Asa Cutler, John Underhill, and Arza Underhill (grantees of the Land Company) under the same statute, on February 19, 1853. Thomas Black, a Seneca who had made some improvements and apparently been compensated for the same, allegedly consented to the Underhills presence. Judge Edgar C. Dibble, of the Genesee County Court (1846, 1851–1854) and a one-time partner of Martindale,, 1890, at 45. granted the writ of removal. The Supreme Court granted certiorari and affirmed on September 4, 1854, holding that "the Seneca nation had not duly granted and conveyed the reserve in question to Ogden and Fellows." The judgement of the Supreme Court was delivered by Judge Marvin, joined by judges Bowen and Green. Judge Mullet dissented without opinion.
The Court of Appeals—after the second argument—also affirmed in September 1857. The majority opinion was authored by Judge Brown, joined by Judges Comstock, Paige, Shankland, and Bowen. The Court of Appeals held that the state statute did not violate the New York Constitution and that a jury trial was not required because the defendants had no property right. In closing, the Court of Appeals cited the U.S. Supreme Court's recent decision in Fellows.  Chief Judge Hiram Denio, joined by Judge Alexander S. Johnson, concurred on the constitutionality of the 1821 state statute, but dissented on the grounds that the treaties extinguished the aboriginal title, and thus the state statute either did not apply or violated the treaty. Judge Selden recused.
By the time Fellows was decided, Dibble had reached the U.S. Supreme Court but had not yet been argued. The Court eventually affirmed in 1858, holding that the state statute did not violate the Indian Commerce Clause, the federal Nonintercourse Act, or the treaty.New York ex rel. Cutler v. Dibble, 18 Barb. 412 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. Gen. Term 1854), aff'd 16 N.Y. (2 E.P. Smith) 203 (1854), aff'd, 62 U.S. (21 How.) 366 (1858).
Subsequent developments
thumb|right|Ely S. Parker, one of the plaintiffs|alt=A photo of Ely S. Parker
Enrolled treaty doctrine
The key claim advanced by lawyer John H. Martindale in all four cases had been that the Treaty of Buffalo Creek (1838) was invalid because it was not signed by the Seneca leaders with the authority to cede the Tonawanda Reservation, and the signatures it did contain were obtained by coercion or fraud.  This argument had not prevailed before the New York Courts or the Supreme Court.  As Brown notes:
The principal point, however, on which the counsel relied, and which he hoped to establish, was that the Tonawandas were not bound by the Treaties, because the chiefs there protested against and refused to sign them.  To this point his main argument has always, in all stages of the litigation been addressed, and he has pressed it upon the consideration of the Courts, with the utmost pertinacity.  It was, however, decided against him in the Blacksmith case, argued last Winter at Washington and has never been decided in his favor by any Court.
Fellows is among the earliest cases where the Supreme Court applied treaties, including treaties between the United States and Native American tribes, as binding law.David B. Dixon, Que Lastima Zapata! Bad CISG Ruling on Attorneys' Fees Still Haunts U.S. Courts, 38  405, 409 n.7 (2006–2007); Jon Michael Haynes, What Is It About Saying We're Sorry? New Federal Legislation and the Forgotten Promises of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, 3 SCHOLAR 231, 244 n.68 (2001); Jill Norgren, Protection of What Rights They Have: Original Principles of Federal Indian Law, 64  73, 116 n.260 (1988); Jordan J. Paust, Breard and Treaty Based Rights under the Consular Convention, 92  691, 692 n.8 (1998); Jordan J. Paust, Rediscovering the Relationship Between Congressional Power and International Law: Exceptions to the Last in Time Rule and the Primacy of Custom, 28  393, 435 n.81 (1988); Michael P. Van Alstine, Federal Common Law in the Age of Treaties, 89  892, 905 n.84 (2004); Note, Indians and the United States, 25  733, 733 n.6 (1912). Fellows has been cited as authority for the enrolled treaty doctrine; analogous to the enrolled bill rule for statutes, the enrolled treaty doctrine prevents inquiry into the legitimacy of the formation of treaties once ratified by the Senate.David P. Currie, The Constitution in the Supreme Court: Article IV and Federal Powers, 1836–1864, 1983  695, 714 n.123; Ford, 1995, at 164 n.149; Aya Gruber, Who's Afraid of Geneva Law?, 39 Ariz. St. L.J. 1017, 1044 n.191 (2007); Markus B. Heyder, The International Law Commission's Draft Articles on State Responsibility: Draft Article 19 and Native American Self-Determination, 32  155, 172 (1994); Jordan J. Paust, Medellín, Avilla, The Supremacy of Treaties, and Relevant Executive Authority, 31  301, 302 n.6 (2008); Jordan J. Paust, Self-Executing Treaties, 82  760, 773 (1988); Philip B. Perlman, On Amending the Treaty Power, 52  825, 845 n.113 (1952);John Robert Renner, The Indian Child Welfare Act and Equal Protection Limitations on the Federal Power over Indian Affairs, 17  129, 134 (1992); Stefan A. Riesenfeld, The Power of Congress and the President in International Relations: Three Recent Supreme Court Decisions, 87  786, 974 n.75 (1999). This doctrine was later used to deny relief (or, to deny more relief) to Native American tribes who claimed that treaties were entered into fraudulently or signed by persons without authority to bind the tribe.See  ("The propriety of this rule and the need for adhering to it are well illustrated in the present case, where the assault on the treaty cession is made 70 years after the treaty and 40 years after the last installment of the stipulated compensation of approximately $1,200,000 was paid to the Indians.");  (declining to consider whether tribe signed treaty because of "fraudulent misrepresentations [or] concealment");  (quoting statement of enrolled treaty doctrine from Fellows); see also Michael C. Blumm, Retracing the Discovery Doctrine: Aboriginal Title, Tribal Sovereignty, and Their Significance to Treaty-Making and Modern Natural Resources Policy in Indian Country, 28  713, 762 n.317 (2004). Fellows was also decided before the Supreme Court began distinguishing between self-executing and non-self executing treaties.Aya Gruber, An Unintended Casualty of the War on Terror, 27  299, 314 n.87 (2011); Louis N. Schulze, Jr., The United States' Detention of Refugees: Evidence of the Senate's Flawed Ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 23  641, 655 n.92 (1997). Regardless, treaties between the United States and Native Americans continued to be regarded as self-executing.Fritz W. Scharpf, Judicial Review and the Political Question, 75  517, 545 n.97 (1966).
Seneca land claims
A contemporary New York Times article opined that: "The questions involved are of great magnitude, and affect more or less the title to a large portion of the State of New York." Although the Seneca prevailed in the lawsuit, title to a large portion of the state was not called into question due to the court's refusal to entertain the Seneca's claims regarding the invalidity of the treaty. According to Armstrong, the result of the decision was mixed:
The decision was not all that the Indians had hoped for—it was a victory on narrow legal grounds rather than a vindication of their cause—but it was a victory.  The Court's ruling meant that as long as the federal government was determined to take no action to remove them from Tonawanda, the Ogden Company was powerless to do so., 1990, at 59–60.
Fellows was "decided at a time when the government was still dealing with Indian tribes as if they were semi-sovereign nations." The Tonawanda Seneca were never relocated to Kansas, and a new 1857 treaty confirmed their title to a 7,549-acre reservation.  This treaty ended 15 years of litigation between the Tonawanda Band and the Ogden Land Company."W.H.P.", New Treaty with the Seneca Indians at Tonawanda, , Jan. 30, 1858 (reprinted from ).
The Seneca, again represented by Martindale, prevailed in New York ex rel. Cutler v. Dibble (1858).  Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy (1896) also involved a Seneca plaintiff represented by a Civil War general.  There, the plaintiffs challenged the Phelps and Gorham Purchase under the Nonintercourse Act. Fellows was not cited.  In 1899, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld a $1,967,056 judgment of the Court of Claims (pursuant to an enabling statute) against the federal government based on the 1838 treaty.. Fellows was cited by Oneida Indian Nation of New York v. County of Oneida (1974) for the proposition that "the possessory right claimed is a federal right to the lands at issue in this case.".
Litigants
Plaintiff Ely S. Parker went on to become a member of General Ulysses S. Grant's staff during the American Civil War, drawing up the terms of the surrender at Appomattox Court House.Gen. Ely S. Parker Dead:  A Full-Blooded Iroquois Indian with a Remarkable History, , Sept. 1, 1895. After the war, President Grant appointed Parker as Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the first indigenous head of the Bureau of Indian Affairs.Bureau of Indian Affairs, Ely S. Parker Building Officially Opens  (Dec. 21, 2000). According to his New York Times obituary, Parker "negotiated the removal of his tribe from this State to the fertile and pleasant lands on Green Bay, Wisconsin."
The Seneca's lawyer, John H. Martindale, later appeared before the U.S. Supreme Court, as New York Attorney General, in In re New York Indians (1866), arguing that the state had the right to tax the Senecas.  The Court disagreed., rev'g Fellows v. Denniston, 23 N.Y. (9 E.P. Smith) 420 (1861). In the case below, plaintiffs Joseph Fellows (the defendant in Fellows), Louisa Troup, and George R. Babcock sought to recover a plot of land from Robert Denniston (in his official capacity as New York State Comptroller) and Thomas W. Olcott, the purchaser at the tax foreclosure sale.72 U.S. at 761. Fellows, Troup, and Babcock argued that the state had no power to tax the Seneca.72 U.S. at 764–65. In re New York Indians, agreeing, cited Fellows:
Until the Indians have sold their lands, and removed from them in pursuance of the treaty stipulations, they are to be regarded as still in their ancient possession, and are in under their original rights, and entitled to the undisturbed enjoyment of them. This was the effect of the decision in the case of Fellows v. Blacksmith. The time for the surrender of the possession, according to their consent given in the treaty, had not expired when these taxes were levied. The period within which the removal was to take place, under the treaty of 1838, was five years from the time it went into effect. It was not proclaimed till 1840, and under that of 1842 the time did not expire till 1846. The taxation of the lands was premature and illegal.72 U.S. at 770 (footnote omitted).
Footnotes
Notes
References
 (First Paperback Edition 1989) (1978). 
Christopher A. Ford, Executive Prerogatives in Federal Indian Jurisprudence: The Constitutional Law of Tribal Recognition, 73  141 (1995)
 (F.W. Beers ed., Syracuse, N.Y., J.W. Vose & Co. 1890).
Further reading
 (First Paperback Edition 2001) (1999). 
External links
Category:Seneca
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
Category:1857 in United States case law
Category:Aboriginal title in New York
"""

From "Feltner v. Columbia Pictures Television, Inc." ==> """
Feltner v. Columbia Pictures Television, Inc., 523 U.S. 340 (1998), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that if there is to be an award of statutory damages in a copyright infringement case, then the opposing party has the right to demand a jury trial..
Background
C. Elvin Feltner, Jr., and the corporation he owns, Krypton International Corporation, operate 3 television stations which ran various television shows licensed from Columbia Pictures, including Who's the Boss?, Silver Spoons, Hart to Hart, and T. J. Hooker.  After becoming delinquent in royalty payments, and being unable to resolve the impasse over the debt owed, Columbia revoked their license to run the shows.  The stations kept running them anyway.  Columbia sued Feltner, Krypton and some subsidiaries and executives of the corporation.  The trial court found the infringement to be wilful, and denied Feltner's request for a jury trial on statutory damages.  The court found every broadcast of every episode run on every television station to be a separate infringement, awarded $20,000 for each of the 440 acts, for a total of $8,800,000 in damages.
The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit upheld the award.
Opinion
The Supreme Court examined the statute in an attempt to resolve the issue without reaching constitutional issues. It found that there is no provision in the statute for a jury trial on the issue of statutory damages, therefore it must look at whether the law triggers the provisions of the requirement for trial by jury required by the Seventh Amendment. The question then is, were statutory damages in the form of a trial in a court of law, or a trial in a court of equity; if a court of law, then trial by jury may be demanded; if a court of equity, then trial by jury is not available unless provided for by statute. Upon examining long historical practice in copyright infringement cases, it decided that damages in a copyright case have historically been tried as a court of law, and not as a court of equity. Thus, the defendant Feltner was entitled to a jury trial on the issue of the amount of statutory damages.
The judgment was reversed and remanded back to the trial court.
After remand and the jury trial ordered by the Supreme Court, the jury awarded $72,000 in statutory damages for each of the 440 works infringed, for a total award of $31.68 million – over three and a half times the damages awarded by the Judge at the prior bench trial. On his appeal from the $31.68 million jury award to the Ninth Circuit, Feltner argued that the Supreme Court's rulings (that the Copyright Act provided that statutory damages are awarded by Judges and the Seventh Amendment required that juries award those damaged) rendered statutory damages unconstitutional and void. The Ninth Circuit rejected this argument and affirmed the $31.68 million jury award. Feltner's petition to the Supreme Court to hear the case for a second time was unsuccessful, leaving the $31.68 million award intact.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 523
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
External links
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Seventh Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:Media case law
Category:Sony Pictures Television
"""

From "FERC v. Electric Power Supply Ass'n" ==> """
FERC v. Electric Power Supply Ass'n, 577 U.S. ___ (2016), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission had the authority to regulate demand response transactions.FERC v. Electric Power Supply Assn., No. 14–840, 577 U. S. ____, slip op. at 2, 33–34 (2016). Justice Scalia's dissenting opinion in this case was the last opinion he wrote before his death in February 2016.
Background
Under the Federal Power Act,41 Stat. 1063, as amended, 16 U.S.C. § 791a et seq. the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) is allowed to regulate “the sale of electric energy at wholesale in inter state commerce", including any activities that affect the wholesale price of electricity.16 U.S.C. §§ 824(b), 824e(a). This case involved a dispute about FERC's attempts to regulate a practice called "demand response".FERC v. Electric Power Supply Assn., slip. op. at 1-2. In demand response transactions, wholesale electricity suppliers pay consumers to use less electricity during periods in which electricity is in high demand.FERC v. Electric Power Supply Assn., slip. op. at 2 (noting that electricity suppliers can "offer electricity both more cheaply and more reliably by paying users to dial down their consumption than by paying power plants to ramp up their production"). In certain circumstances, FERC required suppliers to pay conserving consumers the same price that they would pay electricity producers for generating electricity.FERC v. Electric Power Supply Assn., slip. op. at 2, 10. A group of electricity suppliers challenged FERC's regulation in court; they claimed that FERC lacked authority to regulate demand response transactions and that even if they did have the power to do so, FERC failed to justify why demand response providers and electricity producers should receive the same compensation.FERC v. Electric Power Supply Assn., slip. op. at 2, 11-13.
Opinion of the Court
Writing for a majority of the Court, Justice Elena Kagan ruled that FERC possessed the "requisite statutory power" to regulate demand response transactions and that FERC adequately justified why demand response providers and electricity producers should receive the same compensation.FERC v. Electric Power Supply Assn., slip. op. at 2, 33-34. Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion in which he argued that FERC did not have authority to regulate demand response transactions.FERC v. Electric Power Supply Assn., slip. op. at 1 (Scalia, J., dissenting). This was the last dissenting opinion written by Justice Scalia before his death in February 2016, though his last majority opinion was in Kansas v. Carr.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Demand response
Category:Electric power in the United States
"""

From "Feres v. United States" ==> """
Feres v. United States, 340 U.S. 135 (1950), combined three pending federal cases for a hearing in certiorari in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the United States is not liable under the Federal Tort Claims Act for injuries to members of the armed forces sustained while on active duty and not on furlough and resulting from the negligence of others in the armed forces.According to Johnson v. United States, , which reaffirmed Feres, the tortfeasor under a Feres analysis does not have to be a member of the armed forces, but can be any civilian employee of the federal government. In Johnson, a Coast Guard helicopter pilot was killed when Federal Aviation Administration air traffic controllers assumed positive radar control over the helicopter during a rescue mission and caused the aircraft to crash into the side of a mountain on the Hawaiian island of Molakai. The United States escaped liability relying on Feres. The opinion is an extension of the English common-law concept of sovereign immunity.
The practical effect is that the Feres doctrine effectively bars service members from collecting damages from the United States Government for personal injuries experienced in the performance of their duties.  It also bars families of service members from filing wrongful death or loss of consortium actions when a service member is killed or injured.  The bar does not extend to killed or injured family members, so a spouse or child may still sue the United States for tort claims, nor does it bar service members from filing either in loco parentis on their child's behalf or filing for wrongful death or loss of consortium as a companion claim to a spouse or child's suit.
There have been exceptions to the Feres doctrine where active duty members have been allowed to sue for injuries when the court found that civilians could have been harmed in the same manner under the same circumstances in which the service member's injuries occurred.In Schoenfeld v. Quamme, 492 F.3d 1016 (9th Cir. 2007), the U.S. 9th District Court of Appeals found that Schoenfeld, an active duty Marine at the time of his injury, could proceed with a lawsuit under the Federal Tort Claims Act due to the location and nature of his injury since Schoenfeld was doing what any member of the public could have done at the time.
Injuries experienced by service members while on active duty are covered by various Department of Veterans Affairs benefits legislation.
The effect of the doctrine was substantially limited by a change in the law made by the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020, which created an administrative process to hear claims of medical malpractice.New Law Permits Military Members To Sue For Medical Malpractice
Facts 
Feres v. United States combined three cases pending in the federal courts: the Feres case, the Jefferson case and the Griggs case.
A common issue arising under the Federal Tort Claims Act, as to which Courts of Appeals are in conflict, makes it appropriate to consider three cases in one opinion.
The Feres case: The District Court dismissed an action by the executrix of Feres against the United States to[340 U.S. 135, 137] recover for death caused by negligence. Decedent perished by fire in the barracks at Pine Camp, New York, while on active duty in service of the United States. Negligence was alleged in quartering him in barracks known or which should have been known to be unsafe because of a defective heating plant, and in failing to maintain an adequate fire watch. The Court of Appeals, Second Circuit, dismissed the case.
The Jefferson case: Plaintiff, while in the Army, was required to undergo an abdominal operation. About eight months later, in the course of another operation after plaintiff was discharged, a towel 30 inches long by 18 inches wide, marked "Medical Department U.S. Army," was discovered and removed from his stomach. The complaint alleged that it was negligently left there by the army surgeon. The District Court, being doubtful of the law, refused without prejudice the Government's pretrial motion to dismiss the complaint.  After trial, finding negligence as a fact, Judge Chesnut carefully reexamined the issue of law and concluded that the Act does not charge the United States with liability in this type of case.  The Court of Appeals, Fourth Circuit, affirmed dismissal of the case.
The Griggs case: The District Court dismissed the complaint of Griggs' executrix, which alleged that while on active duty he met death because of negligent and unskillful medical treatment by army surgeons. The Court of Appeals, Tenth Circuit, reversed and, one judge dissenting, held that the complaint stated a cause of action under the Act.
The case was heard by the United States Supreme Court in certiorari.
Issues 
Does the Federal Tort Claim Act (FTCA), construed to fit, so far as will comport with its words into the entire statutory system of remedies against the Government?
Was the purpose of Federal Tort Claims Act to transfer from Congress to the courts the burden of examining tort claims?
The Act confers on the district courts broad jurisdiction, but does this apply to any claim recognizable at law?
Does FTCA create a new cause of tort action?
Is the Government in a position of being analogous to the liability of a "private individual" growing out of "like circumstances"?
Does the "act or omission" resulting in negligence and liability apply in the relationship of the Government to members of its armed forces?
Does FTCA provide a remedial adjustment for other established systems of compensation for injuries and death in the armed services?
Is the ruling in the Feres case, dismissing the cause of action at the District Court level correct?
Is the dismissal of the Jefferson case at the District Court and affirmed by the Court of Appeals, Fourth Circuit correct?
Is the cause of action under FTCA as affirmed by the Court of Appeals, Tenth Circuit, in the Griggs case correct?
How are the rulings in Brooks v. United States to be distinguished?
Held
The United States is not liable under the Federal Tort Claims Act for injuries to members of the armed forces sustained while on active duty and not on furlough and resulting from the negligence of others in the armed forces.Feres, 340 U.S. at 136–146.		
The Tort Claims Act should be construed to fit, so far as will comport with its words, into the entire statutory system of remedies against the Government to make a workable, consistent, and equitable whole.Feres, 340 U.S. at 139.
One of the purposes of the Act was to transfer from Congress to the courts the burden of examining tort claims against the Government, and Congress was not burdened with private bills on behalf of military and naval personnel, because a comprehensive system of relief had been authorized by statute for them and their dependents.Feres, 340 U.S. at 139–140.
The Act confers on the district courts broad jurisdiction over "civil actions on claims against the United States, for money damages," but it remains for the courts to determine whether any claim is recognizable in law.Feres, 340 U.S. at 140–141.
It does not create new causes of action, but merely accepts for the Government liability under circumstances that would bring private liability into existence.Feres, 340 U.S. at 141.
There is no analogous liability of a "private individual" growing out of "like circumstances" when the relationship of the wronged to the wrongdoers in these cases is considered.Feres, 340 U.S. at 141–142.
The provision of the Act making "the law of the place where the act or omission occurred" govern any consequent liability is inconsistent with an intention to make the Government liable inFeres, 340 U.S. at 136. the circumstances of these cases, since the relationship of the Government and members of its armed forces is "distinctively federal in character."Feres, 340 U.S. at 142–144.
The failure of the Act to provide for any adjustment between the remedy provided therein and other established systems of compensation for injuries or death of those in the armed services is persuasive that the Tort Claims Act was not intended to be applicable in the circumstances of these cases.Feres, 340 U.S. at 144–145.
Brooks v. United States,. distinguished.Feres, 340 U.S. at 146.177 F.2d 535 and 178 F.2d 518 affirmed; 18 F.2d 1 reversed.
The dismissal of Feres by the District Court is affirmed.
The dismissal of Jefferson by the Fourth Circuit is affirmed.
The reinstatement of Griggs by the Tenth Circuit is reversed.
Opinion
The Opinion of the Court was rendered by the Honorable Justice Robert Jackson.
The common fact underlying the three cases is that each claimant, while on active duty and not on furlough, sustained injury due to negligence of others in the armed forces. The only issue of law raised is whether the Tort Claims Act extends its remedy to one sustaining "incident to the service" what under other circumstances would be an actionable wrong. This is the "wholly different case" reserved from our decision in Brooks v. United States.337 U. S. 49, 52.
There are few guiding materials for our task of statutory construction. No committee reports or floor debates disclose what effect the statute was designed to have on the problem before us, or that it even was in mind. Under these circumstances, no conclusion can be above challenge, but if we misinterpret the Act, at least Congress possesses a ready remedy.right|300px|thumb|Justice Robert Jackson, shown here at the Nuremberg Trial, delivered the opinion. 
We do not overlook considerations persuasive of liability in these cases. The Act does confer district court jurisdiction generally over claims for money damages against the United States founded on negligence.. It does contemplate that the Government will sometimes respond for negligence of military personnel, for it defines "employee of the Government" to include "members of the military or naval forces of the United States," and provides that " `acting within the scope of his office or employment', in the case of a member of the military or naval forces of the United States, means acting in line of duty.". Its exceptions might also imply inclusion of claims such as we have here.. [The statute] excepts "any claim arising out of the combatant activities of the military or naval forces, or the Coast Guard, during time of war", from which it is said we should infer allowance of claims arising from noncombat activities in peace. Section 2680 (k) excludes "any claim arising in a foreign country." Significance also has been attributed in these cases, as in the Brooks case, to the fact that eighteen tort claims bills were introduced in Congress between 1925 and 1935 and all but two expressly denied recovery to members of the armed forces; but the bill enacted as the present Tort Claims Act from its introduction made no exception. We also are reminded that the Brooks case, in spite of its reservation of service-connected injuries, interprets the Act to cover claims not incidental to service, and it is argued that much of its reasoning is as apt to impose liability in favor of a man on duty as in favor of one on leave. These considerations, it is said, should persuade us to cast upon Congress, as author of the confusion, the task of qualifying and clarifying its language if the liability here asserted should prove so depleting of the public treasury as the Government fears.
This Act, however, should be construed to fit, so far as will comport with its words, into the entire statutory system of remedies against the Government to make a workable, consistent and equitable whole. The Tort Claims Act was not an isolated and spontaneous flash of congressional generosity. It marks the culmination of a long effort to mitigate unjust consequences of sovereign immunity from suit. While the political theory that the King could do no wrong was repudiated in America, a legal doctrine derived from it that the Crown is immune from any suit to which it has not consented was invoked on behalf of the Republic and applied by our courts as vigorously as it had been on behalf of the Crown. As the Federal Government expanded its activities, its agents caused a multiplying number of remediless wrongs—wrongs which would have been actionable if inflicted by an individual or a corporation but remediless  solely because their perpetrator was an officer or employee of the Government. Relief was often sought and sometimes granted through private bills in Congress, the number of which steadily increased as Government activity increased. The volume of these private bills, the inadequacy of congressional machinery for determination of facts, the importunities to which claimants subjected members of Congress, and the capricious results, led to a strong demand that claims for tort wrongs be submitted to adjudication. Congress already had waived immunity and made the Government answerable for breaches of its contracts and certain other types of claims.   At last, in connection with the Reorganization Act, it waived immunity and transferred the burden of examining tort claims to the courts. The primary purpose of the Act was to extend a remedy to those who had been without; if it incidentally benefited those already well provided for, it appears to have been unintentional. Congress was suffering from no plague of private bills on the behalf of military and naval personnel, because a comprehensive system of relief had been authorized for them and their dependents by statute.
Looking to the detail of the Act, it is true that it provides, broadly, that the District Court "shall have exclusive jurisdiction of civil actions on claims against the United States, for money damages . . . ."This confers jurisdiction to render judgment upon all such claims.  But it does not say that all claims must be allowed. Jurisdiction is necessary to deny a claim on its merits as matter of law as much as to adjudge that liability exists. We interpret this language to mean all its says, but no more. Jurisdiction of the defendant now exists where the defendant was immune from suit before; it remains for courts, in exercise of their jurisdiction, to determine whether any claim is recognizable in law.
thumb|300px|Active duty service members injured by military negligence are not covered by Federal Tort Claims Act
For this purpose, the Act goes on to prescribe the test of allowable claims, which is, "The United States shall be liable . . . in the same manner and to the same extent as a private individual under like circumstances. . .," with certain exceptions not material here..  It will be seen that this is not the creation of new causes of action but acceptance of liability under circumstances that would bring private liability into existence. This, we think, embodies the same idea that its English equivalent enacted in 1947(Crown Proceedings Act 1947; 10 and 11 Geo. VI, c. 44, p. 863)  expressed, "Where any person has a claim against the Crown after the commencement of this Act, and, if this Act had not been passed, the claim might have been enforced, subject to the grant . . ." of consent to be sued, the claim may now be enforced without specific consent. One obvious shortcoming in these claims is that plaintiffs can point to no liability of a "private individual" even remotely analogous to that which they are asserting against the United States. We know of no American law which ever has permitted a soldier to recover for negligence, against either his superior officers or the Government he is serving.   Nor is there any liability "under like circumstances," for no private individual has power to conscript or mobilize a private army with such authorities over persons as the Government vests in echelons of command. The nearest parallel, even if we were to treat "private individual" as including a state, would be the relationship between the states and their militia. But if we indulge plaintiffs the benefit of this comparison, claimants cite us no state, and we know of none, which has permitted members of its militia to maintain tort actions for injuries suffered in the service, and in at least one state the contrary has been held to be the case.  It is true that if we consider relevant only a part of the circumstances and ignore the status of both the wronged and the wrongdoer in these cases we find analogous private liability. In the usual civilian doctor and patient relationship, there is of course a liability for malpractice. And a landlord would undoubtedly be held liable if an injury occurred to a tenant as the result of a negligently maintained heating plant. But the liability assumed by the Government here is that created by "all the circumstances," not that which a few of the circumstances might create. We find no parallel liability before, and we think no new one has been created by, this Act. Its effect is to waive immunity from recognized causes of action and was not to visit the Government with novel and unprecedented liabilities.	
The relationship between the Government and members of its armed forces is "distinctively federal in character," as this Court recognized in United States v. Standard Oil Co.,.  wherein the Government unsuccessfully sought to recover for losses incurred by virtue of injuries to a soldier.
No federal law recognizes a recovery such as claimants seek. The Military Personnel Claims Act,31 U.S.C. § 223b (now superseded by 28 U.S.C. § 2672), permitted recovery in some circumstances, but it specifically excluded claims of military personnel "incident to their service."
This Court, in deciding claims for wrongs incident to service under the Tort Claims Act, cannot escape attributing some bearing upon it to enactments by Congress which provide systems of simple, certain, and uniform compensation for injuries or death of those in armed services.[12] We might say that the claimant may (a) enjoy both types of recovery, or (b) elect which to pursue, thereby waiving the other, or (c) pursue both, crediting the larger liability with the proceeds of the smaller, or (d) that the compensation and pension remedy excludes the tort remedy. There is as much statutory authority for one as for another of these conclusions. If Congress had contemplated that this Tort Act would be held to apply in cases of this kind, it is difficult to see why it should have omitted any provision to adjust these two types of remedy to each other. The absence of any such adjustment is persuasive that there was no awareness that the Act might be interpreted to permit recovery for injuries incident to military service. thumb|300px|right|Until 2019, active duty personnel were precluded from bringing medical malpractice actions.
A soldier is at peculiar disadvantage in litigation. Lack of time and money, the difficulty if not impossibility of procuring witnesses, are only a few of the factors working to his disadvantage. And the few cases charging superior officers or the Government with neglect or misconduct which have been brought since the Tort Claims Act, of which the present are typical, have either been suits by widows or surviving dependents, or have been brought after the individual was discharged. The compensation system, which normally requires no litigation, is not negligible or niggardly, as these cases demonstrate. The recoveries compare extremely favorably with those provided by most workmen's compensation statutes. In the Jefferson case, the District Court considered actual and prospective payments by the Veterans' Administration as diminution of the verdict. Plaintiff received $3,645.50 to the date of the court's computation and on estimated life expectancy under existing legislation would prospectively receive $31,947 in addition. In the Griggs case, the widow, in the two-year period after her husband's death, received payments in excess of $2,100. In addition, she received $2,695, representing the six months' death gratuity under the Act of December 17, 1919, as amended, 41 Stat. 367, 57 Stat. 599, 10 U. S. C. § 903. It is estimated that her total future pension payments will aggregate $18,000. Thus the widow will receive an amount in excess of $22,000 from Government gratuities, whereas she sought and could seek under state law only $15,000, the maximum permitted by Illinois for death.
It is contended that all these considerations were before the Court in the Brooks case and that allowance of recovery to Brooks requires a similar holding of liability here. The actual holding in the Brooks case can support liability here only by ignoring the vital distinction there stated. The injury to Brooks did not arise out of or in the course of military duty. Brooks was on furlough, driving along the highway, under compulsion of no orders or duty and on no military mission. A government owned and operated vehicle collided with him. Brooks' father, riding in the same car, recovered for his injuries and the Government did not further contest the judgment but contended that there could be no liability to the sons, solely because they were in the Army. This Court rejected the contention, primarily because Brooks' relationship while on leave was not analogous to that of a soldier injured while performing duties under orders.
We conclude that the Government is not liable under the Federal Tort Claims Act for injuries to servicemen where the injuries arise out of or are in the course of activity incident to service. Without exception, the relationship of military personnel to the Government has been governed exclusively by federal law. We do not think that Congress, in drafting this Act, created a new cause of action dependent on local law for service-connected injuries or death due to negligence. We cannot impute to Congress such a radical departure from established law in the absence of express congressional command. Accordingly, the judgments in the Feres and Jefferson cases are affirmed and that in the Griggs case is reversed.
MR. JUSTICE DOUGLAS concurs in the result.
Discussion
thumb|300px|The Feres Doctrine prohibits by law, negligence claims by active duty military personnel against the United States Government.
A clarifying discussion of the Feres Doctrine was written in the decision of Martinelli v. United States Department of the Army, 1987.ESTATE OF Eugene Lenny MARTINELLI, Rose Martinelli,
Administratrix, and Rose Martinelli, individually, Appellants,  v. UNITED STATES of America, DEPARTMENT OF the ARMY.  No. 86-3530. United States Court of Appeals, Third Circuit. Submitted Under Third Circuit Rule 12(6)  February 18, 1987.   Decided February 27, 1987. 812 F.2d 872
OPINION OF THE COURT
I.
Appellant Rose Martinelli appeals from the district court dismissal of her Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA) suit against the United States for 
damages for the death of her son allegedly caused by injuries received while serving as a member of the United States Army Reserves. The district court held that suit was barred as a matter of law because of the doctrine expressed in Feres v. United States,340 U.S. 135, 71 S.Ct. 153, 95 L.Ed. 152 (1950), that military servicemen may not sue the United States government under the FTCA for injuries arising during service in the military. This court has not previously considered the application of the Feres doctrine to military reservists. Our review over this issue is plenary.
II.
In Feres, the Court gave several reasons for its preclusion of an FTCA suit alleging that negligence caused the death of a serviceman trapped in a barracks during a fire while on active duty. The Court referred to the availability of assured compensation, stating that because injured servicepersons may seek recovery under the Veterans' Benefits Act,.  a remedy under the FTCA is unnecessary.340 U.S. at 144, 71 S.Ct. at 158.  Martinelli argues that military reservists are different because no such relief is available to them. However, as the government points out, there is provision for such coverage because under the Veterans' Benefits Act reserve duty is expressly encompassed within "inactive duty training",.  and the statutory definition of veteran includes one who became disabled or died during a period of "inactive duty training".38 U.S.C. § 101(2), (24).
The Feres Court also noted that the FTCA imposed liability on the government only "in the same manner and to the same extent as a private individual under such circumstances."340 U.S. at 141, 71 S.Ct. at 156 (quoting 28 U.S.C. Sec. 2674).  The Court stated that there is no liability in the private sphere analogous to that asserted against the United States by or on behalf of a serviceman injured while on military duty.340 U.S. at 141-42, 71 S.Ct. at 156-57.   Based on this rationale, later cases have held that the Feres doctrine is based primarily on the effect of lawsuits on military effectiveness. Thus, in United States v. Brown.  the Court stated that the Feres doctrine was based on the "peculiar and special relationship of the soldier to his superiors, the effects of the maintenance of such suits on discipline, and the extreme results that might obtain if suits under the Tort Claims Act were allowed for negligent orders given or negligent acts committed in the course of military duty."Id. at 112, 75 S.Ct. at 143. More recently, in United States v. Shearer,.  the Court again stated that the important focus in considering the applicability of the Feres doctrine is "whether the suit requires the civilian court to second guess military decisions."Id. at 3043.See also ..
The allegation of Martinelli's complaint, which we must accept as true in the procedural posture of this case, is that Martinelli's son died as a result of exposure to noxious gases during his participation as a civilian reserve member in gas chamber exercises. Martinelli alleges the exercises were conducted negligently, carelessly and recklessly. In Jaffee v. United StatesJaffee v. United States, 663 F.2d 1226 (3d Cir. 1981) (en banc), cert. denied, .  this court held that Feres precluded recovery by a serviceman who developed cancer after what the complaint claimed was intentional exposure to radiation during a military exercise. Judge Higginbotham, writing for the majority, stated that suits for service injuries are prohibited because of "their effect on the willingness of military personnel to follow directions of their superiors" and because "[m]ilitary decisionmakers might not be willing to act as quickly and forcefully as is necessary ... if they know they will subsequently be called into a civilian court to answer for their actions."Id. at 1232. The rationale used by this court in Jaffee is equally applicable to Martinelli. Suits by reservists, albeit civilian, for injuries received while on reserve training in military exercises would have the same consequences.
thumb|250px|Injuries incurred by service members are covered by the Veteran Administration.
Accordingly, we hold that the Feres doctrine bars FTCA suits by or on behalf of persons serving in the United States Military Reserves because the same rationale that precludes suits by or on behalf of servicepersons is equally applicable to reservists. Our decision is in accord with that of several other courts of appeals that have addressed the issue.See Mattos v. United States, 412 F.2d 793, 794 (9th Cir.1969) (per curiam) (court stated, without further discussion, that, "[t]he rationale of Feres applies with equal force to reservists.")United States v. Carroll, 369 F.2d 618, 620 (8th Cir.1966) ("[t]here is no doubt that the Feres decision applies also to reservists.")Accord O'Brien v. United States, 192 F.2d 948 (8th Cir.1951)Layne v. United States, 295 F.2d 433, 434-36 (7th Cir. 1961), cert. denied,  (widow of Indiana National Guardsman fatally injured while on duty as part of Reserve not permitted to sue United States under FTCA because of Feres doctrine).
Martinelli argues that we should engage in a case-by-case review to ascertain if application of Feres is appropriate. However, in Jorden v. National Guard799 F.2d 99 (3d Cir.1986),  we rejected the argument that Feres requires us to inquire in each case whether judicial review will unduly interfere with military operations. Instead, we reaffirmed our view, held as well by the majority of courts, that Feres is a per se bar of damage actions against the United States and military officers arising out of injuries to military personnel.Id. at 107-08.Contra United States v. Stanley, 786 F.2d 1490, 1499 (11th Cir.), cert. granted, --- U.S. ----, 107 S.Ct. 642, 93 L.Ed.2d 699 (1986).
In rejecting plaintiff's appeal, we feel compelled to point out that attempts by members of this court to limit the Feres doctrine have been consistently unsuccessful. The panel opinion in Jaffee that would have held that Feres does not grant absolute immunity to military and civilian defendants when charged with intentional, unauthorized tortious conduct,See Jaffee, 663 F.2d at 1249 (Gibbons dissenting), was rejected by the court en banc. 663 F.2d at 1226. This court's opinion that the survivor of an off-duty serviceman could recover from the government for its negligent failure to prevent his murder by another off-duty serviceman was reversed by the Supreme Court in United States v. Shearer It is therefore evident that any relaxation in the Feres doctrine must come from Congress.
For the foregoing reasons, we will affirm the order dismissing the complaint.
Challenges to the Feres Doctrine
 Miller v. United States 
In Miller v. United States,Miller v. United States,  the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals applied the doctrine to a fourth class Midshipman at the United States Naval Academy. Leonce J. Miller, III brought suit against the United States government after he was knocked overboard and unconscious by the boom of the sailboat he was navigating due to improper training and inclement weather. Miller sustained further damage when he was unable to be immediately rescued because the U.S. Navy's boat overseeing the exercise was inoperable and those assigned to watch the trainees were working on the boat. Subsequent to the accident, Miller was admitted to the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Maryland, where he was told he had no physiological injuries, only to learn subsequently that he had suffered a fractured neck and vestibular nerve damage. For nearly four years, Miller was unable to walk unassisted. The Court personally addressed Miller, stating:
 Witt v. United States 
In Witt v. United States, a plaintiff before the United States District Court for the Eastern District of California unsuccessfully argued that the Feres Doctrine violated the equal protection clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments.Witt v. United States, 2009 U.S. Dist. (E.D. Cal. Feb. 9, 2009). In October 2003, Airman SSGT. Dean P. Witt was admitted to David Grant Medical Center for a routine appendectomy while he was on approved furlough to finalize his transfer from Hill Air Force Base, Utah to Travis Air Force Base, California. Prior to post-op, and shortly following surgery, a military nurse anesthetist re-inserted an endotracheal tube into his esophagus instead of his trachea, forcing life-saving oxygen to be pumped into his stomach, instead of his lungs, and then utilized a pediatric medical device to try and save him, resulting in an anoxic brain injury that left him in a vegetative state. Witt died 3 months later on January 9, 2004.
Witt's wife filed a wrongful death claim in August 2008 under Federal Tort Claims Act in California's Eastern (9th) Circuit District, which was reluctantly denied by District Judge John Mendez in February 2009. Mendez urged the Supreme Court to revisit the Feres Doctrine because the Feres Doctrine was “unfair” and “irrational.”
In May 2010, Witt's wife appealed the Ninth Circuit's decision and in January 2011, Witt's wife filed for petition for writ of certiorari. In February 2011, amicus briefs were filed in support of Witt's appeal. However, the Supreme Court refused to hear the case and the petition for certiorari was denied on June 27, 2011.Witt v. United States, 131 S. Ct. 3058
 Other challenges 
In March 2009, Representative Maurice Hinchey of New York's 22nd congressional district introduced the Carmelo Rodriguez Military Medical Accountability Act of 2009, an amended version of a bill from 2008. In 2010, Hinchey re-introduced the amended bill in the House of Representatives.House Report 111-466- 111th Congress-Carmelo Rodriguez Military Medical Accountability Act of 2009 (2009-2010). The bill would have amended the Federal Torts Claims Act to allow claims for military members who are injured or killed due to negligent and wrongful acts in healthcare, except during military conflict from those who are employed by the U.S. Government; it did not pass.
In 2021, the Supreme Court denied Certiorari in Jane Doe v. United States (3 May, 2021). This case concerned an unnamed plaintiff who was allegedly raped by a fellow cadet during her second year at West Point University. After exhausting administrative proceedings, Jane Doe sued the government by invoking the Federal Torts Claims Act, but was dismissed by the district court under the Feres Doctrine. After an appeals court affirmed the dismissal of the lower court, Jane Doe asked the Supreme Court to overrule the Feres Doctrine, but the petition was denied. Justice Clarence Thomas dissented, criticizing the doctrine and the Courts unwillingness to overrule wrongly decided cases:
“Perhaps the Court is hesitant to take up this issue at all because it would require fiddling with a 70-year old precedent that is demonstrably wrong. But if the Feres doctrine is so wrong that that we cannot figure out how to rein it in, then the better answer is to bid it farewell. There is precedent for that approach. We should follow it.” Justice Clarance Thomas dissenting (Pg. 3, 593 U.S _ 2021)
In 2019, Sergeant First Class Richard Stayskal, who was diagnosed with terminal lung cancer after military doctors noticed but failed to look into a growth in his lung on two separate occasions, testified before Congress about his ordeal. The result was the SFC Richard Stayskal Military Medical Accountability Act of 2019, signed into law by President Donald Trump on December 20 of that year, which created an administrative process for the filing and resolution of medical malpractice claims.
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 340
References
External links
Category:1950 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States federal sovereign immunity case law
Category:United States military case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Ferguson v. City of Charleston" ==> """
Ferguson v. City of Charleston, 532 U.S. 67 (2001), is a United States Supreme Court decision that found Medical University of South Carolina's policy regarding involuntary drug testing of pregnant women to violate the Fourth Amendment. The Court held that the search in question was unreasonable..
Facts
In the fall of 1988, staff at a hospital operated by the Medical University of South Carolina became concerned about the prevalence of so-called "crack babies," as well as an increase in cocaine use among pregnant women receiving prenatal treatment at the hospital.  In the spring of 1989, hospital staff began conducting urine screens on pregnant women, and referring the women who tested positive for counseling.  Soon after the urine screenings began, the case manager in the hospital's obstetrics department heard that police in Greenville, South Carolina, were arresting pregnant women who used cocaine for child abuse.  The theory behind the arrests was that the women's cocaine use was harmful to the fetuses.  After reviewing the idea with counsel, the MUSC hospital began referring pregnant women who tested positive for cocaine to Charleston police for prosecution.
Acting together, hospital staff and the police department developed a written policy for determining which pregnant women would be screened and, if they tested positive, prosecuted.  Women would be selected for urine screening if they met certain criteria, such as prior lack of prenatal care, known history of drug or alcohol abuse, intrauterine fetal death, or abruptio placentae.  If the women tested positive, they were referred to substance abuse counseling and threatened with prosecution.  The hospital staff acknowledged that the "threat of law enforcement intervention... provided the necessary leverage to make the policy effective."  Women who tested positive a second time were arrested, even before giving birth.  If the positive test occurred prior to the 28th week of pregnancy, the woman would be charged with simple possession.  If she tested positive in the 28th week or later, she would be charged with possession and distribution to a person under age 18—to wit, the fetus.  If she delivered the baby "while testing positive for illegal drugs," the woman would also be charged with unlawful neglect of a child.
Thirty pregnant women who had been arrested pursuant to the policy brought suit in federal court, challenging the MUSC policy of conducting warrantless, nonconsensual drug testing as violating their Fourth Amendment right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures.  The hospital and the city raised two primary defenses—first, that the women had consented to the searches; and second, that even if they had not consented, the searches were reasonable as a matter of law because they were justified by "special non-law-enforcement purposes."  The district court rejected the second defense because it concluded that the searches were conducted for law enforcement purposes.  It submitted the first defense to the jury, instructing the jury that if the jury found that the women had consented, the jury should rule for the city and the hospital.  The jury found that the women had consented, and thus ruled for the city and the hospital.  The women appealed and Priscilla J. Smith argued for their behalf. 
On appeal, the Fourth Circuit affirmed, but on the ground that the searches were justified as a matter of law by special non-law-enforcement needs.  It reasoned that the interest in curtailing pregnancy complications and reducing the medical costs associated with maternal cocaine use outweighed what it characterized as a "minimal intrusion" on the women's privacy.  The Supreme Court then agreed to hear the case..
Majority opinion
MUSC is a state-operated hospital, so its employees are government actors subject to the Fourth Amendment.  And a drug screen is a "search" covered by the Fourth Amendment.  Because the Fourth Circuit had ruled only on the special needs claim, the Court assumed that the women had not consented to the drug screens.  It then concluded that the special needs doctrine did not permit MUSC to conduct the drug screens according to its policy.
The fact that the women neither knew of nor consented to the drug screens made this case different from the other cases in which the Court had applied the special needs doctrine.  In Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives Association, National Treasury Employees Union v. Von Raab, and Vernonia School District 47J v. Acton, the Court had sustained drug testing under the special needs doctrine in light of the subjects' consent; in Chandler v. Miller, the Court had struck down drug testing under the special needs doctrine despite the subjects' consent.  In all four of those cases, the fact that the subjects consented lessened the invasion on the subjects' privacy.
In this case, by contrast, the extent of the invasion on the women's privacy was far greater.  "The reasonable expectation of privacy enjoyed by the typical patient undergoing diagnostic tests in a hospital is that the results of those tests will not be shared with nonmedical personnel without her consent."  By turning over the results of these medical tests to the police without the women's consent, MUSC violated this reasonable expectation of privacy.  In this case, unless the special needs doctrine applied, this intrusion upon the women's expectation of privacy would amount to a violation of the Fourth Amendment.
The Court did not simply take the city and the hospital at their word that their motivations were beneficent; rather, the Court examined all the evidence available to determine whether the special needs advanced were divorced from the generalized interest in law enforcement.  For example, in Railway Executives, the need to discover the cause of railway accidents justified the drug testing, and in Acton it was the need to promote a drug-free school environment.  In this case, however, the very reason for the policy was to use the threat of arrest to motivate the women to abstain from using cocaine.  This fact was evident from the fact that police and prosecutors assisted the hospital staff in developing specimen collection and chain-of-custody procedures, the nature of possible criminal charges to which the patients would be subject, and how the police would be notified and the arrests would be accomplished.  "While the ultimate goal of the program may well have been to get the women in question into substance abuse treatment and off of drugs, the immediate objective of the searches was to generate evidence for law enforcement purposes in order to reach that goal."  Because the MUSC plan used the threat of arrest as the means to accomplish its overall goal of inducing pregnant women to abstain from using cocaine, "this case simply does not fit within the closely guarded category of 'special needs.'"  The mere fact that the hospital may have had benevolent motives cannot justify departing from the protections of the Fourth Amendment, especially in light of the heavy involvement of law enforcement with the hospital's program.
Justice Kennedy pointed out that all searches, by definition, would uncover evidence of crime, and this says nothing about the "special needs" the search might serve.  In this case, however, Kennedy agreed that "while the policy may well have served legitimate needs unrelated to law enforcement, it had as well a penal character with a far greater connection to law enforcement than other searches sustained under our special needs rationale."Ferguson, 532 U.S. at 88-89 (Kennedy, J., concurring in the judgment).
Dissenting opinion
Justice Scalia reasoned that there was no "search" in this case because the hospital did not take the urine from the women without their consent.  Urine, a waste product, would ordinarily be abandoned by the person who produces it; anyone who came across it would be free to do with it what they will, just as with garbage found on the sidewalk.  There is no "search" in the case of garbage left on the sidewalk because its (former) owner no longer expresses any interest in keeping it private.  For a similar reason, there is no "search" involved in performing a urine screen because the women voluntarily provided it to the hospital—and even if they had not, the women would have freely abandoned it anyway.
Scalia also reasoned that even if the women had been coerced into providing the urine samples, it was not the government that coerced them.  This was so, Scalia reasoned, even if these women had to provide the samples as a precondition of receiving their prenatal medical care.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 532
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
External links
  Merits brief of petitioners
  Reply brief of petitioners
  Information from the ACLU about Ferguson
  Amicus brief of the National Coalition for Child Protection Reform
  Amicus brief of American Public Health Association
  Amicus brief of the ACLU
 Ferguson v. City of Charleston and Child Welfare, from the Duke Journal of Gender Law and Policy
  Summary from the National Conference of State Legislatures
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Medical University of South Carolina
Category:Medical lawsuits
Category:Drug control law in the United States
Category:Health issues in pregnancy
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in South Carolina
Category:Cocaine in the United States
Category:Drug testing
"""

From "Ferguson v. Skrupa" ==> """
Ferguson v. Skrupa, 372 U.S. 726 (1963), was a case before the United States Supreme Court regarding the constitutionality of prohibiting debt adjustment.
Background
A Kansas statuteKan. Gen. Stat. § 21-2464 (Supp. 1961) makes it a misdemeanor for any person to engage "in the business of debt adjusting" except as an incident to the lawful practice of law, "debt adjusting" being defined as the making of a contract whereby an adjuster, for consideration,  agrees to distribute payments by a debtor among his creditors in accordance with an agreed upon plan.  The plaintiff, engaged in the business of "debt adjusting," alleged that his business was a useful and desirable one, and that, therefore, an absolute prohibition of the business by the State would violate his rights under the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The District Court, sitting as a three-judge court, granted an injunction on the statute.210 F Supp 200
Opinion of the court
On appeal, the Supreme Court of the United States reversed, 9-0. Justice Black held that the statute did not violate the due process clause.
1) States had the power to legislate against what were found to be injurious practices in their internal commercial and business affairs so long as their laws did not run afoul of some specific federal constitutional prohibition or of some valid federal law. When the subject lay within the State's police power, debatable questions as to reasonableness were not for the courts but for the legislature.
2) The Court further held that the statute's exception of lawyers did not constitute a denial of equal protection of the laws to nonlawyers.  Statutes created many classifications that did not deny equal protection; it was only invidious discrimination that offended the Constitution.
Concurrence
Harlan, J., concurred in the judgment on the ground that the state statute bore a rational relation to a constitutionally permissible objective.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:Legal history of Kansas
Category:1963 in United States case law
"""

From "Fernandez v. California" ==> """
Fernandez v. California, 571 U.S. 292 (2014), was a U.S. Supreme Court case that explored the limits of Georgia v. Randolph, a 2006 case that held that consent to search a dwelling is invalid in the presence of an objecting co-resident. Fernandez, however, held that when the objecting co-resident is removed for objectively reasonable purposes (such as lawful arrest), the remaining resident may validly consent to search.
Case aspects
Supreme Court Case law precedent
Fernandez v. California is  governed by two cases: The 1974 case United States v. Matlock and the 2005 case Georgia v. Randolph. In Matlock the U.S. Supreme Court laid out the so-called "co-occupant consent rule". This rule means that anyone who has "common authority" over the home can consent to a search of the home. The Supreme Court defined "common authority" as “mutual use of the property by persons generally having joint access or control for most purposes, so that it is reasonable to recognize that any of the co-inhabitants has the right to permit the inspection in his own right and that the others have assumed the risk that one of their number might permit the common area to be searched. Then they arrested him.” In essence the court decided that any one person who is a “joint occupant” can consent to a police search of the shared residence, without a search warrant. In Georgia v. Randolph the Court limited the holding of Matlock. In Randolph the court decided that when co-occupants who are disagreeing whether to let the police search their dwelling the police can't conduct a search, if a "physically present" co-occupant objects that search.
Case background
When police arrived at Fernandez's apartment, they believed a suspect in a gang-related assault had just entered. While approaching the apartment they heard screaming and fighting occurring inside. Police knocked on the apartment's door, which was answered by Fernandez's bloodied girlfriend. Believing that Fernandez may have assaulted his girlfriend, police attempted to separate the two. Fernandez refused to follow the police's directive to step away from his girlfriend and yelled "You don't have a right to come in here. I know my rights." The officers soon realized that Fernandez was the suspect in the gang-related assault and arrested him for that crime. About an hour later the police came back to ask Fernandez's girlfriend for consent to search the apartment, which she gave. Fernandez later challenged the lawfulness of this third-party consent.  Counsel to Fernandez were attorneys Jeff Fischer and Gerald Peters.
Supreme Court decision
By a vote of six to three, the Court ruled that the search which followed the arrest of defendant Fernandez did not violate the Constitution, because Fernandez was no longer physically there and had been removed for fair reasons. Respect for the girlfriend's independent voluntary consent requires that it be honored. The three dissenting judges argued that the girlfriend had been pressured into consenting, and that police should have gotten a search warrant once they knew Fernandez objected to the search.
References
External links
 SCOTUSblog Coverage of Fernandez v. California (2014)-
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
"""

From "Fernandez-Vargas v. Gonzales" ==> """
Fernandez-Vargas v. Gonzales, 548 U.S. 30 (2006), is a United States Supreme Court case that considered Humberto Fernandez-Vargas, a Mexican citizen who, after being deported, illegally reentered the United States in 1982, and remained undetected for over 20 years, fathering a son in 1989 and marrying the boy's mother, a U.S. citizen, in 2001. He filed an application to adjust his status to that of a lawful permanent resident, but the Government began proceedings to reinstate his 1981 deportation order under §241(a)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality Act,, as added by the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996,  § 305(a)(3). and deported him.
Fernandez-Vargas argued that because he illegally reentered the country before the IIRIRA's effective date, §241(a)(5) did not bar his application for an adjustment of status, and that §241(a)(5) would be impermissibly retroactive if it did bar his adjustment application. The Court held that Section 241(a)(5) applies to those who reentered the U.S. before IIRIRA's effective date and does not retroactively affect any right of, or impose any burden on, the continuing violator of the INA now before this Court..
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:2006 in international relations
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Ferris v. Frohman" ==> """
Ferris v. Frohman, 223 U.S. 424 (1912), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held an unauthorized public production of an unpublished play does not invalidate the play owner's common law copyright.
 References 
External links
Category:1912 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Festo Corp. v. Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabushiki Co." ==> """
Festo Corp. v Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabushiki Co., 535 U.S. 722 (2002), was a United States Supreme Court decision in the area of patent law that examined the relationship between the doctrine of equivalents (which holds that a patent can be infringed by something that is not literally falling within the scope of the claims because a somewhat insubstantial feature or element has been substituted) and the doctrine of prosecution history estoppel (which holds that a party who makes a change to a patent application to accommodate the requirements of patent law cannot claim infringement by equivalents of an element that was narrowed by that change).
Background of the case
Festo Corporation (petitioner) possessed patents for an industrial device. After Festo began marketing its device, Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabushiki Co. (SMC, respondents) entered the market with a device that used one two-way sealing ring and a nonmagnetizable sleeve. Festo Corporation already owned two similar patents (although their initial patent application was rejected) for this industrial device.  Festo filed suit, claiming that SMC's device was sufficiently similar that it infringed Festo's patents under the doctrine of equivalents. Festo's claim had been amended during prosecution for, at the very least, compliance with 35 U.S.C. §112 (claim structure), and thus Shoketsu claimed that prosecution history estoppel should bar Festo from asserting equivalents.
The United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts held that Festo's amendments were not made to avoid prior art, and therefore the amendments were not the kind that give rise to estoppel. A panel of the Federal Circuit affirmed. 72 F. 3d 857 (1995). The Supreme Court granted certiorari, vacated, and remanded in light of an intervening decision in Warner-Jenkinson v. Hilton Davis Chemical Co.. After a decision by the original panel on remand, 172 F. 3d 1361 (1999), the Federal Circuit ordered rehearing en banc, 187 F. 3d 1381 (1999). The court sitting en banc held that claim amendments made for compliance with the Patent Act presented a complete bar to claiming equivalents.
Issue 
Whether any amendment to a patent application that narrowed a patent claim to comply with the Patent Act creates an absolute bar to equivalents for the particular claim limitation that was narrowed by the amendment.
Court's decision
The Supreme Court vacated the ruling made by the Federal Circuit, holding that such amendments do not create an absolute bar, but instead must be examined in light of the reason for the change. In the unanimous opinion, Justice Kennedy explained that it was not whether prosecution history estoppel applied to amendments, but to what extent the amendment surrendered coverage of the claim. If the change was made to clarify a translation, for example, the inventor should suffer no reduction in rights. But if the change was made to keep the patent from overlapping with another patent, then the applicant will be presumed to have given up the right to complain about anything broader than the patent claim itself.
In particular, the Court held that patentee's decision to narrow claims through amendment in order to comply with the Patent Act automatically assumes surrender of the territory between the original claim and the amended claim, i.e., a presumption of surrendering all equivalents for the particular claim limitation that was narrowed by the amendment. The Court thus placed the burden on the applicant as to showing what equivalents were not surrendered.
The Court conceded, however, that there are some cases where the amendment cannot be viewed as surrendering a particular equivalent. "The equivalent may have been unforeseeable at the time of the application; the rationale underlying the amendment may bear no more than a tangential relation to the equivalent in question; or there may be some other reason suggesting that the patentee could not reasonably be expected to have described the insubstantial substitute in question. In those cases the patentee can overcome the presumption that prosecution history estoppel bars a finding of equivalence."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 535
List of United States Supreme Court cases
External links
 Address citing the case by Thomas O. Barnett, Assistant Attorney General, Antitrust Division, U.S. Department of Justice
 Papers 
 "Patent Law: The Festo Case and the Doctrine of Equivalents", United States Congressional Research Service, July 25, 2002
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States patent case law
Category:2002 in United States case law
"""

From "Fiallo v. Bell" ==> """
Fiallo v. Bell, 430 U.S. 787 (1977), was a U.S. Supreme Court case that challenged the constitutionality of Sections 101(b)(1)(D) and 101(b)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952. The Sections gave immigration preference to children or parents of either existing U.S. citizens or of noncitizens residing under lawful permanent resident status. But, as the Court wrote, the statute defined “child” narrowly: “an unmarried person under 21 years of age who is a legitimate or legitimated child, a stepchild, an adopted child, or an illegitimate child seeking preference by virtue of his relationship with his mother”.
The appellants, three sets of unmarried biological fathers, contended that the law was discriminatory to the relationship between natural fathers and their illegitimate child and claimed equal protection and due process violations.
The Supreme Court rejected the appellants’ claims and upheld the Sections, citing Congress' “exceptionally broad power” to admit or exclude non-citizens and acknowledging the intentional political choice of Congress to exclude a select group. As put by Justice Powell, who wrote for the majority, it was not, “the judicial role in cases of this sort to probe and test the justifications for the legislative decision.”
 Background 
Ramon Fiallo was a United States born citizen, but resident of the Dominican Republic, whose mother petitioned, on his behalf, for his Dominican father to be legally declared his parent. The United States Consul in the Dominican Republic rejected Fiallo’s petition, citing his illegitimacy--his parents were not married nor would be in the future. Fiallo, along with appellant Cleophus Warner--a US citizen with an illegitimate child in the French West Indies--and apellants Trevor and Earl Wilson--permanent residents petitioning for their Jamaican father--sued Attorney General Edward H. Levi in the US District Court for the Eastern District of New York.
The District Court dismissed the suit, alluding to the plenary power of Congress over matters of admission and exclusion of non-residents. 
In 1976, the Supreme Court noted probable jurisdiction and accepted the appeal.
 Argument 
The appellants, represented by Harold R. Tyler Jr., put forth three key arguments against the identified Sections of the 1952 Act:
 The statutory exclusion predicated on a father’s marital status, his child’s illegitimacy, and the sex of the parent violated the appellants’ right to equal protection of the law.
 The inherent statutory assumption that there is a lack of familial tie (emotional, economic, or otherwise) between fathers and their illegitimate children violates the appellants’ right to due process of the law.
 The effect of the statute impairs the appellants’ right to “mutual association, to privacy, to establish a home, to raise natural children, and to be raised by natural fathers.”
 Decision 
From the outset of the decision, the Court emphasized the “limited scope of judicial inquiry into immigration legislation”, citing previous cases that have recognized Congressional power to expel or exclude aliens as “a fundamental sovereign attribute” (e.g., Harisiades v. Shaughnessy, Fong Yue Ting v. United States).
In asserting a violation of equal protection, the appellants referenced previous border search cases (Almeida-Sanchez v. United States and United States v. Brignoni-Ponce) for the holding that the judiciary is required “to protect the rights of citizens against immigration legislation.” The Court, however, refused to apply that principle to Congress’ authority to regulate alien entrance.
The Court was similarly unconvinced with the appellants’ attempt to apply stricter judicial scrutiny by claiming the discrimination within the statute (i.e., based on sex and illegitimacy) infringes on rights of citizens to familial relationships and denies due process. The Court cited its prior holding in the First Amendment case Kleindienst v. Mandel, in which the Court refused to exercise stricter scrutiny to ensure the executive branch had acted within its bounds to deny immigration. To Fiallo, therefore, the Court applied the same judicial standard it had when a first amendment right was in question.
Finally, given that the 1952 Act was amended in 1957 specifically to add illegitimate children and their mothers, the Court recognized that the omission of illegitimate children and their fathers was an “intentional choice” on the part of Congress. The Court, therefore, asserted that it was not its role to “probe” and “test” the reasons for Congress’ legislative actions.
On April 26th, 1977, the Supreme Court ruled against appellants Fiallo, Warner, and Wilson in a 6-3 majority with Justices Marshall, Brennan, and White dissenting. Justice Marshall was alone in writing a dissenting opinion.
 Justice Marshall's Dissent 
Justice Marshall asserted that Fifth Amendment rights are still applicable to immigration law and reasons that the mere involvement of immigration should not result in an immediate deferral to Congress under the rationale of plenary power. He also noted that the case “directly involves the rights of citizens, not aliens.” Accordingly, because Fifth Amendment rights are pertinent to immigration and because citizens’ rights are involved, Marshall agreed with the appellants’ contention that the Sections violated equal protection and due process rights. 
Justice Marshall also parted with the majority in asserting that the case should have been held to a higher form of judicial scrutiny, reasoning that “freedom of personal choice in matters of marriage and family life” is a fundamental right and is grounds for strict scrutiny.
 Legacy 
The Fiallo Court, in asserting that “over no conceivable subject is the legislative power of Congress more complete than it is over the admission of aliens”, built upon the precedent set by cases like Chae Chan Ping v. United States and Fong Yue Ting v. United States in establishing judicial deference and Congressional plenary power in the realm of immigration. Because Fiallo involved the rights of US citizens (i.e., the right to personal choice in family matters), the Court’s decision established Congressional power to legislate immigration policy that affects citizens.
In 1999, as part of Chapter 12 of Title 8 of the United States Code, Congress enacted legislation reversing the Sections of the 1952 Act challenged in Fiallo. Fathers can now petition for their illegitimate child’s permanent residence, if they can prove a “bona fide parent-child relationship.” No such burden of proof is put on mothers.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:1977 in United States case law
"""

From "Fifth Third Bancorp v. Dudenhoeffer" ==> """
Fifth Third Bancorp v. Dudenhoeffer, 573 U.S. 409 (2014), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the court found Employee stockownership (ESOP) fiduciaries have the same prudential duties as non-ESOP fiduciaries, as set by ERISA, except that they are not required to diversify their investments beyond shares of the employer's stock.
 Background 
Fifth Third Bancorp, a large financial services company, maintained a defined contribution retirement plan / 401(k) (specifically an Employee stock ownership (ESOP)) for its employees. In September 2009, a group of its former employees and current 401(k) participants file a class action lawsuit against Fifth Third and its corporate officers (in their capacity as administrators of the 401(k)), alleging that they violated their ERISA-mandated fiduciary duty under ERISA. Specifically, the employees alleged that Fifth Third and its officers should have known that Fifth Third's stock was overvalued.
Per the complaint, the stock was overvalued due to the firm's involvement in risky subprime lending and that officers had made material misstatements about the company's financial prospects to inflate the value of the company's stock. The employees alleged that a prudent fiduciary acting in good faith stewards of the ESOP's assets should have taken steps to address this overvaluation or protect the plan participants from the risks. Instead, they continued to buy and hold Fifth Third stock until the market crashed in July 2007, wiping out over 3/4ths of the company's stock value and leaving the plaintiffs destitute.
 In lower courts 
The lawsuit, which was filed in the Southern District Court of Ohio, was originally dismissed by that court. The District Court ruled that the 401(k) plan administrators were entitled to a 'presumption of prudence' with respect to their decision to continue buying and holding their own company's stock. The Sixth Circuit reversed the District Court, ruling that additional evidence would be needed before a court could rule on whether the 'presumption of prudence' should apply. Fifth Third appealed the Sixth Circuit's decision to the Supreme Court of the United States in December 2012.
 Supreme Court opinion 
The Supreme Court vacated the Sixth Circuit's ruling and remanded the case back to the lower courts for further reconsideration. Writing for a unanimous court, Justice Stephen Breyer determined that administrators of ESOPs are not entitled to a special 'presumption of prudence' with respect to their decision-making. Rather, they are held to the same legal standard of care as any other fiduciary under ERISA. The Supreme Court accepted the petitioners' argument that allowing lawsuits against ESOP fiduciaries may discourage employers from offering ESOP plans in the first place (thus contravening Congress's intent), but resolved the dilemma by creating guidelines for lower courts to apply in future cases at the motion to dismiss stage.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2014 in United States case law
Category:Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
"""

From "Financial Oversight and Management Board for Puerto Rico v. Aurelius Investment, LLC" ==> """
Financial Oversight and Management Bd. for Puerto Rico v. Aurelius Investment, LLC, 590 U.S. ___ (2020), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that appointments to the Financial Oversight and Management Board for Puerto Rico are not subject to the restrictions in the Appointments Clause of the U.S. Constitution. The Court held that all officers of the United States are subject to the Appointments Clause even if their duties relate to Puerto Rico. However, the power they exercise must be primarily federal in nature for the Clause to apply. If the officer exercises powers primarily of a local nature, even if created by federal law, then the officer is not "of the United States" and is exempt from compliance with the Clause. As members of the Board are primarily concerned with the governance of Puerto Rico, even though their decisions have potentially nationwide consequences, their powers are primarily local in nature and need not be appointed in compliance with the Clause.
Case background
In the years prior to 2014, Puerto Rico, a territory of the United States, had several economic issues, including a period of depression, that caused it to accrue a large amount of debt with creditors. U.S. law prevents the territory from declaring bankruptcy under Chapter 9 on its debt, an option normally afforded to other U.S. states and divisions. In February 2014, both Standard & Poor's and Moody's downgraded Puerto Rico's debt rating, causing some of their prior creditors' agreements to now require repayment in months rather than years. By this point, it was estimated that Puerto Rico had acquired more than  in debt across some 165,000 creditors, and failure to pay off these agreements would have added additional billions to what the territory owed. The territory attempted to clear some of the debt by passing the Puerto Rico Public Corporation Debt Enforcement and Recovery Act, allowing public corporations like utilities to file for bankruptcy but this was ultimately ruled unallowed under the existing law via the Supreme Court case Puerto Rico v. Franklin California Tax-Free Trust as being too similar to Chapter 9 bankruptcy.
The inability of Puerto Rico to clear its debt led to the Puerto Rico Oversight, Management, and Economic Stability Act (PROMESA) in June 2016. PROMESA created a Fiscal Control Board (FCB), composed of seven members along with the Governor of Puerto Rico as its eighth, non-voting member. The FCB saw to help Puerto Rico restructure its debt to be able to pay off its creditors in a timely manner, develop a fiscal plan to support that payment schedule while meeting the necessary welfare and services of its residents, and otherwise help direct the fiscal responsibility of the territory. The Act also shielded Puerto Rico from any lawsuits from its creditors by imposing a moratorium period following the bill's passage to allow the FCB to establish a plan, and then afterwards, to have such cases heard in a special court, the District Court for the District of Puerto Rico, with cases to be overseen by Judge Laura Taylor Swain of the District Court for the Southern District of New York, who had been appointed by Chief Justice John Roberts. Of the seven members of the board, six were selected by the President of the United States from a list of recommendations from Congress based on previous ties to Puerto Rico businesses, and the seventh of the President's choosing. PROMESA did not require any affirmation of these appointments by the Senate.
As the FBC was formed and work began to establish a fiscal plan and debt restructuring, the initial deadline for which Puerto Rico could default on payments had passed and in May 2017, several creditors filed suit against the territory for failure to pay. The FCB issued its intent to have these cases heard in the special court established by PROMESA. The cases held at this court looked to significantly cut back how much Puerto Rico owed to its creditors. This was also impacted by Hurricane Maria that struct Puerto Rico in September 2017, causing an estimated  in further costs for recovery, which impacted how much the territory could pay back to creditors under PROMESA. Unable to challenge the special venue, the creditors turned to challenge the validity of the core of PROMESA, arguing that the board of the FCB, as Presidential appointees, need to be affirmed through Senate approval as part of the Appropriations Clause, and thus were unconstitutional. Judge Swain rejected the creditors' arguments on the constitutionality of PROMESA, which created multiple appeals to the First Circuit Court of Appeals. In a combined ruling in February 2019, the First Circuit reversed the special court's findings and agreed with the creditors that the appointment of members to the FCB, while not to a federal position but established by a federal law, required Senate confirmation, and thus their appointments were unconstitutional. The First Circuit did not declare any past deals that the FCB to be nullified, asserting that even without appointment, the actions and deals of the members of the FCB remained valid under the de facto officer doctrine, and gave the U.S. administration 90 days to make the Senate to make the necessary confirmations before the effect of the Circuit decision took place to nullify the FCB's authority.
Supreme Court
The FCB itself made an emergency petition to the Supreme Court to hear the case, as well as to extend the deadline due to delays in the reappointment process within the Senate; President Donald Trump had provided a new list of names by June but the Senate was several weeks out before they could begin confirmation hearings. The Supreme Court accepted the petition on June 20, 2019, scheduling to expedite the case in October. With the Supreme Court's acceptance of the case, the First Circuit agreed to extend the deadline for reappointments until the Supreme Court delivered its opinion on the case.
Oral arguments were held on October 15, 2019. Questions arose around the applicability of the Insular Cases, the First Circuit's opinion to leave the past FCB decisions in place under the de facto officer doctrine, and what impacts on Puerto Rico would occur based on multiple decision outcomes.
The Supreme Court issued its decision on June 1, 2020, unanimously reversing the First Circuit's decision and upholding the appointment of the FCB board without Senate confirmation. Justice Stephen G. Breyer wrote the majority opinion that was joined by all but two Justices. Breyer wrote that the FCB "is part of the local Puerto Rico government" with a range of duties and powers "backed by Puerto Rican, not federal, law", and thus negating the need for the board members to be confirmed via the Appointments Clause. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote an opinion that concurred in judgement but disagreed with how the majority concluded that the FCB's duties were primarily local, while Justice Sonia Sotomayor also wrote an opinion concurring in judgement but stated that she was "skeptical that the Constitution countenances this freewheeling exercise of control over a population that the federal government has explicitly agreed to recognize as operating under a government of their own choosing, pursuant to a constitution of their own choosing".
 References 
External links
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2020 in Puerto Rico
"""

From "Findlay v. McAllister" ==> """
Findlay v. McAllister, 113 U.S. 104 (1885), was a suit brought against Thomas McAllister and 14 other defendants, to recover damages as follows:
Background
Findlay, the plaintiff, owned bonds with coupons issued by Scotland County, Missouri, which were recovered on September 25, 1877 in the same circuit court where action was brought, with a judgment on the coupons against the county in the amount of $4,008.86. The county failed to pay the judgment, so the circuit court issued a peremptory writ of mandamus, which commanded the county court to levy and cause to be collected a special tax on all taxable property within the county in order to pay the judgment, including interest as well as other costs. This was also ordered for several other plaintiffs in like circumstances..
The county court levied a special tax, called a 'judgment tax,' with an amount sufficient to pay off all the judgments, and placed it on the books of the county to be delivered to the county tax collector for collection of the tax.
After the special tax had been levied, and the tax-book placed in the hands of the collector for collection, the defendants, with about 2,000 other evil-disposed persons, all residents of Scotland county, conspired to hinder and prevent the county court and the collector from collecting and paying the special tax.  They did this in order to try and depreciate the value of the bonds held by the plaintiff in an attempt to compromise the judgment and bonds at much less than their value.  This was done unlawfully and maliciously, and in contempt of the orders and mandates of the circuit court.
The defendants and their confederates organized into an association called 'The Tax-payers Association of Scotland County,' with branch organizations in various school-districts of the county, for the purpose, among other things, of resisting the collection of the special tax, and the defendants and their confederates did pledge themselves to contribute of their means and influence, and to protect each other in all efforts made, to resist the payment thereof. In furtherance of their design, the defendants and their confederates, members of said association, made and published threats of violence against the attorneys of the plaintiff, who were employed to represent him in the collection of his judgment, and gave out and circulated the threat that no person would be allowed to bid upon or purchase any property that might be offered for sale by the collector to enforce the payment of the special tax, intending thereby to intimidate any person from bidding upon or purchasing any property offered for sale by the collector for the payment thereof. To induce the tax-payers of the county to join the association and aid in carrying out their unlawful conspiracy, the defendants and their confederates falsely and fraudulently gave out and published that such bonds and special tax were illegal, null, and void, and that they were under no obligation, legal or moral, to pay the same, well knowing that such declarations were false.
During the month of February, 1878, the collector of the county levied upon a large number of horses and mules, and advertised them to be sold on February 28, 1878, at Memphis, in said county of Scotland; whereupon the defendants and their confederates, in order to prevent the sale of the property so levied on, and prevent the payment of the plaintiff's judgment, and so to harass and wrong him as to induce him to compromise his judgment and bonds at much less than their value, assembled in vast numbers at the time and place advertised for the sale, and, by their combined influence, threats, and hostile demonstrations, did so overawe and intimidate the persons who had gone to the place of sale, for the purpose of and with intent to bid on the property, as to prevent them from bidding when the same was offered for sale; and, by reason of such combined influence, threats, and menaces, the defendants and their confederates, members of said association, acting under its orders, did prevent any person from bidding on the property when so offered for sale, and did prevent it from being sold.
The unlawful combination and conspiracy of the defendants, to injure and defraud the plaintiff, and prevent the collection of his judgment, still exists; and, by reason of the combined influence, threats, menaces, and hostile demonstrations of the defendants, the tax-payers of Scotland county are overawed and intimidated, and so influenced that they do not pay the special tax, nor has the collector, by reason of said combination and association, been able to collect the same. The plaintiff, by reason of the premises, has been damaged to the amount of his judgment, to-wit, $4,008.86, with interest thereon from September 25, 1877, and costs; for which, with $3,000 exemplary damages, he demands judgment against the defendants.
The defendants demurred to the petition. In support of their demurrer they assigned and argued, both in the circuit court and this court, the following grounds: (1) That the plaintiff had no such legal property interest in the taxes in question as to entitle him to maintain actions for conspiracy; (2) that he had sustained no legal damages by the alleged acts of the defendants. The court sustained the demurrer, and rendered a judgment for the defendants, to reverse which the plaintiff brings this writ of error.
Decision
It was found that the plaintiff could not sue the collector; for he has done his duty, and no suit lies against him. Unless the plaintiff has a cause of action against the defendants, he is without remedy. To hold that the facts of this case do not give a cause of action against them would be to decide that a citizen might be subjected to a willful and malicious injury at the hands of private persons without redress; that an organized band of conspirators could, without subjecting themselves to any liability, fraudulently and maliciously obstruct and defeat the process of the courts, issued for the satisfaction of the judgment of a private suitor, and thus render the judgment nugatory and worthless. Such a conclusion would be contrary to the principles of the common law and of right and justice.
It is no answer to the case made by the petition to say, as the defendant, by his counsel, does, that the judgment of the plaintiff is still in force and bearing interest, and the liability of the county still remains undisturbed. What is a judgment worth that cannot be enforced? The gravamen of the plaintiff's complaint is that the defendants have obstructed, and continue to obstruct, the collection of his judgment, and he avers that he has been damaged thereby to the amount of his judgment and interest; in other words, that by reason of the unlawful and malicious conduct of the defendants, his judgment has been rendered worthless. To reply to this that the judgment still remains in force on the records of the court is an inadequate answer to the plaintiff's cause of action.
From the views expressed by the higher court, it was determined that the circuit court erred in sustaining the demurrer to the petition. Its judgment was reversed, and the cause remanded for further proceedings in conformity with this opinion; and it was so ordered.
Justices Miller and Field dissented.
See also
 Ackley School District v. Hall: Supreme Court case on defaulted municipal bonds from Iowa
 City of Quincy v. Jackson: Supreme Court case on defaulted municipal bonds form Illinois
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:United States securities case law
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Scotland County, Missouri
Category:Government bonds issued by the United States
"""

From "First English Evangelical Lutheran Church v. Los Angeles County" ==> """
First English Evangelical Lutheran Church v. Los Angeles County, 482 U.S. 304 (1987), was a 6–3 decision of the United States Supreme Court. The court held that the complete destruction of the value of property constituted a "taking" under the Fifth Amendment even if that taking was temporary and the property was later restored.
Background
First English Evangelical Lutheran Church operated a retreat center for handicapped children on its property within the Angeles National Forest. They called the camp Lutherglen. After a serious flood destroyed all the buildings in Lutherglen, the County of Los Angeles adopted an interim ordinance prohibiting building within the floodplain.
The church sued seeking damages, alleging the ordinance denied them all use of Lutherglen. The Superior Court struck the allegation, reasoning that damages were unavailable for an inverse condemnation. In California a plaintiff was procedurally first required to get the court to declare a challenged regulation was excessive. After the regulation was declared excessive the regulator could discontinue the regulation or pay just compensation. The Court of Appeal affirmed the decision and the California Supreme Court denied review.
Opinion of the court
The six-member majority reversed and remanded the case to be considered with the struck allegations reinstated. Writing for the court, Chief Justice William Rehnquist's logic turns on a concern that allowing a regulator to simply discontinue a regulation declared to be a taking creates a temporary taking for the period of time the challenged regulation was in force.
This temporary takings question had been in contention since the court had affirmed on other grounds the case establishing the California approach, Agins v. City of Tiburon. In the seven years since Agins, the court had heard three cases involving the California approach, all of which had been denied review by the California Supreme Court, only to dividedly affirm or dismiss on finality issues. This case had its own jurisdictional problems, not least of which that the plaintiff's less than clear pleadings had only invoked the California state constitution. Nevertheless, the court found itself ready and able to dispose of the temporary takings issue.
The court held that a temporary regulatory takings requires just compensation, as in any other kind of takings. In reaching his conclusion, Rehnquist relied heavily on WWII physical takings cases, where the government was required to pay compensation for property it had temporarily commandeered.
Dissent
Justice John Paul Stevens, joined by Justices Harry Blackmun and Sandra Day O'Connor, dissented. After noting the "litigation explosion" the court's reasoning will cause, the dissent points out that even if the church's allegation are not struck, plaintiff's claim is so weak it will be summarily rejected regardless. They also point out that the severe floods in the floodplain may poise a greater obstacle to rebuilding Lutherglen than the county ordinance. Given that the church has such a weak case, the dissenters doubt the propriety of using struck complaint allegations as a "springboard" to address novel constitutional questions.
Writing alone, Stevens probes the distinction between physical and regulatory takings. Acknowledging as a matter of course that there can be temporary physical takings, he posits that the "three-dimensional" nature of regulations make them too uncertain to be treated the same as physical invasions. Stevens concludes by noting that procedural due process should be adequate to protect property owners from a malevolent local zoning board.
See also
 Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church & School v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 482
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1987 in United States case law
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:History of Los Angeles County, California
Category:Evangelical Lutheran Church in America
Category:Angeles National Forest
Category:Summer camps in California
Category:Zoning in the United States
"""

From "First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti" ==> """
First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U.S. 765 (1978), is a U.S. constitutional law case which defined the free speech right of corporations for the first time. The United States Supreme Court held that corporations have a First Amendment right to make contributions to ballot initiative campaigns..   The ruling came in response to a Massachusetts law that prohibited corporate donations in ballot initiatives unless the corporation's interests were directly involved.
In 1976 several corporations, including the First National Bank of Boston, were barred from contributing to a Massachusetts referendum regarding tax policy and subsequently sued. The case was successfully appealed to the Supreme Court, which heard oral arguments in November 1977. On April 26, 1978, the Court ruled 5-4 against the Massachusetts law.
As a result of the ruling, states could no longer impose specific regulations on donations from corporations in ballot initiative campaigns. While the Bellotti decision did not directly affect federal law, it has been cited by other Supreme Court cases such as McConnell v. FEC and Citizens United v. FEC.
Background
Corporate funds and federal elections
Since the early 1900s, federal law has prohibited the use of corporate funds to influence federal elections.Greenwood, Daniel J. Encyclopedia of the Supreme Court of the United States, s.v. “First National Bank v. Bellotti, 435 U.S. 765 (1978). Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2008. In 1907, Congress passed the Tillman Act, prohibiting corporations and national banks from contributing to federal campaigns.18 U.S.C. Sec. 610. Act of January 26, 1907, 34 Stat. 864.“Turn of the Twentieth Century Timeline,” Central Connecticut State University, accessed 4/5/14.“Appendix 4: The Federal Election Campaign Laws: A Short History” , Federal Election Commission. Accessed 4/5/14. Forty years later, the Taft-Hartley Act banned direct election contributions by labor unions and corporations to federal elections.Kirk Nahra, “Political Parties and the Campaign Finance Laws: Dilemmas, Concerns, and Opportunities,” Fordham Law Review, vol. 56, issue 1 (1987).
In 1971, the Federal Election Campaign Act (FECA) initiated sweeping reforms by requiring full reporting of contributions to federal elections.“The FEC and the Federal Campaign Finance Law,” Federal Election Commission. February 2004.Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971. 2 U.S.C § 431. In 1974, amendments to the FECA created the Federal Election Commission and enacted stricter limits on election contributions and expenditures.
That same year, Buckley v. Valeo challenged the 1974 FECA amendments in the U.S. Supreme Court on the grounds that they violated the First Amendment's guarantees of free speech.Buckley v. Valeo. 424 U.S. 1 (1976). The Court, introducing the concept of spending money as a form of unrestricted political speech, overturned limits on campaign expenditures.”Litigation CCAB” , Federal Election Commission. Accessed 4/5/14.  However, it upheld contribution limits because such limits served the government's interest in reducing election corruption.
Before the Massachusetts Supreme Court
In 1976, Massachusetts passed Massachusetts General Laws ch. 55 § 8,, Annotated Laws of Massachusetts GL ch. 55 § 8. which expanded the 1974 FECA amendment's prohibitions. The new criminal statute disallowed the use of "corporate funds to purchase advertising to influence the outcome of referendum elections, unless the corporation's business interests were directly involved."
That same year, Massachusetts proposed a constitutional amendment (to be voted upon in a referendum election) modifying income tax laws. The First National Bank of Boston, New England Merchants National Bank, the Gillette Co., Digital Equipment Corp., and Wyman-Gordon claimed that this amendment affected their business interests and that they should be allowed to spend corporate funds on relevant advertising.First Nat. Bank of Bos. v. Attorney Gen., 371 Mass. 773, 359 N.E.2d 1262 (1977).  The Massachusetts Attorney General's Office, applying Massachusetts General Laws. ch. 55 § 8, disagreed.
In response, the corporations sued Massachusetts Attorney General Francis Bellotti, the Coalition for Tax Reform, and United Peoples, Inc., contending that Massachusetts General Law ch. 55 § 8 was unconstitutional because it violated their right to free speech. The Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts heard The First National Bank of Boston & others v. Attorney General & others on June 8, 1976.
On February 1, 1977, the Massachusetts Supreme Court ruled in favor of the defendants, stating that Massachusetts General Laws ch. 55 § 8 was constitutionally applied because of a failure to find a material effect on the corporations' business interests.  The plaintiffs appealed the decision to the United States Supreme Court."Syllabus, First Nat’l Bank of Boston v. Bellotti – 435 U.S. 765 (1978).” Justia. Accessed 3/22/14.
Before the Supreme Court
The U.S. Supreme Court heard First National Bank of Boston et al. v. Bellotti, Attorney General of Massachusetts, on November 9, 1977.
Francis H. Fox presented the oral arguments on behalf the appellant, the First National Bank of Boston in representation of national banking associations and business corporations.Lexis Summary. 435 U.S. 765; 98 S. Ct. 1407; 55 L. Ed. 2d 707; 1978 U.S. LEXIS 83; 3 Media L. Rep. 2105. Date Accessed: 2014/03/23."First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti" The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law, accessed April 5, 2014. E. Susan Garsh joined him on the briefs. Massachusetts Assistant Attorney General Thomas R. Kiley spoke during oral argument for the appellee.  The Attorney General Francis X. Bellotti and Assistant Attorney General Stephen Schultz joined him on the brief.  Main issues addressed during oral arguments included corporations as persons, the scope of freedom of speech, and the power of the states.
The Associated Industries of Massachusetts, Inc. and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce filed briefs of amici curiae supporting a reversal of the lower courts' ruling.Lexis Summary. 430 U.S. 964; 97 S. Ct. 1642; 52 L. Ed. 2d 354; 1977 U.S. LEXIS 1460. Date Accessed: 2014/03/23.Lexis Summary. 429 U.S. 876; 97 S. Ct. 199; 50 L. Ed. 2d 159; 1976 U.S. LEXIS 3046. Date Accessed: 2014/03/23. The Federal Election Commission filed briefs of amici curiae supporting an affirmation of the constitutionality of the statue.  The State of Montana, the New England Council, and the Pacific Legal Foundation also filed amicus briefs.Lexis Summary. 431 U.S. 963; 97 S. Ct. 2918; 53 L. Ed. 2d 1058; 1977 U.S. LEXIS 2336. Date Accessed: 2014/03/23. The Northeastern Legal Foundation's motion to file a brief was denied.Lexis Summary. 432 U.S. 904; 97 S. Ct. 2947; 53 L. Ed. 2d 1076; 1977 U.S. LEXIS 2471. Date Accessed: 2014/03/23.
Opinions of the Court
Overview
The Supreme Court issued its decision on April 26, 1978, with a 5-to-4 majority vote in favor of the First National Bank of Boston.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 766. Justice Powell delivered the majority opinion and was joined by Justices Stewart, Blackmun, and Stevens, with Burger writing a separate concurring opinion. Justice White was joined by Justices Brennan and Marshall in his dissent, with Justice Rehnquist issuing a separate dissent.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 767. The Supreme Court ruled that corporations have First Amendment speech protections extending beyond material commercial interests, reversing the decision made by the Massachusetts Supreme Court.59 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1227 (1985-1986). Free Speech and Corporate Freedom: A Comment on First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti; Schneider, Carl E. Page 1227.
Majority opinion
In opinion written by Justice Powell, the court held: 
 the case was not moot because it was one of a category of cases that is "capable of repetition, yet evading review;"
 the statute was unconstitutional and the argument that a corporation's speech regarding issues not relevant to the business loses its First Amendment protection is invalid.
In its ruling, the Court first considered whether the case was moot.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 774. The constitutional amendment that the appellants had opposed had been defeated by the time the case came to the Court's attention. The Court used the scrutiny described in Weinstein v. Bradford in its determination that the case was not, in fact, moot.."First Amendment--Corporate Free Speech", Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology 69 (1978): 545, accessed April 20, 2014. The Court's rationale was twofold: first, the interval between the amendment's proposal and its referendum was too short for complete judicial review to have occurred; and second, the Court found that there was a reasonable expectation that the appellants would be adversely affected by the statute again.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 774-775.
Then, the Supreme Court held that the Massachusetts statute in question violated corporate speech rights protected under the First Amendment.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 786-787. The majority wrote that "commercial speech is accorded some constitutional protection not so much because it pertains to the seller's business as because it furthers the societal interest in the 'free flow of commercial information.'"Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 766.
The majority opinion asserted that "the inherent worth of the speech in terms of its capacity for informing the public does not depend upon the identity of its source, whether corporation, association, union, or individual." In deciding the case, the Court rejected the argument that the Fourteenth Amendment did not apply to corporations.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 784. The Court overruled Pierce v. Society of Sisters, which stated that corporations "cannot claim for themselves the liberty which the Fourteenth Amendment guarantees," declaring the decision to be "untenable under decisions of this Court".. Instead, the Court asserted that the Due Process Clause extends freedom of speech and other First Amendment liberties to corporate entities.1979 Utah L. Rev. 98 (1979) Prohibition of Corporate Political Expenditures: The Effects of First National Bank v. Bellotti; Green, Thomas B. Page 98.
The majority rejected the argument that the First Amendment rights of a corporation derive purely from their business and property interests.67 Geo. L. J. 1347 (1978-1979). O'Kelley, Charles R. Jr. Constitutional Rights of Corporations Revisited: Social and Political Expression and the Corporation after First National Bank v. Bellotti, The. Pages 1370-1371. Furthermore, the Court asserted that "the Court's decisions involving corporations in the business of communication or entertainment are based not only on the role of the First Amendment in fostering individual self-expression, but also on its role in affording the public access to discussion, debate, and the dissemination of information and ideas".Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 783. The Supreme Court cited Virginia State Board of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, in which the Court held that whether "the advertiser's interest in a commercial advertisement is purely economic does not disqualify him from protection under the First and Fourteenth Amendments. Both the individual consumer and society in general may have strong interests in the free flow of commercial information.". The Court found that there was no evidence that corporations lost speech protections if their speech did not materially affect the business of the corporation.59 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1227 (1985-1986), at 1229. Thus, the Court held the statute violated the First Amendment rights of the corporation.
The Court also rejected the claim that the statute was "necessitated by governmental interests of the highest order".Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 785. Massachusetts had argued that the statute was necessary for two reasons: first, that the State had a compelling interest in maintaining the role of the individual in the electoral process and that corporate speech would diminish this; and secondly, to protect shareholders of the corporations whose views might differ from those of the corporate management.29 Case W. Res. L. Rev. 813 (1978-1979) Corporate Spending on State and Local Referendums: First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti; Hart, Gary; Shore, William. Page 813. The majority asserted that neither of these justifications was apparent in the statute.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 788. Furthermore, the decision found that there was insufficient evidence that the law was necessary to satisfy the compelling state interest test.59 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1227 (1985-1986), at 1229 As to the latter claim, the Court held that the statute was both underinclusive and overinclusive in regards to shareholders interests.67 Geo. L. J. 1347 (1978-1979), at 1371
Concurrence
Chief Justice Burger, wrote a separate concurring opinion in order "to raise some questions likely to arise in this area in the future."Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 795 (Burger, C.J., concurring).
Burger wrote to emphasize the difficulty in differentiating media corporations from other corporate entities.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 796. He also pointed out that media conglomerates were a more likely threat than the appellants to the public interests raised by the state of Massachusetts, due to their immense influence.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 796-797. Thus, Burger concluded that "no factual distinction has been identified as yet that would justify government restraints on the right of appellants to express their views without, at the same time, opening the door to similar restraints on media conglomerates with their vastly greater influence".Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 797. Burger pointed out that as newspapers merged with global media conglomerates, separating corporations from media had become untenable. Therefore, Burger argued, restrictions on speech such as the Massachusetts statute necessitated a great deal of caution.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 802. "In short," Burger wrote, "the First Amendment does not 'belong' to any definable category of persons or entities: it belongs to all who exercise its freedoms."
Dissents
A dissenting opinion by Justice White was joined by Justices Brennan and Marshall. In the dissent, White disagreed with the Court's opinion that the statute abridges the speech rights of corporations.67 Ky. L.J. 75 (1978-1979) Corporate Political Speech: The Effect of First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti upon Statutory Limitations on Corporate Referendum Spending; Fox, Francis H. Page 83. "By holding that Massachusetts may not prohibit corporate expenditures or contributions made in connection with referendums involving issues having no material connection with the corporate business," White wrote, "the Court not only invalidates a statute which has been on the books in one form or another for many years, but also casts considerable doubt upon the constitutionality of legislation passed by some 31 States restricting corporate political activity."Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 803 (White, J., dissenting).
White wrote that the Court had erred in not recognizing that the "state's regulatory interests ... were themselves derived from the First Amendment." Specifically, White claimed that "the state had a first amendment interest in 'assuring that shareholders are not compelled to support and financially further beliefs with which they disagree.'"59 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1227 (1985-1986), at 1231 The only purpose uniting all shareholders, White argued, is to make a profit.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 805. Any issue not related to business interests could diverge from the interests of individual shareholders.
White also argued that states have the ability to prevent threats from corporate entities to the political process.Bellotti, 435 U. S.  at 809. "The State need not permit its own creation to consume it," White wrote. White noted that the nation had a history of recognizing the need to limit the influence of corporations in the political process, citing United States v. Auto Workers, in which the Court held that the primary purpose of a federal act was "to avoid the deleterious influences on federal elections resulting from the use of money by those who exercise control over large aggregations of capital.".
Justice Rehnquist, in a separate dissent, sharply criticized the Court's decision.13 J. Contemp. L. 221 (1987) Populist of the Adversary Society: The Jurisprudence of Justice Rehnquist, The; Maveety, Nancy. Page 237. Rehnquist pointed out that, while the issue of whether corporations had the right to voice their opinions on political issues was new to the Court, the constitutional permissibility of restrictions on such speech had been considered and approved by Congress and over thirty states.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 823. He argued that this consensus by so many governmental institutionals should not be ignored in the Court's decision.
Furthermore, Rehnquist claimed that corporate speech is only protected such as it connects to commercial interests.22 Ariz. L. Rev. 427 (1980) PACing the Burger Court: The Corporate Right to Speak and the Public Right to Hear after First National Bank v. Bellotti; Kiley, Thomas R. Page 436. Rehnquist concluded, "although the Court has never explicitly recognized a corporation's right of commercial speech, such a right might be considered necessarily incidental to the business of a commercial corporation. It cannot be so readily concluded that the right of political expression is equally necessary to carry out the functions of a corporation organized for commercial purposes."Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 825.
Rehnquist asserted that corporate liberties did not include the right to influence and engage in political issues:
I can see no basis for concluding that the liberty of a corporation to engage in political activity with regard to matters having no material effect on its business is necessarily incidental to the purposes for which the Commonwealth permitted these corporations to be organized or admitted within its boundaries. Nor can I disagree with the Supreme Judicial Court's factual finding that no such effect has been shown by these appellants. Because the statute as construed provides at least as much protection as the Fourteenth Amendment requires, I believe it is constitutionally valid.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 828.
From this conclusion, Rehnquist argued that the dissemination of information to the public is not diminished by restrictions on corporate speech on political topics. Therefore, in his view, "all natural persons ... remain as free as before to engage in political activity."
Further Supreme Court rulings
In 1990, the Supreme Court in Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce upheld a state law prohibiting corporate independent expenditures, reasoning that the "government has a strong interest in preventing the wealth of corporations from distorting elections for public office."Mayer, L. "Breaching a Leaking Dam?: Corporate Money and Elections." Charleston School of Law. 2009. LexisNexis 105. Date Accessed: 2014/04/17. The 2003, Supreme Court majority in McConnell v. Federal Election Commission "relied on Austin" to preserve new federal campaign restrictions of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act (2002).Miller, P. "Shareholder Rights: Citizens United and Delaware Corporate Governance Law." Journal of Law & Politics, Inc. 2012. LexisNexis 56. Date Accessed: 2014/04/17. In 2010, the Supreme Court in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission overturned Austin and returned to the principle established in Buckley and Bellotti that "the First Amendment does not allow political speech restrictions based on a speaker's corporate identity.".
Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce
In 1990, the Supreme Court ruled in Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce that even though the First Amendment did protect corporate expression, restrictions on independent expenditure were justified due to the compelling interest to prevent corruption or the appearance of corruption in campaigns.Geary, Sean T. "Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce: Freedom of Expression Issues Implicated by the Government Regulation of Corporate Political Expenditures in Candidate Elections. Law Review, Boston University. 1992. LexisNexis 828. Date Accessed: 2014/03/21. The Austin majority quoted Bellotti in agreeing that political speech did not lose First Amendment protection "merely because the speaker is a corporation."Charles D. Watts Jr., “Corporate Legal Theory under the First Amendment: Bellotti and Austin”, University of Miami Law Review 46 (1991): 369, accessed April 20, 2014.Geary, Sean T. "Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce: Freedom of Expression Issues Implicated by the Government Regulation of Corporate Political Expenditures in Candidate Elections. Law Review, Boston University. 1992. LexisNexis 831. Date Accessed: 2014/03/21Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 777. However, the Austin majority held that the Michigan Chamber of Commerce, a non-profit corporation that wanted to publish a newspaper advertisement supporting a candidate, did not qualify for the non-profit exemption established in Federal Election Commission v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Inc (1986).Geary, Sean T. "Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce: Freedom of Expression Issues Implicated by the Government Regulation of Corporate Political Expenditures in Candidate Elections. Law Review, Boston University. 1992. LexisNexis 829. Date Accessed: 2014/03/21 The dissent in the Austin case cited the statement in Bellotti that "the legislature is constitutionally disqualified from dictating the subjects about which persons may speak and the speakers who may address a public issue."Austin, 494 U.S. at 698-699.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 784-785.Gerald Ashdown, “Controlling Campaign Spending and the New Corruption: Waiting for the Court”, Vanderbilt Law Review 44 (1991): 777, accessed April 20, 2014. The dissent found that Massachusetts's law discriminated on the basis of the speaker's identity, and argued that the precedents of the Supreme Court, such as Bellotti, condemn this type of censorship.First National Bank v. Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 784-786. Scholars agree that the Austin decision was inconsistent with precedent in that the Court had previously never upheld a statue that regulated corporate independent expenditure because of a state interest in preventing corruption.Lassman, P. "Breaching the Fortress Walls: Corporate Political Speech and Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce." Virginia Law Review. 1992. LexisNexis 782. Date Accessed: 2014/04/14.Shofield, M. "Muzzling Corporations: The Court Giveth and the Court Taketh Away a Corporation's "Fundamental Right" to Free Political Speech in Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce." Louisiana Law Review. 1991. LexisNexis 260. Date Accessed: 2014/04/14.Cytryn, M. "Defining the Specter of Corruption: Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce." Brooklyn Law Review. 1991. LexisNexis 940. Date Accessed: 2014/04/14.
McConnell v. Federal Election Commission
In 2002, the Supreme Court in McConnell v. Federal Election Commission upheld the two major provisions of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act, which were the bans on unrestricted "soft money" donations to political parties and on electioneering communications, which are defined as any broadcast that refers to a federal candidate and is aired within a designated time frame of that candidate's election.“McConnell v. Federal Election Commission.” Date Accessed: 2014/03/21.Clark, Michael. "Unleashing Electioneering: Analyzing the Court's Decision in Federal Election Commission v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc. Law Journal, Southern Illinois University. Fall 2008. LexisNexis 126. Date Accessed: 2014/03/21. The McConnell majority moved away from the Bellotti decision by allowing such restrictions on corporate donations.Thomas McCoy, “Understanding McConnell v. FEC and Its Implications for the Constitutional Protection of Corporate Speech”, DePaul Law Review 54 (2004): 1070, accessed April 20, 2014.. The majority accepted legislative judgment that corporate treasuries represent a threat of corruption when deployed directly in candidate elections."Kerr, R. "Subordinating the Economic to the Political: The Evolution of Corporate Speech Doctrine." Lawrence Erblaum Associates, Inc. 2005. Lexis Nexis 99. Date Accessed: 2014/04/06. The McConnell dissent characterized the Austin argument concerning the "corrosive and distorting effects" of corporations as the notion that corporations "will be able to convince voters on the correctness of their ideas."Austin, 494 U.S. at 659.McConnell, 540 U.S. at 273. The dissent argued that using this reasoning, simply "winning the marketplace of ideas" could be considered evidence of corruption. They argued that this conclusion opposed the First amendment, citing the statement from Bellotti that "the fact that advocacy may persuade the electorate is hardly a reason to suppress it."McConnell, 540 U.S. at 274.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 790.
Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission
In 2010, the Supreme Court in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission overturned Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce (1990), portions of McConnell v. Federal Election Commission (2003), and Section 203 of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act (2002) that prohibited electioneering communications by corporations."The Supreme Court, 2009 Term: Comment: Citizens United v. FEC: Corporate Political Speech." 2010. LexisNexis 76. Date Accessed: 2014/04/06. The Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy described the reasoning of the Citizens majority as based on two propositions. The first was that the Court has recognized that "First Amendment protections extend to corporations," for which the Court cited Bellotti as an example.Citizens United, 558 U.S. at 313.Bellotti, 435 U.S. at 778. The Court "returned to the principle established in Buckley and Bellotti that the Government may not suppress political speech based on the speaker's corporate identity." The Court cited Bellotti in arguing that political speech is "indispensable to decision making in a democracy and [that] this is no less true because the speech comes from a corporation." The second proposition addressed contribution expenditure and corruption.G. Breanne. "Removing Corporate Campaign Finance Restrictions v. Federal Election Commission." Harvard Society for Law and Public Policy, Inc. 2011. LexisNexis 409. Date Accessed: 2014/04/06. The Court ruled that independent expenditure limits were unconstitutional because, unlike campaign contribution limits, they fail to "serve any substantial government interest in stemming the reality or appearance of corruption in the electoral process.". The Court argued, "Austin upheld a corporate independent expenditure restriction" by recognizing a "new governmental interest" in preventing corruption to "bypass Buckley and Bellotti." The Court rejected the anti-distortion reasoning argued in Austin and returned to the quid pro quo conception of corruption used in Buckley, stating that "independent expenditures, including those made by corporations, do not give rise to corruption or the appearance of corruption."G. Breanne. "Removing Corporate Campaign Finance Restrictions v. Federal Election Commission." Harvard Society for Law and Public Policy, Inc. 2011. LexisNexis 418. Date Accessed: 2014/04/06.Citizens United, 558 U.S. at 314. In overruling Austin, the Citizens majority insisted, "before Austin, the court had not allowed the exclusion of a class of speakers from general public dialogue."Kerr, R. "What Justice Powell and Adam Smith could have told the Citizens United Majority about Other People's Money." North Carolina Law Review Association. 2011. LexisNexis 226. Date Accessed: 2014/04/14.Citizens United, 558 U.S. at 341. The Court did concede that the Bellotti case "did not address the constitutionality" of bans on "corporate independent expenditures to support candidates." However, the court reasoned that such bans "would have been unconstitutional under Bellotti's central principle that the First Amendment does not allow political speech restrictions based on a speaker's corporate identity."
Effects on policy
Effects on legislation
While the First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti ruling set a precedent for allowing corporate spending in elections, it did not directly lead to federal campaign law changes because of its narrow focus.John Nichols and Robert W. McChesney, Dollarocracy (New York: Nation Books, 2013), 86.Robert L Kerr, "Subordinating the Economic to the Political: The Evolution of the Corporate Speech Doctrine," Communication Law & Policy 10 (2005): 63, accessed March 19, 2014. The Bellotti decision focused on state referendums, not the election of candidates.
In April 1978, when the Supreme Court decided First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 31 states had laws regulating corporate spending on ballot initiatives.Robert L Kerr, "Subordinating the Economic to the Political: The Evolution of the Corporate Speech Doctrine," Communication Law & Policy 10 (2005): 71, accessed March 19, 2014.Library of Congress, Analysis of Federal and state campaign finance law, summaries (Washington DC: Library of Congress, 1977).Allen K. Easley, "Buying Back the First Amendment: Regulation of Disproportionate Corporate Spending in Ballot Issue Campaigns" Georgia Law Review 17 (1983): 681. However, not all of these state laws were annulled by the Supreme Court ruling.  Universal caps on donations for ballot initiatives as well as specific bans aimed to prevent "undue" corporate influence on referendums were still considered constitutional.P Lansing and G.M. Sherman, “Evolution of the Supreme Court's Political Spending Doctrine: Restricting Corporate Contributions to Ballot Measure Campaigns after Citizens against Rent Control v. City of Berkeley California,” The Journal of Corporation Law 8 (1982): 96, accessed March 19, 2014. Of these 31 states, 18 of them, including Massachusetts, had laws that would be considered unconstitutional after the Bellotti decision.Warren Weaver Jr., “Justices, 5-4, Allow Corporate Spending for Issues on Ballot,” The New York Times, April 27, 1978, accessed March 17, 2014.
In the aftermath of Bellotti, several states changed their laws relating to spending on referendums.P Lansing and G.M. Sherman, “Evolution of the Supreme Court's Political Spending Doctrine: Restricting Corporate Contributions to Ballot Measure Campaigns after Citizens against Rent Control v. City of Berkeley California,”  The Journal of Corporation Law 8 (1982): 97, accessed March 19, 2014.  In 1981, Iowa's state legislature updated their campaign finance laws to state,
It is unlawful for any insurance company, savings and loan association, bank, and or corporation ... to contribute any money, property, labor, or thing of value, directly or indirectly, to any committee, or for the purpose of influencing the vote of any elector, except that such resources may be so expended in connection with a ballot issue, however all such expenditures are subject to the disclosure requirements of this chapter.Iowa Acts , Chapter 35, Section 14, Iowa Legislature (1981). 
Montana had previously banned all corporate donations for or against ballot issues.§23-4744, Revised Code of Montana (1947).  In October 1978, this law was overturned by the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit citing First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti.C&C Plywood Corporation v. Hanson, 583 F.2d 421 (9th Cir. 1978).
On December 23, 1986, the General Court of Massachusetts approved a series of changes to its campaign finance laws, and only then officially changed the law governing corporate spending on ballot initiatives.An Act Further Regulating Political Campaign Financing, Chapter 631, Section 5, General Court of Massachusetts (December 23, 1986), The State Library of Massachusetts DSpace.  In "An Act Further Regulating Political Campaign Financing," the General Court stated that they were "striking out" Chapter 55, Section 8, the law annulled by the Bellotti decision. Furthermore, a new §8 law was written that in part stated,
No person or persons, no political committee, and no person acting under the authority of a political committee, or in its behalf, other than a political committee organized on behalf of a ballot question campaign ... shall solicit or receive from such corporation or such holders of stock any gift, payment, expenditure, contribution or promise to give, pay, expend or contribute for any such purpose. 
Effects on referendums
Scholars are split on whether the First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti decision has had an overall effect on the ballot initiative process.  Some scholars believe that without any regulations on corporate spending on ballot initiatives, corporations have the potential to donate much more to these campaigns than individuals or citizen groups.Anthony Gierzynski, Money Rules (Oxford: Westview Press, 2000), 85.David R. Lagasse, “Undue Influence: Corporate Political Speech, Power and the Initiative Process,” Brooklyn Law Review 61 (1995):1349, accessed April 4, 2014.Reid Wilson, “Initiative Spending Booms Past $1 Billion as Corporations Sponsor Their Own Proposals,” The Washington Post, November 8, 2013, accessed March 18, 2014.  Some scholars maintain that this advantage gives corporations undue influence over referendum campaigns and policy outcomes.Thomas Stratmann, The Effectiveness of Money in Ballot Measure Campaigns,” Southern California Law Review 78 (2004): 104, accessed March 16, 2014.David S. Broder,Democracy derailed: initiative campaigns and the power of money (New York: Harcourt, 2000)Thomas E. Cronin, "'Direct Democracy: The Politics of Initiative, Referendum, and Recall' (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999), 109.
One such way corporations can use money to sway voters is through advertising and spreading information about propositions.Daniel H. Lowenstein, “Campaign Spending and Ballot Propositions: Recent Experience, Public Choice Theory and the First Amendment,” UCLA Law Review 29 (1982): 562, accessed April 4, 2014.David R. Lagasse, “Undue Influence: Corporate Political Speech, Power and the Initiative Process,” Brooklyn Law Review 61 (1995):1375, accessed April 4, 2014. For example, a California ballot initiative, Proposition 37 from 2012, attracted a disproportionately high level of spending from corporations.  The proposition would mandate that all foods containing genetically modified organisms would have to be labeled as such.  Corporations including Monsanto and DuPont spent $45 million against Prop 37 - five times more than the money spent by supporters of the proposition.Amy Westervelt, “With California Prop Defeated, GMO Labeling Proponents Look to Farm Bill,” Forbes, November 13, 2012, accessed March 18, 2014.Suzanne Goldenberg, “Prop 37: food companies spend $45m to defeat California GM label bill,” The Guardian, November 5, 2012, accessed April 4, 2014. The proposition was defeated by a margin of 51% to 48%,Statewide Summary by County, Propositions 30-40  California General Election Results, November 6, 2012, accessed April 4, 2014. a result that left many pro-Prop 37 groups blaming unfair financing as the reason for the defeat.“Right to Know Election Statement,”  Right to Know, 2013, accessed April 4, 2014.
Still, other political scientists disagree, believing that there is no definitive evidence that links corporation donations to referendum results.“What Impact Does Money Have in the Initiative Process?,”  Initiative & Referendum Institute at the University of Southern California, 2013, accessed March 19, 2014.Bernard Grofman, “Contribution and Spending Limits for Initiatives or Other Ballot Propositions,” Southern California Law Review 78 (2005): 103, accessed March 16, 2014.Allen K. Easley, "Buying Back the First Amendment: Regulation of Disproportionate Corporate Spending in Ballot Issue Campaigns" Georgia Law Review 17 (1983): 694.Thomas Stratmann, The Effectiveness of Money in Ballot Measure Campaigns,” Southern California Law Review 78 (2004): 101-124, accessed March 16, 2014. For example, the campaign around California's Proposition 188, a ballot initiative aimed at lifting bans on smoking,“Decision '94 / Special Guide to California's Elections: Propositions: 188: Regulates Smoking Statewide: What It Is?,” Los Angeles Times, October 20, 1994, accessed March 19, 2014.  is another example of unequal spending between corporations and others.  Businesses spent over $19,000,000 in favor of Prop 188, while non-businesses spent less than $2,000,000 in opposition.Dan Morain, “California Elections : The Propositions : Funds Fuel Prop. 187 Fight; Tobacco Gives Millions to Prop. 188,” The Los Angeles Times, October 29, 1994, accessed April 5, 2014.Anthony Gierzynski, Money Rules (Oxford: Westview Press, 2000), 86.   Nevertheless, in this case, voters ultimately voted against Proposition 188.Dan Morain and Virginia Ellis, "California Elections / Propositions: Voters Approve 'Three Strikes' Law, Reject Smoking Measure: Proposal for government-run health care system, gasoline tax to fund rail projects are also defeated," The Los Angeles Times, November 9, 1994, accessed April 5, 2014.
Similarly, the gambling industry in California has spent tens of millions of dollars since 1912 on referendums regarding gambling rules.  However, only 25% of the referendums they have supported monetarily have passed.
Support and criticism
First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti (1978), referred to by Linda Greenhouse as "the most important Supreme Court case no one's ever heard of," did not elicit a very strong reaction from the media and the public.“What's the Most Important Supreme Court Case No One's Ever Heard Of?”, The Atlantic, last modified April 24, 2013, accessed March 19, 2014, https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2013/05/the-big-question/309290/.59 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1232 (1985-1986) Free Speech and Corporate Freedom: A Comment on First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti; Schneider, Carl E. Most of the discourse pertaining to the case relates to the decision's effects on the role of money in politics and corporate rights.
Support
Those who support the Bellotti decision saw it as a culmination of constitutional thinking on the issue of corporate political speech.67 Ky. L.J. 75 (1978-1979) Corporate Political Speech: The Effect of First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti upon Statutory Limitations on Corporate Referendum Spending; Fox, Francis H.16 Tulsa L.J. 600 (1980-1981) Consolidated Edison and Bellotti: First Amendment Protection of Corporate Political Speech; Prentice, Robert A These scholars and lawyers praise the ruling for treating corporate speech as equal as individual speech and thus increasing the information provided to voters during elections.16 Tulsa L.J. 600 (1980-1981) Consolidated Edison and Bellotti: First Amendment Protection of Corporate Political Speech; Prentice, Robert A
According supporters, there is a long history of legislative and judicial decisions that justifies the Bellotti decision. While pre-1900 Supreme Courts believed that corporations did not deserve any protection under the First Amendment, by 1970 some lower courts were beginning to recognize First Amendment protection to "corporate speech." Lawyer Robert Prentice stated that First Amendment protection for corporations has worked its way into the decisions of the Supreme Court since the 1940s, in cases such as Valentine v. Chrestensen (1942), Pittsburgh Press Co. v. Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations (1973) and Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council (1976). From 1973 to Chief Justice Burger's departure in 1986, "the Burger Court ... invalidated every commercial speech ban considered," building up precedents for the Bellotti decision.
Supporters also praise the increase in discourse and available surrounding information about ballot initiatives resulting from the Bellotti decision.67 Ky. L.J. 75 (1978-1979) Corporate Political Speech: The Effect of First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti upon Statutory Limitations on Corporate Referendum Spending; Fox, Francis H.17 Ga. L. Rev. 677 (1982-1983) Buying Back the First Amendment: Regulation of Disproportionate Corporate Spending in Ballot Issue Campaigns; Easley, Allen K. Lawyer Francis H. Fox wrote, "[the ruling] perceives that the First Amendment's purposes are better served by allowing the [free] use of means of communication than by enacting legislation designed to foster equality of access to those means."  Prentice also noted that the Court acted correctly by protecting the rights of listeners to hear all possible pertinent information. This is the "right to receive" doctrine, which interprets the First Amendment as protecting individuals' right to receive information as part of freedom of communication.16 Tulsa L.J. 600 (1980-1981) Consolidated Edison and Bellotti: First Amendment Protection of Corporate Political Speech; Prentice, Robert A
Criticisms
Critics condemned Bellotti for increasing the influx of corporate money into elections, claiming that this would drown out smaller voices and candidates.Tamara R. Piety, Commentary, Citizens United and the Threat to the Regulatory State , 109 Mich. L. Rev. First Impressions 16 (2010).George W Scofield “Bellotti - Corporations' Freedom of Speech” Louisiana Law Review 79 (1979); 1232, accessed March 19, 2014.Greenhouse, Linda, “Over the Cliff” The New York Times, August 24, 2011, accessed March 19, 2014. Academic George W. Scofield said that corporate speech unrelated to corporate property "becomes the purely personal views of corporate management [and is] undeserving of the constitutional protection afforded by Bellotti."George W Scofield “Bellotti - Corporations' Freedom of Speech” Louisiana Law Review 79 (1979); 1236, accessed March 19, 2014.
Former Judge for the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit J. Skelly Wright said that the rulings in both the First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti and Buckley v. Valeo cases have "given protection to the polluting effect of money in financial campaigns."Wright, J. Skelly. "Money and the Pollution of Politics: Is the First Amendment an Obstacle to Political Equality?." Columbia Law Review (1982): 609-645. Wright advocates for "one person, one vote," a concept that meshes with Scofield's concept of aligning the speech of a corporation and of the individuals composing it.George W Scofield “Bellotti - Corporations' Freedom of Speech” Louisiana Law Review 79 (1979); 1238, accessed March 19, 2014.
Some critics point out that commercial interests and public interests are not always aligned, and that investment from corporations for commercial interests can be detrimental to the formation of public opinion.Tamara R. Piety, Commentary,  Citizens United and the Threat to the Regulatory State, 109 Mich. L. Rev. First Impressions 16 (2010) In an article in The New York Times, Linda Greenhouse said, "the court's speech-protective instincts appear increasingly to serve a deregulatory agenda."
Additionally, scholar Carl E. Schneider wrote in the Southern California Law Review that the Court's opinion agreed with previous opinions on the topic of "legislature attempting to govern the political and social power of the business corporation."59 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1232 (1985-1986) Free Speech and Corporate Freedom: A Comment on First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti; Schneider, Carl E. Schneider writes that the Court misinterpreted the First Amendment and had "problems in understanding social reality."
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:United States elections case law
Category:Campaign finance in the United States
Category:Bank of America
"""

From "First Options of Chicago, Inc. v. Kaplan" ==> """
First Options of Chicago, Inc. v. Kaplan, 514 U.S. 938 (1995), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States on who decides whether a dispute is subject to arbitration, the courts or an arbitrator.
Background
Under the 1924 U.S. Federal Arbitration Act and subsequent Supreme Court rulings, there is a strong presumption in favor of arbitration, with the courts generally deferring to the opinions of an arbitrator. Deciding Who Decides Questions of Arbitrability: A Survey of American Law and a Comparative Perspective
This case arose out of disputes over a "workout" agreement, embodied in four documents, which governed the "working out" of debts to First Options of Chicago, Inc. incurred as a result of the October 1987 stock market crash  (and later losses) by Manuel Kaplan, his wife, and his wholly owned investment company, MK Investments, Inc. (MKI). First Options is a firm that clears stock trades on the Philadelphia Stock Exchange. When First Options' demands for payment went unsatisfied, it sought arbitration by a stock exchange panel. MKI, which had signed the only workout document containing an arbitration agreement, submitted to arbitration, but the Kaplans, who had not signed that document, filed objections with the panel, denying that their disagreement with First Options was arbitrable. The arbitrators decided that they had the power to rule on the dispute's merits and ruled in First Options' favor. The District Court confirmed the award, but the Third Circuit Court of Appeals reversed. The Third Circuit said that courts should independently decide whether an arbitration panel has jurisdiction over a dispute, and that it would apply ordinary standards of review when considering the District Court's denial of the Kaplan's' motion to vacate the arbitration award.
Supreme Court holdings
The Court unanimously agreed with the Third Circuit that arbitrability of the Kaplan—First Options dispute was subject to independent review by the courts. On the narrow question of whether the arbitrators or the courts have the primary power to decide whether the parties agreed to arbitrate a dispute's merits, the Court held that just as the arbitrability of the merits of a dispute depends upon whether the parties agreed to arbitrate that dispute, so the question "who has the primary power to decide arbitrability" turns upon whether the parties agreed to submit that question to arbitration. If so, then the court should defer to the arbitrator's arbitrability decision. If not, then the court should decide the question independently. These answers flow inexorably from the fact that arbitration is simply a matter of contract between the parties. Courts generally should apply ordinary state law principles governing contract formation in deciding whether such an agreement exists. However, courts should not assume that the parties agreed to arbitrate arbitrability unless there is "clear and unmistakable" evidence that they did so.
The Court also held that courts of appeals should apply ordinary standards when reviewing district court decisions upholding arbitration awards, i.e., accepting findings of fact that are not "clearly erroneous" but deciding questions of law de novo; they should not, in those circumstances, apply a special "abuse of discretion" standard. Syllabus, First Options Of Chicago, Inc. V. Kaplan Et Al. Supreme Court of the United States, No. 94-560. Argued March 22, 1995, Decided May 22, 1995
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 514
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United States securities case law
Category:1995 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Fisher v. University of Texas (2013)" ==> """
Fisher v. University of Texas, 570 U.S. 297 (2013), also known as Fisher I (to distinguish it from the 2016 case),. is a United States Supreme Court case concerning the affirmative action admissions policy of the University of Texas at Austin. The Supreme Court voided the lower appellate court's ruling in favor of the university and remanded the case, holding that the lower court had not applied the standard of strict scrutiny, articulated in Grutter v. Bollinger (2003) and Regents of the University of California v. Bakke (1978), to its admissions program. The Court's ruling in Fisher took Grutter and Bakke as given and did not directly revisit the constitutionality of using race as a factor in college admissions.Fisher v. Univ. of Tex., .
The suit, brought by undergraduate Abigail Fisher in 2008, asked that the Court declare the university's race-conscious admissions inconsistent with Grutter, which had in 2003 established that race had an appropriate but limited role in the admissions policies of public universities. While reasserting that any consideration of race must be "narrowly tailored", with Fisher the Court did not go on to overrule Grutter, a relief for political activists who feared that the Court would end affirmative action.
The United States District Court heard Fisher v. University of Texas in 2009 and upheld the legality of the university's admission policy in a summary judgment. The case was appealed to the Fifth Circuit which also ruled in the university's favor. The Supreme Court agreed on February 21, 2012, to hear the case. Justice Elena Kagan recused herself because she served as the Solicitor General when the Department of Justice filed an amicus curiae, or friend-of-the-court, brief in the Fisher case when it was pending in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. On June 24, 2013, the Fifth Circuit's decision was vacated, and the case remanded for further consideration in a 7–1 decision, with Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg dissenting. Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas filed concurring opinions.
Applying the Supreme Court's 2013 decision, the Fifth Circuit once again found for UT Austin in 2014.  Fisher again appealed the Fifth Circuit's decision, and in 2016 the Supreme Court upheld the lower court in a 4–3 decision.
 Background 
Plaintiffs Abigail Noel Fisher and Rachel Multer Michalewicz applied to the University of Texas at Austin in 2008 and were denied admission. The two women, both white, filed suit, alleging that the university had discriminated against them on the basis of their race in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. At the time that the initial lawsuit was filed, the University of Texas at Austin accepted students in the top 10% of each Texas high school's graduating class, regardless of their race; under Texas House Bill 588, 81% of 2008's freshman class were admitted under the plan. (Starting with the fall 2010 admission class, Senate Bill 175 adjusted this rule to the top 7 percent, but with no more than 75 percent of freshman slots filled under automatic admissions.)
Applicants who, like Fisher, failed to gain acceptance by automatic admissions can still gain admission by scoring highly in a process that evaluates their talents, leadership qualities, family circumstances, and race. Fisher had a grade point average of 3.59 (adjusted to a 4.0 scale) and was in the top 12% of her class at Stephen F. Austin High School. She scored 1180 on her SAT (measured on the old 1600-point scale, because UT Austin did not consider the writing section in its undergraduate admissions decision for the 2008 incoming freshman class). The 25th and 75th percentiles of the incoming class at UT-Austin were 1120 and 1370 respectively. She was involved in the orchestra and math competitions and volunteered at Habitat for Humanity.
During the case proceedings, Fisher enrolled at Louisiana State University, from which Fisher graduated in 2012 with a degree in finance. In 2011, Michalewicz withdrew from the case, leaving Fisher as the sole plaintiff.
 Lower courts 
In 2009, United States District Court judge Sam Sparks upheld the university's policy, finding that it meets the standards laid out in Grutter v. Bollinger. That decision was affirmed by a Fifth Circuit panel composed of judges Patrick Higginbotham, Carolyn Dineen King and Emilio M. Garza. In his ruling, Higginbotham wrote that the "ever-increasing number of minorities gaining admission under this 'Top Ten Percent Law' casts a shadow on the horizon to the otherwise-plain legality of the Grutter-like admissions program, the Law's own legal footing aside".Fisher v. University of Texas, 
A request for a full-court en banc hearing was denied by a 9–7 vote by circuit judges.Fisher v. University of Texas, 
 Original Supreme Court hearing 
In September 2011, lawyers representing Fisher filed petition seeking review from the Supreme Court.Petition for Certiorari Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin. Retrieved June 25, 2013. The plaintiff's legal team was assembled by the Project on Fair Representation, a Washington, D.C.-based legal defense fund active in attempts to overturn race-based laws, whose legal fees were paid by Donors Trust, a conservative donor-advised fund. On February 21, 2012, the court granted certiorari in Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin. Justice Elena Kagan recused herself from the case and did not participate in the court's discussions. Kagan's recusal was most likely due to her involvement with the case while she was Solicitor General.
The case was on the Supreme Court calendar for the term beginning in October 2012. There were concerns that if the Court overruled Grutter, affirmative action at public universities would end in the United States. Some argued that the result of such a ruling would decrease the number of black and Hispanic students admitted to American universities while increasing the proportion of white and Asian students.
 Amicus Briefs 
Amicus briefs were filed by Teach for America, the Asian American Legal Foundation, the Asian Pacific American Legal Center, the Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund, the California Association of Scholars and Center for Constitutional Jurisprudence, the Black Student Alliance at The University of Texas, the Mountain States Legal Foundation, the Pacific Legal Foundation, Peter Kirsanow, Stuart Taylor, Jr., the Louis D. Brandeis Center for Human Rights Under Law, and many others.
 Oral arguments 
On October 10, 2012, the Supreme Court heard oral arguments in the case. Bert Rein represented the petitioner, Gregory G. Garre, a former Solicitor General, represented the respondent, the university, and Solicitor General Donald Verrilli, Jr., presented the government's stance in support of the respondent.
During the beginning of the petitioner's argument, Justices Sotomayor and Ginsburg asked questions about whether the case was moot. Specifically, they were concerned with the university's arguments that Fisher would not have earned admission regardless of her race, that she had already graduated from college, and that she only named the $100 application fee as real damages. Scalia commented that the harm of racial discrimination alone created an active controversy under the Court's previous Equal Protection jurisprudence."Oral Argument Transcript", U.S. Supreme Court
Justices Scalia, Alito, and Roberts asked many questions about the definition of a "critical mass", which Grutter named as the central measure of diversity.  Scalia started calling it a "critical cloud" after the university's lawyer failed, upon multiple requests, to define the central measure of diversity. Chief Justice Roberts asked whether an applicant who was one-quarter or one-eighth Latino would be permitted by the university to check the "Latino" box.  Garre responded that the applicant was entitled to self-identify as any race, subject to discipline under the university's honor code, and that the university did not ever question that determination.
Legal analysts concurred that the process of oral argument indicated that a majority of the justices disliked the university's position.Nick DeSantis, "Early Reactions to Fisher v Texas Arguments", Chronicle of Higher Education, October 10, 2012.
 Opinions of the Court 
The opinion was issued on June 24, 2013.  In a 7–1 decision, the Court vacated and remanded the Fifth Circuit's ruling. Writing for the majority, Justice Kennedy concluded that the Fifth Circuit failed to apply strict scrutiny in its decision affirming the admissions policy. Instead, he wrote, the Fifth Circuit held that Fisher could only challenge "whether the University's decision to use race as an admissions factor 'was made in good faith.'  It presumed that the school had acted in good faith and gave petitioner the burden of rebutting that presumption".Fisher v. University of Texas, 570 U.S., (slip op., at 11). Kennedy argued that per the Grutter ruling, the burden of evidence primarily lies with the university "to prove that its admissions program is narrowly tailored to obtain the educational benefits of diversity".Fisher v. University of Texas, 570 U.S., (slip op., at 13).
Justice Scalia wrote a one-paragraph concurring opinion, stating that he still held the view that he first expressed in his concurring opinion in Grutter: "The Constitution proscribes government discrimination on the basis of race, and state-provided education is no exception".Casey Scott McKay, "Fishin' with Fisher: Determining the Depth of Deference Does Not Demand Damning Deference to A Dastardly Death", 83 Mississippi Law Journal 951 (2014). Because the petitioner did not ask to overturn the holding in Grutter, that there is a compelling evidence in the educational benefits of diversity to justify racial preferences in university admissions, he joined with the majority in full.Fisher v. University of Texas, 570 U.S., (Scalia, J., concurring slip op., at 1).
Justice Thomas wrote his own concurrence, stating his reasons for overturning Grutter, and ruled that the use of race in higher education admissions violated the Equal Protection Clause. Thomas concluded that Grutter was a radical departure from the Court's application of the strict scrutiny test. According to Justice Thomas, strict scrutiny had only been previously satisfied where the state actor was acting to protect national security or to remedy its own past discrimination.Fisher v. University of Texas, 570 U.S., (Thomas, J., concurring slip op., at 4–5).  He wrote that student body diversity was simply not important enough to override the presumption that race-based policies are unconstitutional.
Additionally, comparing such university admissions with desegregation, he wrote that "there is no principled distinction between the University's assertion that diversity yields educational benefits and the segregationists' assertion that segregation yielded those same benefits".Fisher v. University of Texas, 570 U.S., (Thomas, J., concurring slip op., at 12). He also wrote that he believed that such admissions programs may actually be more harmful: "Blacks and Hispanics admitted to the University as a result of racial discrimination are, on average, far less prepared than their white and Asian classmates...the University's discrimination does nothing to increase the number of blacks and Hispanics who have access to a college education generally...any blacks and Hispanics who likely would have excelled at less elite schools are placed in a position where underperformance is all but inevitable because they are less academically prepared than the white and Asian students with whom they must compete".Fisher v. University of Texas, 570 U. S., (Thomas, J., concurring slip op., at 17–18).
In her dissenting opinion, Justice Ginsburg explained her reasons for affirming the Fifth Circuit's ruling. Noting that the university's 10% plan admitted students regardless of their race, she argued that "the University's admissions policy flexibly considers race only as a 'factor of a factor of a factor of a factor' ... and is subject to periodic review to ensure that the consideration of race remains necessary and proper to achieve the University's educational objectives ... As I see it, the Court of Appeals has already completed that inquiry, and its judgment, trained on this Court's Bakke and Grutter pathmarkers, merits our approbation".Fisher v. University of Texas, 570 U.S., (Ginsburg, J., dissenting slip op., at 3–4).
 Back to the Fifth Circuit 
In June 2013, the Supreme Court ruled the Fifth Circuit had failed to apply strict scrutiny to the university's race-conscious admissions policy and sent the case back to the Fifth Circuit court. In November, the Fifth Circuit court heard oral arguments from both sides. In their questions during the arguments, Judges Patrick Higginbotham, Carolyn Dineen King, and Emilio M. Garza focused on the way the university defines "critical mass" as well as past attempts the university has made to increase minority enrollment.
On July 15, 2014, the Fifth Circuit announced its decision in favor of UT Austin, with Judge Garza dissenting. In its decision, the majority wrote, "It is equally settled that universities may use race as part of a holistic admissions program where it cannot otherwise achieve diversity."09-50822 5th Circuit Court of Appeals, (2014). Fisher sought a rehearing en banc with the Fifth Circuit which was denied on 12 of November in a 10–5 decision.09-50822 ON PETITION FOR REHEARING EN BANC 5th Circuit Court of Appeals, (2014). Fisher then filed a petition for certiorari to the Supreme Court.<ref>"Fisher II" reaches the Court. Scotusblog.com February 11th.</ref>
Return to the Supreme Court
On June 29, 2015, the Supreme Court announced that they would hear another challenge to UT Austin's admissions policy. The case was assigned docket number 14-981 and oral arguments were heard on December 9.  Legal analysts predict from the justices' questions that the Court would likely either remand the case again to the lower courts for additional fact-finding, strike down UT Austin's policy, or strike down affirmative action in college admissions nationwide.
During oral arguments, Justice Scalia raised the mismatching theory and questioned whether black students admitted to top-tier schools suffer because the courses are too difficult. Scalia commented that "There are those who contend that it does not benefit African Americans to get them into the University of Texas, where they do not do well, as opposed to having them go to a less-advanced school, a slower-track school where they do well. One of the briefs pointed out that most of the black scientists in this country don't come from schools like the University of Texas. They come from lesser schools where they do not feel that they're being pushed ahead in classes that are too fast for them." The comments led to outcry from the University of Texas's African American students, and spurred the creation of the Twitter hashtag #StayMadAbby. As Justice Antonin Scalia died on February 13, 2016, and Justice Elena Kagan recused herself, the case was decided by the seven remaining justices. On June 23, 2016, a 4–3 vote affirmed the Fifth Circuit's decision for UT Austin.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 570
 Fisher v. University of Texas'' (2016)
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
 Text of Fisher v. University of Texas from the Fifth Circuit
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit cases
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:University of Texas at Austin
Category:University and college admissions in the United States
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Fisher v. University of Texas (2016)" ==> """
Fisher v. University of Texas, 579 U.S. 365 (2016) (commonly referred to as Fisher II) is a United States Supreme Court case which held that the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit correctly found that the University of Texas at Austin's undergraduate admissions policy survived strict scrutiny, in accordance with Fisher v. University of Texas (2013), which ruled that strict scrutiny should be applied to determine the constitutionality of the University's race-conscious admissions policy.
 Background 
Plaintiffs Abigail Noel Fisher and Rachel Multer Michalewicz applied to the University of Texas at Austin in 2008 and were denied admission. The two women, both white, filed suit, alleging that the University had discriminated against them on the basis of their race in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. At the time that the initial lawsuit was filed, the University of Texas at Austin accepted students in the top 10% of each Texas high school's graduating class, regardless of their race; under Texas House Bill 588, 81% of 2008's freshman class were admitted under the plan. (Starting with the fall 2010 admission class, Senate Bill 175 adjusted this rule to the top 7 percent, but with no more than 75 percent of freshman slots filled under automatic admissions.)
Applicants who, like Fisher, failed to gain acceptance by automatic admissions can still gain admission by scoring highly in a process that evaluates their talents, leadership qualities, family circumstances, and race. Fisher had a grade point average of 3.59 (adjusted to a 4.0 scale) and was in the top 12% of her class at Stephen F. Austin High School. She scored 1180 on her SAT out of 1600, around the average SAT score for that year (1511 out of 2400, or 1100 out of 1600). The 25th and 75th percentiles of the incoming class at UT-Austin were 1120 and 1370. Fisher was involved in the orchestra and math competitions and volunteered at Habitat for Humanity.
In 2009, United States District Court judge Sam Sparks upheld the University's policy, finding that it meets the standards laid out in Grutter v. Bollinger. That decision was affirmed by a Fifth Circuit panel composed of judges Patrick Higginbotham, Carolyn Dineen King and Emilio M. Garza. In his ruling, Higginbotham wrote that the "ever-increasing number of minorities gaining admission under this 'Top Ten Percent Law' casts a shadow on the horizon to the otherwise-plain legality of the Grutter-like admissions program, the Law's own legal footing aside." A request for a full-court en banc hearing was denied by a 9–7 vote."Order on the petition for rehearing en banc", United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit.
In September 2011, lawyers representing Fisher filed petition seeking review from the Supreme Court.Petition for Certiorari Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin. Retrieved June 25, 2013. On February 21, 2012, the court granted certiorari in Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin. The Supreme Court heard the oral argument in October 2012, and handed down its decision on June 24, 2013. In a 7–1 decision, the Court vacated and remanded the Fifth Circuit's ruling. Writing for the majority, Justice Kennedy concluded that the Fifth Circuit failed to apply strict scrutiny in its decision affirming the admissions policy. Instead, he wrote, the Fifth Circuit held that Fisher could only challenge whether the University's decision to use race as an admissions factor was made in good faith. Justice Ginsburg was the lone dissenter, who argued in favor of affirming the judgment of the Fifth Circuit in its entirety.
On remand, in November, the Fifth Circuit court heard oral arguments from both sides. On July 15, 2014, the Fifth Circuit announced its decision in favor of UT Austin, with Judge Garza dissenting. Fisher sought a rehearing en banc with the Fifth Circuit which was denied on November 12, 2014, in a 10–5 decision.09-50822 ON PETITION FOR REHEARING EN BANC 5th Circuit Court of Appeals, (2014). Fisher then filed a petition for certiorari to the Supreme Court."Fisher II" reaches the Court. Scotusblog.com February 11th. The Supreme Court again agreed to hear the case on June 29, 2015, to decide whether the Fifth Circuit's determination that the University of Texas at Austin's use of racial preferences passed strict scrutiny and can be sustained. Justice Elena Kagan again recused herself from this case due to her prior involvement as Solicitor General.
Oral argument
On June 29, 2015, the Supreme Court granted Fisher's second challenge on UT Austin's admissions policy. The case was assigned docket number 14-981 and oral arguments were heard on December 9. Legal analysts predicted from the justices' questions that the Court would likely either remand the case again to the lower courts for additional fact-finding, strike down UT Austin's policy, or strike down affirmative action in college admissions nationwide.
During oral arguments, Justice Scalia raised the mismatching theory and questioned whether black students admitted to top-tier schools suffer because the courses are too difficult. Scalia commented: "There are those who contend that it does not benefit African Americans to get them into the University of Texas, where they do not do well, as opposed to having them go to a less-advanced school, a slower-track school where they do well. One of the briefs pointed out that most of the black scientists in this country don't come from schools like the University of Texas. They come from lesser schools where they do not feel that they're being pushed ahead in classes that are too fast for them." The comments led to outcry from the University of Texas's African American students, and spurred the creation of the Twitter hashtag #StayMadAbby. As Justice Antonin Scalia died on February 13, 2016, and Justice Elena Kagan had recused herself, the case was decided by the seven remaining justices.
Decision
Fisher II was decided by a 4-3 decision (Elena Kagan had recused herself due to prior involvement, while Antonin Scalia died shortly before the rendering, although he opined on the case publicly). The majority opinion was authored by Justice Kennedy and joined by Justices Ginsburg, Breyer, and Sotomayor. The majority upheld the lower court.
The opinion summarized that Fisher I set three controlling principles: strict scrutiny of affirmative-action admissions processes, judicial deference to reasoned explanations of the decision to pursue student body diversity, and no judicial deference for the determination of whether the use of race in admissions processes is narrowly tailored. It then noted that the University of Texas' combined Top Ten Percent-holistic admission policy is unique and data on resulting diversity was limited; however, it noted that the university should regularly evaluate available data and "tailor its approach in light of changing circumstances, ensuring that race plays no greater role than is necessary to meet its compelling interest."
The Court refused the petitioner's four arguments against the admissions policy. First, the Court upheld that the university's rationale for diversity-associated goals as "sufficiently measurable to permit judicial scrutiny of the policies adopted to reach them," despite a lack of a numerical quota. The goals that the Court affirmed as sufficiently measurable included the "destruction of stereotypes," promotion of "cross-racial understanding," preparation of students for "an increasingly diverse workforce and society," and cultivation of "leaders with legitimacy in the eyes of the citizenry." Second, the court found that the university presented sufficient evidence to show that in the seven years between the Hopwood decision and the implementation of the combined academic-holistic admissions process, race-neutral policies and increased outreach efforts were insufficient to achieve these goals. Third, the court found that "consideration of race has had a meaningful, if still limited, effect on the diversity of the University's freshman class," and that such a limited effect "should be a hallmark of narrow tailoring, not evidence of unconstitutionality." Finally, the court found that the petitioner failed "to offer any meaningful way in which the University could have improved upon" its prior race-neutral efforts to achieve diversity-associated goals, including expanding the Top Ten Percent rule, which would leave, as quoted from the Grutter decision, "a gap in an admissions process seeking to create the multidimensional diversity" envisioned by the Bakke decision.
In conclusion, the majority reiterated that the University has an ongoing obligation to use available data "to assess whether changing demographics have undermined the need for a race-conscious policy; and to identify the effects, both positive and negative, of the affirmative-action measures it deems necessary."
In a lengthy dissent joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Thomas, Justice Alito wrote that the university's stated interests in diversity were not sufficiently measurable and upon review were "shifting" as compared to those from Fisher I, "unpersuasive, and, at times, less than candid." Though Alito noted that the articulated goals were "laudable," he wrote that they were "not concrete or precise," and "offer[ed] no limiting principle for the use of racial preferences." Alito questioned how "a court ever be able to determine whether stereotypes have been adequately destroyed" or "whether cross-racial understanding has been adequately achieved[.]" He further noted that "[i]f a university can justify racial discrimination simply by having a few employees opine that racial preferences are necessary to accomplish these nebulous goals, . . . then the narrow tailoring inquiry [of strict scrutiny] is meaningless. Courts will [effectively] be required to defer to the judgment of university administrators, and affirmative-action policies will be completely insulated from judicial review."
Additionally, Alito reiterated the circuit court dissent's claim that the Circuit Court majority believed that automatically admitted minority students were "somehow more homogeneous, less dynamic, and more undesirably stereotypical than those admitted under holistic review."
Justice Thomas also authored a dissent. In this dissent, he reiterated the thoughts expressed in his concurrence in Fisher I, namely that "a State's use of race in higher education admissions decisions is categorically prohibited by the Equal Protection Clause."
 Analysis 
Lauren Cyr of Clark University writes that while the court's decision ultimately upheld the university's race-conscious policies, it also rejected the possibility of using such policies to redress past racial discrimination; in doing so, the court affirmed earlier rulings that oriented affirmative action away from ideas of social justice and instead toward promoting multiculturalism. Cyr writes that Fisher's arguments "revived right-wing challenges to affirmative action" by "echoing long-standing assertions of 'reverse discrimination' and 'reverse racism.
 References 
External links
SCOTUSBlog page on the case
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit cases
Category:University of Texas at Austin
Category:University and college admissions in the United States
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Fiske v. Kansas" ==> """
Fiske v. Kansas, 274 U.S. 380 (1927), was a United States Supreme Court Case that was first argued May 3, 1926 and finally decided May 16, 1927..
Background
The case began when 26-year-old labor organizer Harold B. Fiske, a Clinton, Washington native, was arrested after being caught with union literature which proclaimed the preamble of the Industrial Workers of the World:
That the working class and the employing class have nothing in common, and that there can be no peace so long as hunger and want are found among millions of working people and the few who make up the employing class have all the good things of life. Between these two classes a struggle must go on until the workers of the world organize as a class, take possession of the earth and the machinery of production and abolish the wage system. Instead of the conservative motto, 'A fair day's wages for a fair day's work,' we must inscribe on our banner the revolutionary watchword, 'Abolition of the wage system.' By organizing industrially we are forming the structure of the new society within the shell of the old.
A Kansas statute defined "criminal syndicalism" as "the doctrine which advocates crime, physical violence, arson, destruction of property, sabotage, or other unlawful acts or methods, as a means of accomplishing or effecting industrial or political ends, or as a means of effecting industrial or political revolution, or for profit . . ." The law was applied by a state court and was charged if the accused in some fashion held these views and formed a group of followers with a similar intent.  Fiske was tried and convicted of violating this act, and the judgement was upheld in the Supreme Court of Kansas.  He then appealed to the Federal Supreme Court where his case was heard.
Trial
The federal question was whether the Syndicalism Act as applied in this case was repugnant to the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The state offered no evidence as to the true beliefs and practices of Fiske and his organization. Fiske claimed that his organization in no way sought to bring about industrial change by illegal or criminal means.
The state of Kansas could prove neither that Fiske had any actual or imminent intent to illegally change the economic structure of the United States nor that he intended to overthrow the US government. Fiske's words were thus protected by the First Amendment and so could not be barred.
Decision
The Syndicalism Act was called "an arbitrary and unreasonable exercise of the police power of the State." The law, applied as it had, was found to be a violation of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The judgement of the state court was reversed, and Fiske was found to be not in violation of any law.
Importance
This court decision further solidified the importance of the Due Process Clause by ensuring that the state recognize all the legal rights of a person and prevents the government from violating rights without a justifiable and pressing reason to do so. The case would also reinforce the "imminent lawless action" clause of Brandenburg v. Ohio in the future as well as other court cases, which ruled that commitment and imminent intent to act upon the plans was needed to convict someone of a similar criminal violation such as in this case. The case was seen as a victory for proponents of a stronger definition of the First Amendment and protected speech.
References
Further reading
 "The Wobblies and Fiske v. Kansas: Victory Amidst Disintegration", Richard C. Cortner, Kansas History, Spring 1981, p. 30-38
External links
Category:Illegal speech in the United States
Category:Industrial Workers of the World in the United States
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:1927 in United States case law
Category:History of the Industrial Workers of the World
"""

From "Fitzgerald v. Barnstable School Committee" ==> """
Fitzgerald v. Barnstable School Committee, 555 U.S. 246 (2009), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that parents could sue a school committee under grounds of the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment..
 Background 
During the 2000-01 school year, Jacqueline Fitzgerald, a kindergartener at Hyannis West Elementary School in the Barnstable School District was coerced by a third-grader, to lift her dress up when she rode the public school bus to school. In February 2001, Fitzgerald told her parents about the incidents on the bus, and her parents contacted the school. The school identified two kindergarten students who corroborated Fitzgerald's account of the harassment, but the school's principal, Fredrick Scully, informed the Fitzgeralds the school would not take action.
The Fitzgeralds contacted the Barnstable Police Department to investigate the matter, but the investigator determined there were insufficient evidence to bring criminal charges.http://oyez.com/cases/2000-2009/2008/2008_07_1125
In March 2001, the Fitzgeralds made a written request for a bus monitor, the separation of the children with disciplinary problems and the kindergarten students, and the removal of the third-grader from the bus. The superintendent of the Barnstable School District denied the request.  The Fitzgeralds alleged that the teachers at Hyannis West Elementary School were not properly informed of the harassment and did not separate their daughter from the harasser.
The Fitzgeralds filed suit alleging the school's response to the allegations of sexual harassment was inadequate. The complaint alleged violations of Title IX and 42 U.S.C. § 1983, and various state claims.  The District Court of the District of Massachusetts dismissed the state claims and the § 1983 claim under Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) for a failure to state a claim. Subsequently, the district court granted summary judgment on the Title IX claim.  The First Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the judgment of the district court and held that Title IX precluded § 1983 claims based on equal protection.  The First Circuit stated that five conditions must be met for a plaintiff to succeed for a Title IX violation: (1) the institution is a recipient of federal funding, (2) severe, pervasive, and objectively offensive harassment occurred, (3) the harassment denied the student of educational opportunities or benefits, (4) the institution had actual knowledge of the harassment, and (5) the institution's deliberate indifference caused the student to be subjected to the harassment.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a unanimous decision the United States Supreme Court held Title IX does not preclude Section 1983 equal protection claims. Justice Samuel Alito wrote the opinion.  The Court reversed the First Circuit's decision which found Title IX provided a comprehensive remedial scheme that precluded the use of Section 1983 claims.  The decision resolved a split in the circuits, and abrogated the Second, Third, and Seventh Circuits opinions in Bruneau v. South Kortright Central School District, Waid v. Merrill Area Public Schools, and Pfeiffer v. Marion Center Area School District respectively. Fitzgerald affirmed the judgment of the Sixth, Eighth, and Tenth Circuits in Communities for Equity v. Michigan High School, Crawford v. Davis, and Seamons v. Snow respectively.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 555
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Second Enforcement Act of 1871 case law
Category:United States education case law
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:2009 in education
Category:Education in Barnstable County, Massachusetts
Category:Sexual harassment in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Barnstable, Massachusetts
Category:Harassment case law
"""

From "Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer" ==> """
Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer, 427 U.S. 445 (1976), was a United States Supreme Court decision that determined that the U.S. Congress has the power to abrogate the Eleventh Amendment sovereign immunity of the states, if this is done pursuant to its Fourteenth Amendment power to enforce upon the states the guarantees of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Background
In 1972, Congress amended Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. § 2000e, Chapter 21, Subchapter VI) to allow individuals to sue state governments for money damages for discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. The plaintiffs, a group of male retirees, sued the State of Connecticut for sex discrimination against them in its retirement policies. Connecticut invoked its Eleventh Amendment sovereign immunity, and both the District Court and the Court of Appeals allowed only injunctive relief; they denied monetary recovery, although the Court of Appeals permitted attorney's fees. Both of those courts pointed to Edelman v. Jordan, , a US Supreme Court case holding that the Eleventh Amendment prohibits a federal court from ordering a state to pay money to an individual who is wronged by the state. The plaintiffs appealed to the Supreme Court.
Issue
Can Congress abrogate state sovereign immunity under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment?
Decision
The Court, in an opinion by Justice William Rehnquist, distinguished previous cases in which attempts by individuals to sue the states for money damages (or the equivalent), including Edelman v. Jordan, had failed because the plaintiffs had not identified an express provision by Congress that permitted such lawsuits. The Court ruled that Congress has the power, under the Fourteenth Amendment, to abrogate sovereign immunity of states, as it was enacted specifically to limit the power of the states with the purpose of enforcing civil rights guarantees against them.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 427
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment, section five case law
Category:1976 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:States' rights
"""

From "Flagg Bros., Inc. v. Brooks" ==> """
Flagg Bros., Inc. v. Brooks, 436 U.S. 149 (1978), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States wherein the constitutionality of New York's Uniform Commercial Code provision, which allows a warehouse to enforce a lien upon repossessed goods by selling said goods, was challenged under the Fourteenth Amendment.  The Court held that the state-allowed re-sale provision did not constitute state action, and thus, the plaintiff did not possess a colorable federal due process claim.
 Background 
After the city evicted plaintiff/appellee Shirley Brooks from her home in Mount Vernon, N.Y. in 1973, her possessions were stored in a warehouse owned by  American  defendant/appellant corporation Flagg Bros., Inc. After several disputes between the parties regarding the price that Brooks was to pay for the moving and storage of her belongings, Flagg Bros. presented Brooks with notice that she needed to pay the amount owed within 10 days "or [her furniture would] be sold."436 U.S. at 153
When letters from Brooks to the defendant did not produce any results, Brooks brought suit under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, seeking monetary damages, an injunction against the proposed sale, and a declaration by the judiciary that such a sale under New York Uniform Commercial Code § 7-210 would violate due process.
 Opinion of the Court 
 Rehnquist's majority opinion 
Associate Justice William Rehnquist authored the majority opinion for the Court, joined by Chief Justice Warren Burger and Associate Justices Potter Stewart, Harry Blackmun, and Lewis Powell.  Rehnquist began by outlining the dual burden that rested on the plaintiffs in making a viable Fourteenth Amendment claim. First, Rehnquist wrote, the plaintiffs must show that they have been deprived of a right guaranteed by the Constitution. Second, they must show that Flagg Bros. denied them of that right while acting under the color of New York state law.
However, Rehnquist wrote, Brooks carried an additional burden because she was accusing Flagg Bros. of depriving her of property under the Fourteenth Amendment. The Fourteenth Amendment reads, in part, that "[no] State [shall] deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law." (emphasis added)  Thus, according to the Court's Fourteenth Amendment jurisprudence, Flagg Bros. taking of Brooks' property could only rise to the level of a federal constitutional violation if Flagg Bros. was a state actor, that is, performing a duty traditionally and exclusively performed by the state, and therefore attributable to the state.
Pointing out that Brooks had failed to name any governmental entity as a defendant, Rehnquist went on to argue that "very few" functions have been exclusively carried out by state governments.436 U.S. at 158.  In American history, the settlement of disputes between debtors and creditors was not, in Rehnquist's view, a function performed exclusively by the state, as the parties typically retained other avenues of remedy.
To Brooks' contention that the state had directly authorized the re-sale of her possessions under the UCC, Rehnquist responded that the UCC merely embodied the state's decision not to involve itself in the debtor-lendor dispute. If the state had failed to pass any law related to the re-sale, there could be no contention that the state had acted in any way. Codification of the state's intent to not involve its courts in the re-sale of repossessed goods still equated to a refusal to act.
 Marshall's dissent 
Associate Justice  Thurgood Marshall  authored a short dissenting opinion, emphasizing what he perceived as the Court's "attitude of callous indifference to the realities of life for the poor."436 U.S. at 166.  Marshall observed that, according to the record before the Court, Brooks' takehome pay was $87 per week, and thus she would be unable to pay for the surety necessary, let alone the bill that she owed to the defendant. In Marshall's view, this meant that Brooks had no realistic remedy at state law. Further, Marshall argued that New York's state traditions led to the conclusion that the execution of liens was a state function, typically performed by the sheriff. Marshall also joined Justice Stevens' dissenting opinion.
 Stevens' dissent 
Associate Justice John Paul Stevens, joined by Associate Justices Marshall and  Byron White, authored a dissent,  arguing that the Court's decision was foreclosed by inconsistent prior caselaw including Sniadach v. Family Finance Corp. Stevens accused the Court of adopting an overly narrow definition of state action – arguing that under the Court's reasoning, a State could pass a law stating that it would authorize, for example, "any person of sufficient physical power" to seize and retain his neighbor's property.436 U.S. at 170.
Stevens noted the role of the state in defining and controlling the debtor-creditor relationship, seeing the state power in this case as the power to allow for a binding remedy against the wishes of one of the parties to the dispute.
 See also 
 State actor
 Notes 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:United States due process case law
"""

From "Flagg v. Walker" ==> """
Flagg v. Walker, 113 U.S. 659 (1885), regards a case where the deeds for several parcels of land were transferred from Flagg, who was in financial difficulty, to Walker in return for paying off Flagg's debts and profits from the sale against a mortgage for other property owned by Flagg..
Flagg's financial situation
William F. Flagg, one of the appellants, was the owner, in February 1875, of real estate in and near the City of Bloomington, Illinois, which may be generally described as follows:
A large manufacturing establishment, known as the Empire Machine Works, and about  of land upon which it stood.
A tract of land containing about , known as "the pasture", situated in the northeastern part of the city.
Block No. 1, in Flagg's third addition to the City of Bloomington, containing about , on which stood his residence. This property is designated in the record as the "homestead".
A large number of lots in the city, most of them vacant, but on about ten of which were tenement houses.
A tract in Fayette County, Illinois, and lands in Pettis County, Missouri. He also owned a large amount of personal property, consisting mainly of the machinery and tools in the Empire Machine Works.
At the time, Flagg was in financial difficulty in his business and owed over $50,000. The larger part of this indebtedness bore interest at the rate of ten percent per annum. Much of the real estate was covered by mortgages; his tenement houses were out of repair; he was largely in arrears for taxes and for interest on his indebtedness, and was in broken health. In this condition of his affairs, he sent for the appellee, Samuel Walker, who resided in Massachusetts, and who was the brother of his first wife, and made a statement to him of his financial condition.
Walker funding
Walker, upon the transfer of the property, paid off all or nearly all of the unsecured debts of Flagg, and furnished Mrs. Flagg with money to pay the taxes which were due and interest due and unpaid on the residue of Flagg's debts, and supplied Flagg with money to take a trip for the improvement of his health. The money so advanced amounted on August 27, 1875, to over $11,000.
After these events, on September 25, 1878, the original bill in this case was filed by Mrs. Flagg against Walker, Sibley, Weed, the trustee, and her husband, William F. Flagg. It alleged that since the conveyances made by her husband to Walker in February 1875, the former had by mesne conveyances transferred and conveyed to her "all his interest, right, and title in and to said real estate above mentioned," referring to the real estate conveyed by Flagg to Walker, "and all personal property appertaining thereto, or that went into the hands of Samuel Walker." The bill set out the transfer to Walker by Flagg and his wife of the real and personal estate of Flagg, and in reference thereto made the following averments:
"That the said deeds were intended by said William F. Flagg and oratrix to secure the said Samuel Walker for his advances to be made by him, as above set forth, and as a further security for a reasonable compensation to be paid to him for the rendition of such services, and that he might out of the sale of a portion of said property be reimbursed for such advances and compensation. It was also agreed . . . that when the purpose for which such conveyance had been made was fully completed, the said Samuel Walker was to reconvey to William F. Flagg, or to oratrix, as they might elect at least one-half of the property remaining unsold and undisposed of, and should keep for himself and for his compensation a portion of said lands, not exceeding one-half of the residue, after payment of all debts."
Dispute
The bill also averred "that shortly after receiving the said deeds of conveyance Samuel Walker executed a statement in writing in which he set forth and stated to your oratrix the use and purpose, both set forth, upon which the said Samuel Walker had received the said property in trust."
The bill charged "that said deeds of conveyance made to Samuel Walker, while, in fact warranty deeds," were "in equity no more or less than mortgages, made to secure said Samuel Walker for his advances to be made by him, and said advances were to be sufficient in amount to pay all indebtedness of said William F. Flagg to other persons than said Samuel Walker, and that said Samuel Walker was to reimburse himself out of the sales to be made by him. "
The bill alleged that Walker neglected and refused to furnish money to pay the interest on the debt to Sibley, secured by the trust deed to Weed on "the pasture," which was well worth $80,000, and that had it not been for the conveyance thereof by Flagg to Walker, Flagg would have been able to raise money to pay the interest on the debt as it accrued, or could have made a new loan and paid off Sibley's claim in full, but by reason of the conveyance to Walker, he was unable to do so, and that Walker knowingly and willfully permitted Sibley, by Weed, his trustee, to sell the premises at a forced sale for about $10,000, when its real value at the time of the sale, was $80,000.
Walker filed his answer alleging that he came to Illinois at the request of Flagg and his wife, and upon examination of Flagg's affairs found that he was deeply in debt; that his real estate was heavily encumbered, and that he owed a large floating debt and was out of funds, and that all of his property was likely to be taken from him if it should be forced to sale, but that, after a full investigation, he became satisfied that Flagg's property, with good management, was worth more than his indebtedness, and that he proposed that Flagg should convey all his property to him, and let him manage his business for him; that Walker agreed that he would take the property without any future right of control, management, or ownership remaining in Flagg, and would pay off the debts of Flagg specified in a list furnished to him by Flagg.
This list did not include the debt due to Sibley, and he refused to assume that debt and would not agree to pay it, but promised that he would use the rents and profits of the land toward keeping down the interest on the Sibley debt and the taxes, and if he could sell the property so as to pay the debt, he would do so, or he would convey the same to any parties to whom Flagg might sell.
At the time of this case, Walker agreed to pay off all the ascertained indebtedness of Flagg, except the Sibley debt, and as to that he was only to pay so much of it as could be made out of a sale of the lands mortgaged to secure it. Walker did in fact pay off all the other indebtedness of Flagg. The complaint made against him is that he did not furnish money to pay the Sibley debt, or sufficient to keep down the interest, but made default in the payment of interest, and thus allowed the property to be sacrificed at a forced sale.
In view of the declaration of trust made by Walker on April 12, 1875, it is clear that the transaction between Flagg and Walker was not a mortgage
Court ruling
The High Court found no error in the proceedings and decree of the circuit court. But as the time limited by the decree, to-wit, April 1, 1881, for the payment to Walker by W. F. Flagg, or some one of the defendants to the cross-bill, of the said sum of $25,207.18, with interest, has passed, we think the time for such payment should be extended. The appellants, while they were litigating their rights with Walker in this Court, having given an appeal bond, which superseded the decree of the circuit court, were not required to make the payment.
The court directed that the decree of the circuit court be so modified as to extend the time for the payment of the sum coming to Walker for the period of six months from the filing of the mandate of this Court in the circuit court, and, as so modified, the decree of the circuit was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Bloomington, Illinois
"""

From "Flast v. Cohen" ==> """
Flast v. Cohen, 392 U.S. 83 (1968), was a United States Supreme Court case holding that a taxpayer has standing to sue the government to prevent an unconstitutional use of taxpayer funds..
The Supreme Court decided in Frothingham v. Mellon (1923), that a taxpayer did not have standing to sue the federal government to prevent expenditures if his only injury is an anticipated increase in taxes. Frothingham v. Mellon did not recognize a constitutional barrier against federal taxpayer lawsuits. Rather, it denied standing because the petitioner did not allege "a breach by Congress of the specific constitutional limitations imposed upon an exercise of the taxing and spending power." Because the purpose of standing is to avoid burdening the court with situations in which there is no real controversy, standing is used to ensure that the parties in the suit are properly adversarial, "not whether the issue itself is justiciable."  
In 1968, Florance Flast joined several others in filing a lawsuit against Wilbur Cohen, the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, contending that spending funds on religious schools violated the First Amendment's ban on the establishment of religion. The district court denied standing, and the Supreme Court heard the appeal.
Decision
Writing for the majority, Chief Justice Earl Warren established a "double nexus" test which a taxpayer must satisfy in order to have standing. First, he must "establish a logical link between [taxpayer] status and the type of legislative enactment attacked." Second, "show that the challenged enactment exceeds specific constitutional limitations upon the exercise of the taxing and spending power and not simply that the enactment is generally beyond the powers delegated to Congress by Article I, Section 8." Only when both nexuses have been satisfied may the petitioner have standing to sue.
Flast test
The Court developed a two-part test to determine whether the plaintiffs had standing to sue. First, because a taxpayer alleges injury only by virtue of his liability for taxes, the Court held that "a taxpayer will be a proper party to allege the unconstitutionality only of exercises of congressional power under the taxing and spending clause of Art. I, § 8, of the Constitution." *479  Id., at 102, 88 S.Ct., at 1954. Second, the Court required the taxpayer to "show that the challenged enactment exceeds specific constitutional limitations upon the exercise of the taxing and spending power and not simply that the enactment is generally beyond the powers delegated to Congress by Art. I, § 8." Id., at 102-103, 88 S.Ct., at 1954."
Ruling
The Court ruled that petitioners had satisfied both nexuses and therefore had standing to sue as taxpayers. First, their Constitutional challenge concerned expenditures contained within a law passed pursuant to Congress's Article I, Section 8 power to spend for the general welfare. Second, the law at issue allocated funds to parochial schools and therefore violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. The Court, however, expressed "no view at all on the merits of appellants' claims in this case."
Concurring opinion
Justice William O. Douglas advocated dealing with the seeming contradiction by overturning Frothingham completely.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 392
 Hein v. Freedom From Religion Foundation
 Valley Forge Christian College v. Americans United for Separation of Church and State
 References 
Sources
External links
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States standing case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Fleitas v. Richardson" ==> """
Fleitas v. Richardson, 147 U.S. 550 (1893), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that under the Louisiana Code, the liability of the husband to the wife for her separate property received by him under the marriage contract is in the nature of a debt secured by mortgage of his lands, and may be enforced by her by direct suit against him. It may also be extinguished by his discharge in bankruptcy.
Background
The plaintiff, Mary C. W. Fleitas, was married to Francis B. Fleitas on February 6, 1868, in St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana. Before the marriage, the couple and her parents signed a marriage contract which provided that her parents' gift of $20,000 would be secured by a mortgage by Francis Fleitas in favor of his wife, as provided by Louisiana law.  This law determined that her parents' contribution was a dotal (or dowry contribution).
On April 25, 1877, Francis B. Fleitas obtained a discharge in bankruptcy in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana. In 1884, Francis Fleitas purchased land, with a mortgage held by Gilbert M. Richardson, a citizen of New York, Albert R. Shattuck and Francis B. Hoffman, citizens of Massachusetts, the Defendants in this case.
On September 3, 1887, the Mrs. Fleitas filed a petition in the state court in St. Bernard Parish against her husband for separation of property, and for a recognition of her mortgage on all his lands in that parish, alleging that he was largely in debt and that there was danger that his estate would not be sufficient to satisfy her rights and claims. On September 10, 1887, she recovered judgment against Fleitas decreeing a separation of property between them and ordering that the sum of $20,000, held by him as her paraphernal property, be returned to her and be recognized as secured by legal mortgage on all his lands in that parish.  The sheriff executed the order, whereupon, on June 29, 1888, Richardson instituted executory proceedings upon the mortgage of January 28, 1884, for the seizure and sale of the lands, as set forth in the next preceding case, the record of which was made part of the record in this case.
The case was duly removed by said defendants into the circuit court of the United States upon the grounds that there was a separable controversy between them and the plaintiff, and that the suit involved a question under the bankrupt law of the United States as to the effect of the husband's discharge in bankruptcy upon the plaintiff's claim and mortgage.
Opinion of the Court
The Court started by explaining and applying Louisiana's laws governing the rights of married women, which "differs widely from the common law." Fleitas at 552. Citing Louisiana Code articles Articles 2334 and 2335, the Court explained that the separate property of the wife is that which she 'brings into the marriage, or acquires during the marriage by inheritance or by donation made to her particularly,' and 'is divided into dotal and extradotal property. Dotal property is that which the wife brings to the husband to assist him in bearing the expenses of the marriage establishment. Extradotal property, otherwise called "paraphernal property," is that which forms no part of the dowry.
The liability of the husband to the wife for her separate property received by him under the marriage contract is in the nature of a debt secured by mortgage of his lands and may be enforced by her by direct suit against him.
The wife may, at any time during the marriage, sue the husband for a separation of property, "when the disorder of his affairs induces her to believe that his estate may not be sufficient to meet her rights and claims." Louisiana Civil Code, art. 2425, (2399). Consequently, a transfer of property, or a confession of judgment, by an insolvent husband to his wife, in settlement of her claims, is good against his creditors. Citing Lehman v. Levy, 30 La. Ann. 745, 750; Levi v. Morgan, 33 La. Ann. 532; Thompson v. Freeman, 34 La. Ann. 992.
Such being the nature of the liability of the husband to the wife for her paraphernal property under the law of Louisiana, it was clearly provable by her against him as a debt under the bankrupt act of the United States. Rev. St. 5067; In re Bigelow, 3 Ben. 198; In re Blandin, 1 Low. 543; In re Jones, 6 Biss. 68, 78.
It is equally clear that it has none of the elements of a trust, certainly not of such a technical trust as to make it a fiduciary debt, within the meaning of that act; and that consequently it was barred by his discharge in bankruptcy. Rev. St. [147 U.S. 550, 556]   5117, 5119; Hennequin v. Clews, 111 U.S. 676, 4 Sup. Ct. Rep. 576; Upshur v. Briscoe, 138 U.S. 365, 11 Sup. Ct. Rep. 313.
Having determined that, the Court then turned to the second question: whether the Fleitases can avail themselves of that discharge.  The Court opined that under Louisiana law, the debt of the husband to the wife was extinguished by his discharge in bankruptcy; and thereupon her mortgage, which was but a security for that debt, disappeared with it, and could not attach to these lands upon his subsequently purchasing them; and the appellees, claiming as his creditors under the mortgage from him to them, were entitled to set up his discharge in bankruptcy against any lien claimed by her upon the lands.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 147
External links
Category:1893 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Louisiana law
Category:United States bankruptcy case law
Category:Marriage law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Flemming v. Nestor" ==> """
Flemming v. Nestor, 363 U.S. 603 (1960), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the constitutionality of Section 1104 of the 1935 Social Security Act. In this Section, Congress reserved to itself the power to amend and revise the schedule of benefits.
 Background 
A 1954 amendment to the Social Security Act stripped old-age benefits from contributors who were deported under the Immigration and Nationality Act. The following year Ephram Nestor, an alien from Bulgaria who had paid into Social Security for 19 years, began drawing benefits. Nestor was subsequently deported for involvement in the Communist Party, and his benefits were terminated. He sued the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare on the basis that the amendment had deprived him of a property interest in Social Security without due process and was therefore invalid.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court ruled that there is no contractual right to receive Social Security payments. Payments due under Social Security are not “property” and are not protected by the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment. The interest of a beneficiary of Social Security is protected only by the Due Process Clause.
Under Due Process Clause analysis, government action is valid unless it is patently arbitrary and utterly lacking in rational justification. This provision of §202(n) is not irrational; it could have been justified by the desire to increase the purchasing power of those living in America, because those living abroad would not spend their payments domestically.
Critique
The case has been criticized on many grounds. In dissent, Justice Black argued that the Court's holding was motivated by anti-communist bias. Charles A. Reich argued that Social Security benefits should be considered to be "property" for the purposes of the Fifth Amendment. Social Security, he argued, is a compulsory substitute for private property, is heavily relied on, and is important to beneficiaries. The beneficiary's right to Social Security, he argued, should not be subject to public policy considerations (especially not something resembling a loyalty oath, as was the case in Flemming). According to this argument, allowing government benefits to be revoked in this way too extensively threatens the system of private property. 
Further reading
External links
Case Details from the Social Security Administration
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Social Security lawsuits
Category:Takings Clause case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:1960 in United States case law
"""

From "Fletcher v. Peck" ==> """
Fletcher v. Peck, 10 U.S. (6 Cranch) 87 (1810), was a landmark United States Supreme Court decision in which the Supreme Court first ruled a state law unconstitutional. The decision created a growing precedent for the sanctity of legal contracts and hinted that Native Americans did not hold complete title to their own lands (an idea fully realized in Johnson v. M'Intosh).
Yazoo lands sales
Following the Treaty of Paris ending the American Revolution, Georgia claimed possession of the Yazoo lands, a  region of the Indian Reserve, west of its own territory. The land later became the states of Alabama and Mississippi.
In 1795, the Georgia legislature divided the area into four tracts. The state then sold the tracts to four separate land development companies for $500,000, about $0.014 per acre, a bargain even at 1790 prices. The Georgia legislature overwhelmingly approved this land grant, known as the Yazoo Land Act of 1795. However, it was later revealed that the Yazoo Land Act had been approved in return for bribes in a scandal known as the Yazoo Land Scandal.Lamplugh, George R. (2015). Yazoo Land Fraud. New Georgia Encyclopedia. Retrieved 13 May 2016 The voters rejected most of the incumbents in the next election; the new legislature, reacting to the public outcry, repealed the law and voided the transactions made under it.
Robert Fletcher and especially John Peck were speculators in the Yazoo lands. Fletcher bought a tract of land from Peck after the 1795 act was repealed. Fletcher, in 1803, brought a suit against Peck, claiming that Peck had not had clear title to the land when he sold it.
There was collusion between the two. Both would have their land secured if the Supreme Court decided that Native Americans did not hold original title. Fletcher set out to win the case.
Court ruling
The Supreme Court unanimously (with a separate concurring opinion written by William Johnson) ruled that the legislature's repeal of the law was unconstitutional. John Marshall wrote that the sale was a binding contract, which under Article I, Section 10, Clause I (the Contract Clause) of the Constitution, cannot be invalidated even if it is illegally secured. 
The ruling lent further protection to property rights against popular pressure and is the earliest case of the Court asserting its right to invalidate state laws which are in conflict with or are otherwise contrary to the Constitution. A later Chief Justice, William H. Rehnquist, wrote that Fletcher v. Peck "represented an attempt by Chief Justice Marshall to extend the protection of the contract clause to infant business".Rehnquist, William. A Random Thought on the Segregation Cases, Memo to Justice Robert H. Jackson
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 10
Yazoo land scandal
References
Further reading
External links
Famous Cases
Case Brief for Fletcher v. Peck at Lawnix.com
Category:1810 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:Aboriginal title case law in the United States
Category:Contract Clause case law
Category:United States federalism case law
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:Native American history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Flint v. Stone Tracy Co." ==> """
Flint v. Stone Tracy Co., 220 U.S. 107 (1911), was a United States Supreme Court case in which a taxpayer challenged the validity of a federal income tax on corporations..  The privilege of incorporation is a state function, and the challengers argued that only the states should tax corporations. The Court ruled that the privilege of operating in corporate form is valuable and justifies imposition of a federal income tax:
The continuity of the business, without interruption by death or dissolution, the transfer of property interests by the disposition of shares of stock, the advantages of business controlled and managed by corporate directors, the general absence of individual liability, these and other things inhere in the advantages of business thus conducted, which do not exist when the same business is conducted by private individuals or partnerships.
Background
President William Howard Taft proposed a constitutional amendment to allow federal income taxes on individuals and an excise tax "upon the privilege of doing business as an artificial entity and of freedom from a general partnership liability enjoyed by those who own the stock" on June 16, 1909.President Taft speech of June 16, 1909 The Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which permitted federal income taxation without apportionment, was enacted in 1913; and the Corporation Excise Tax Act, sometimes known as the Corporation Tax Act, was enacted on August 5, 1909 and taxed corporation income at 1%, with the first $5000 exempt.Purpose of ActHistorical perspectives of tax: 1909History of corporate tax rates
Dictionaries often cite the case for the definition of excise tax in the United States:Dictionary definitions of excise
Excises are 'taxes laid upon the manufacture, sale, or consumption of commodities within the country, upon licenses to pursue certain occupations, and upon corporate privileges.' Cooley, Const. Lim. 7th ed. 680.
The tax under consideration, as we have construed the statute, may be described as an excise upon the particular privilege of doing business in a corporate capacity, i. e., with the advantages which arise from corporate or quasi corporate organization; or, when applied to insurance companies, for doing the business of such companies. As was said in the Thomas Case, 192 U. S. supra, the requirement to pay such taxes involves the exercise of  privileges, and the element of absolute and unavoidable demand is lacking. If business is not done in the manner described in the statute, no tax is payable.220 U.S. 107, 152
Constitutionality arguments
The New International Yearbook reported:
One of the chief arguments against the constitutionality presented in the public prints was that this is an excise tax on the privilege of doing business in the corporate form; this latter being a privilege derived by franchise from State authorities only, Congress can not impose a burden on it without invading the sovereignty of the States. President Taft in recommending the tax had stated that it is laid "upon the privilege of doing business as an artificial entity and the freedom from a general partnership liability enjoyed by those who own stock." While, therefore, it was argued, a tax on the business of a corporation might be constitutional, a tax on the franchise, that is, on the special privileges which the State confers upon the corporation, is an invasion of the State's rights.New International Yearbook (1910 Edition), page 705
According to the Tax History Project, "the tax was challenged on the theory that it was a direct tax that had not been apportioned among the states by population."Direct Taxes Under the Constitution: A Review of Precedents, Tax History Project, Alan O. Dixler  The U.S. Constitution provides (in part):
The Congress shall have power To lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises... but all Duties, Imposts and Excises shall be uniform throughout the United States....U.S. Const., art. I, § 8, cl. 1. Representatives and direct Taxes shall be apportioned among the several States which may be included within this Union, according to their respective Numbers....U.S. Const., art. I, § 2, cl. 3. No Capitation, or other direct, Tax shall be laid, unless in proportion to the Census or Enumeration herein before directed to be taken.U.S. Const., art. I, § 9, cl. 4.
The power to impose taxes, whether direct or indirect, is granted by Article I, section 8, clause 1. Indirect taxes (or "duties, imposts and excises," sometimes called simply "excises") are required to be geographically uniform, according to Article I, section 8, clause 1.
Another issue raised in the case was whether section 38 of the Act in question was unconstitutional because it originated in the Senate, in violation of the Origination Clause, section 7 of article 1 of the Constitution, providing that "all bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives, but the Senate may propose or concur with the amendments, as on other bills."
The Court rejected that argument, upholding the statute and ruling that the bill had indeed originated in the House of Representatives:
...the tariff bill of which the section under consideration is a part, originated in the House of Representatives, and was there a general bill for the collection of revenue. As originally introduced, it contained a plan of inheritance taxation. In the Senate the proposed tax was removed from the bill, and the corporation tax, in a measure, substituted therefor. The bill having properly originated in the House, we perceive no reason in the constitutional provision relied upon why it may not be amended in the Senate in the manner which it was in this case. The amendment was germane to the subject-matter of the bill, and not beyond the power of the Senate to propose.
Criticism
Henry Campbell Black stated:
The tax laid by the act of 1909 was specifically denominated a "special excise tax" and was declared to be imposed "with respect to the carrying on or doing business by such corporation." This was in reality an income tax very thinly disguised, and restricted to corporations. But the theoretical distinction between a tax on income and a tax on the privilege of doing business in a corporate capacity, as measured by income, afforded sufficient ground for the courts to hold that it was not a direct tax and therefore not in conflict with the constitution.A Treatise on the Law of Income Taxation, Henry Campbell Black
Similar cases
In Quaker City Cab. v. Pennsylvania, the Supreme Court held that the state of Pennsylvania could not discriminate between corporations and individuals and partnerships in imposing taxes on gross receipts of operators of taxicabs:
The equal protection clause does not detract from the right of the state justly to exert its taxing power or prevent it from adjusting its legislation to differences in situation or forbid classification in that connection, but it does require that the classification be not arbitrary, but based on a real and substantial difference having a reasonable relation to the subject of the particular legislation.Quaker City Cab v. Pennsylvania, 
The vote was 6-3, and the dissent by Louis Brandeis cited Flint v. Stone Tracy Co.:
Why Pennsylvania should have chosen to impose upon corporations a heavier tax than upon individuals or partnerships engaged under like circumstances in the same line of business, or why it should have selected this particular form of tax as the means of doing so, we have no occasion to enquire. The state may have done this, because, in view of the advantages inherent in corporate organization, the Legislature believed that course necessary in order to insure a just distribution of the burdens of government. In Flint v. Stone Tracy Co., this court listed the advantages which justify the imposition of special taxes on corporations…
The Court, 45 years later, explicitly reversed the Quaker City Cab decisionSupreme Court Decisions Overruled by Subsequent Decision, Government Printing Office   in upholding an Illinois property tax that was higher on corporations than individuals, and it quoted the dissenting opinion of Holmes in the taxicab case and the Flint v. Stone Tracy Co. case.Lehnhausen v. Lake Shore Auto Parts Co., 
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 220
Payne–Aldrich Tariff Act
References
External links
Category:1911 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:Excises
Category:Origination Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
"""

From "Flood v. Kuhn" ==> """
Flood v. Kuhn, 407 U.S. 258 (1972), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that preserved the reserve clause in Major League Baseball (MLB) players' contracts. By a 5–3 margin, the Court reaffirmed the antitrust exemption that had been granted to professional baseball in 1922 under Federal Baseball Club v. National League, and previously affirmed by Toolson v. New York Yankees, Inc. in 1953. While the majority believed that baseball's antitrust exemption was anomalous compared to other professional sports, it held that any changes to the exemption should be made through Congress and not the courts.
The National League had instituted the reserve clause in 1879 as a means of limiting salaries by keeping players under team control. Under that system, a baseball team reserved players under contract for a year after the contract expired, preventing them from being taken by other teams in bidding wars. MLB team owners argued that the clause was necessary to ensure a competitive balance among teams, as otherwise wealthier clubs would outbid teams in smaller markets for star players. The reserve clause was not addressed in Federal Baseball, where Ned Hanlon, owner of the rival Federal League's (FL) Baltimore Terrapins, had argued that MLB had violated the Sherman Antitrust Act through anticompetitive practices meant to force the FL out of business. The Supreme Court ruled that baseball did not qualify as interstate commerce for the purposes of the Sherman Act, a ruling that remained even after it denied boxing and American football the same exemption.
In 1969, Curt Flood, a center fielder for the St. Louis Cardinals, was traded to the Philadelphia Phillies. Flood was unhappy with the trade, as the Phillies were not known to treat players well, but the reserve clause required him to play for Philadelphia. He retained attorney Arthur Goldberg, a former Supreme Court justice, through Marvin Miller and the Major League Baseball Players Association (MLBPA) and took the case to court, arguing that the reserve clause was a collusive measure that reduced competition and thus an antitrust violation. The reserve system was upheld by all three courts under the principle of stare decisis and the precedents set by Federal Baseball and Toolson.
Legal scholars have criticized the Court's decision in Flood both for its rigid application of stare decisis as well as Section I of Harry Blackmun's majority opinion, an "ode to baseball" that contains little legal matter. The reserve clause was settled outside the Supreme Court three years later through the arbitration system created by the collective bargaining agreement between MLB and the MLBPA. Peter Seitz ruled in favor of Andy Messersmith and Dave McNally that their contracts could only be renewed without their permission for one season, after which they became free agents. Free agency in MLB was codified the following year after the 1976 Major League Baseball lockout, while the Curt Flood Act of 1998, signed by Bill Clinton, ended baseball's antitrust exemption as it related to interactions between players and owners, but preserved it in other areas such as franchise relocation. Courts have continued to differ over the extent of the exemption; a 2021 suit filed over that year's minor league reorganization asks that it be rescinded entirely.
 Background 
 Reserve clause 
thumb|William Hulbert instituted the reserve system in the National League in 1879.
William Hulbert, then the president of the National League (NL), instituted the first reserve clause in professional baseball in 1879. Under Hulbert's system, each NL team could "reserve" five players for its roster, and owners from opposing clubs could not offer contracts to reserved players. This provision extended to 11 players per team in 1883, 12 per team in 1885, 14 per team in 1887, and by 1890, all players under active contract with an NL team were subject to the reserve clause. Any player who signed with an NL team was placed under that team's control until they retired, were traded to another club, or were released outright. This latter qualification also made it easier for teams to discipline players by voiding their contracts, and it was sometimes referred to as the "reserve and release" clause. In 1883, the American Association entered into the first national agreement with the NL, extending the reserve system to the Association as well. In 1903, the American League (AL) signed its own national agreement, forming the two-league system known as Major League Baseball (MLB). The reserve clause extended cross-league, with reserved NL players prevented from joining AL teams and vice versa.
The primary rationale for instituting the reserve clause was to limit player salaries for the struggling NL by keeping players under team control. Many of the players that the owners reserved for the 1880 season had been, at the time, the best-paid in the league, such as Cap Anson, Paul Hines, and Tommy Bond, and these players saw their salaries drop once they remained bound to their respective teams. Once the reserve system was extended to all players, those players were categorized into five categories under the Brush Classification System, with each group receiving a salary that ranged between $1,500 and $2,500 annually. While the league owners supported the reserve system as a cost-cutting measure, they also defended its use as a way to ensure a competitive balance in baseball. Without a reserve clause, the wealthiest teams could stockpile star players simply by outbidding smaller teams. This sentiment was echoed by federal district court judge William P. Wallace in 1890, who quoted Albert Spalding in arguing that the rule "takes a manager by the throat and compels him to keep his hands off his neighbor's enterprise". The owners also argued that the reserve clause justified a team's investment in its players, who were drafted with little experience and required years of development to reach the major leagues.
One of the first players to challenge the reserve clause was Sam Wise, who in 1882 left the Cincinnati Red Stockings of the American Association for the NL's Boston Red Caps. The Massachusetts General Court denied Cincinnati's request for an injunction, and Wise spent the remainder of the season with Boston. The reserve clause's most vocal opponent, however, was John Montgomery Ward, known as Monte Ward, who compared the system to slavery in 1885. In 1890, he helped to found the Players' League (PL), which promised a three-year contract to all players and no pay cuts after the first year. Players' salaries were the same as what the NL had paid them in either 1888 or 1889, whichever was higher. Players who had joined the PL, like Jim O'Rourke, were able to convince their colleagues that the reserve clause only prevented players from joining teams in those leagues that had it, and that they were legally free to join teams in new leagues. 
When Ward left the New York Giants to join the PL, the team took him to New York Supreme Court to prevent him from playing with his new club. While Justice Morgan J. O'Brien disagreed with Ward and O'Rourke's assessment that the reserve clause did not apply to the Players' League, the court was most concerned about the vague phrasing of the clause: Ward was technically under contract with the Giants for the 1890 season, but the perpetual reserve clause meant that major aspects of his contract, including his salary, were not addressed, and the court decided that the reserve clause was "too indefinite" to be properly enforced. The decision in Metropolitan Exhibition Co. v. Ward also criticized the uneven system by which a team could hold a player theoretically indefinitely but terminate them with only 10 days' notice. This legal victory was not enough to sustain the Players' League, as many of its financial backers pulled out after suffering considerable losses during that premiere season.
Hall of Famer Nap Lajoie was taken to court in 1901 by the Philadelphia Phillies, an NL team, after he joined their crosstown AL rival, the Philadelphia Athletics, who were not yet bound by the reserve clause. The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania ruled the next year in Philadelphia Ball Club, Ltd. v. Lajoie that he possessed a unique skill set, much like Johanna Wagner, the defendant in the seminal 1852 English contract law decision Lumley v Wagner. This skill set meant that, while the Phillies could not require Lajoie to play for them, they could prevent him from playing for other teams.
 Baseball's antitrust exemption 
thumb|Ned Hanlon took MLB to court for antitrust violations in Federal Baseball Club v. National League.
The United States Congress had enacted the Sherman Antitrust Act which prohibited the type of anticompetitive collusion under which the reserve clause has been argued to fall, in 1890. This policy was extended even further by the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, which allowed private parties to sue for damages caused by anticompetitive conduct. The same year that the Clayton Act became law, the Federal League (FL) was created as a challenger to MLB. Despite the new league prohibiting players from signing if they were under contract with a major league team and MLB threatening to blacklist players who defected, players such as Joe Tinker nonetheless left MLB to join the FL, and many of these defections led to litigation. While the lower courts typically ruled in favor of players who joined the Federal League during the offseason, when they were under reserve but not an active contract, the owners did win some cases where players had abandoned their MLB team midseason.
Dave Fultz, the president of the FL, was primarily focused on improving the working conditions of minor league players and improving player safety. He was not radically against the reserve system, and he feared that eliminating it from his league would incur retribution from MLB. Instead, he proposed that FL players remained under reserve for five years, after which owners and players could mutually agree to extend the reserve option.
Federal Baseball Club of Baltimore v. National League
In January 1915, the Federal League owners sued the major leagues and three members of the National Commission for antitrust violations, hoping that noted trustbuster Kenesaw Mountain Landis would rule in their favor. Landis, however, announced that "any blows at the thing called baseball would be regarded by this court as a blow to a national institution", and he took the case under advisement for a year to stall any action. Meanwhile, the FL incurred great financial losses that season, and came to a settlement with MLB at the end of the year.
Most FL owners were bought out by MLB teams or allowed to buy interests in existing major league clubs. The one exception was Ned Hanlon of the Baltimore Terrapins. Hanlon and his partners brought an antitrust lawsuit in D.C. District Court, alleging that MLB had colluded to "wreck and destroy" the FL by purchasing and dissolving its teams. Judge Wendell Phillips Stafford ruled in Hanlon's favor, agreeing that baseball games constituted interstate trade and commerce under the Sherman Act and that MLB had engaged in impermissibly monopolistic behavior. Hanlon was awarded $80,000 in damages, which was increased to $240,000 ($ in modern dollars) under the treble-damages provision of the Clayton Act.
On appeal, Judge George W. Pepper of the D.C. Circuit held that sports like baseball, "a spontaneous product of human activity", were "not in [their] nature commerce", and thus not subject to antitrust legislation. The circuit's chief judge, Constantine Joseph Smyth, wrote in his opinion that "sport" such as professional baseball fell outside the realm of business and thus monopoly. Hanlon then brought his claim to the Supreme Court, where former US president and baseball fan William Howard Taft was Chief Justice.
In May 1922, the Court unanimously affirmed the appellate decision in Federal Baseball Club v. National League. The Sherman Act required that businesses be engaged in interstate commerce to incur government intervention, and Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. interpreted commerce to include only physical goods. Because baseball exhibitions did not fall under this definition, the sport consisted of "purely state affairs".
The next term the Court considered Hart v. B.F. Keith Vaudeville Exchange, a Clayton Act suit brought by a talent agent alleging the defendants had conspired to exclude the plaintiffs' clients from the many theaters they controlled in order to extract large payments to them, arguing that since their productions depended on the interstate transport of sets and costumes, the vaudeville circuit was interestate commerce. It had been filed before Federal Baseball; afterwards, the defendants had argued that their industry, too, was similarly not interstate commerce since its main business activity was selling admission to performances it had arranged rather than transport of goods for sale, with the shipments of materials required for those productions merely an incident to their business, just as with baseball teams' travel. The Southern District of New York agreed and dismissed the case. Justice Holmes wrote for a unanimous Court that reversed the trial court on jurisdictional grounds, holding that a federal question existed over whether the vaudeville circuit was interstate commerce, and that until that question was resolved the case was not to be disposed even if the arguments for federal jurisdiction themselves seemed weak. "[I]t may be that what in general is incidental, in some instances may rise to a magnitude that requires it to be considered independently", Holmes wrote.
Gardella v. Chandler
thumb|right|Happy Chandler was the Commissioner of Baseball when Danny Gardella almost overturned baseball's antitrust exemption.
The case that came closest to overturning the reserve system and antitrust exemption was brought by Danny Gardella, who left the New York Giants in 1946 to play for the Azules de Veracruz of the Mexican League. He returned to New York in 1947 to play in MLB again but found himself blacklisted. Gardella's attorney Frederic Johnson tried to distinguish his client from Nap Lajoie by arguing his client was not an exceptional player or "unique performer", but a standard-quality professional athlete being denied an opportunity to make a living.
Judge Henry W. Goddard of the Southern District of New York ruled in favor of the owners, dismissing Gardella's lawsuit under the precedent set by Federal Baseball, The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit overturned this decision, however, with Jerome Frank ruling that baseball's television and radio presence made it a matter of interstate commerce that thus fell under the Sherman Act. The case never reached the Supreme Court, as Happy Chandler, then the Commissioner of Baseball, soon reinstated the blacklisted Mexican League players. Gardella settled out of court for $60,000 in damages and a trade to the St. Louis Cardinals.
With Gardella's case settled, there was little pressure on the league to alter the reserve system or any other anticompetitive measures. Some members of Congress, however, were worried about the potential challenge to baseball's antitrust exemption, as well as the instability to the sport caused when Chandler was replaced by Ford Frick. In 1951, four bills were introduced to Congress that would have further codified the antitrust laws concerning baseball.
Toolson v. New York Yankees, Inc.
Congress ultimately took no action on the antitrust exemption, as the House Subcommittee on the Study of Monopoly Power decided that enacting official legislation would affect the Supreme Court's decision on another case that had come its way, Toolson v. New York Yankees, Inc. George Toolson, a minor league player in the Yankees' farm system, had been reassigned from the Newark Bears, their Triple-A affiliate, to the Low-A Binghamton Triplets in 1949. He refused to report to the new club and brought the reserve clause to court as an antitrust violation. In a 7–2 ruling, the Court upheld the Federal Baseball precedent that the "business of giving exhibitions" was "purely state affairs" and thus exempt from the antitrust protections built into the Sherman Act. The one-paragraph per curiam majority opinion in Toolson held that any changes to the Federal Baseball precedent would have to go through Congress and not the courts.
 Justice Harold Hitz Burton dissented, arguing that organized baseball was obviously engaged in interstate trade and commerce and thus should be subject to federal antitrust enforcement.Toolson, 357–365
Shuster and International Boxing
The Court did not revisit baseball's antitrust exemption, although other lower courts would. In the years after Toolson, three other antitrust cases involving other industries, including other professional sports, made baseball's exemption problematic when the Court declined to extend the logic of Federal Baseball to them.
Early in 1955, two cases decided the same day involved federal Sherman Act cases against companies alleged to have nearly monopolized theatrical performances and professional boxing. Both defendants had argued that the Federal Baseball precedent applied to them as well since the interstate travel required to stage performances and fights was equally incidental to those events, and judges in the Southern District of New York hearing the cases granted defense motions to dismiss. The government appealed directly to the Supreme Court under the Expediting Act.
In both cases, the Court allowed the cases to proceed. The theater case, United States v. Shuster, was decided unanimously. After citing many precedents which had held industries which did not ship goods for sale across state lines to be interstate commerce, Chief Justice Earl Warren wrote that Federal Baseball and Toolson applied only to baseball and thus Hart controlled in the instant case: "[It] established, contrary to the defendants' argument here, that Federal Baseball did not automatically immunize the theatrical business from the antitrust laws." Any holding that it did required a trial on that question. Justices Burton and Reed referred to their Toolson dissents in statements indicating their concurrence with Warren's opinion.Shuster, 229–231
The two would also join Warren's majority opinion in United States v. International Boxing Club of New York, Inc., where he conceded that "if it were not for Federal Baseball and Toolson, we think that it would be too clear for dispute that the Government's allegations bring the defendants within the scope of the Act." Again he deferred to Congress to resolve the issue if it desired.International Boxing Club, 240–243 Justices Felix Frankfurter and Sherman Minton dissented this time, with Minton also joining Frankfurter's dissent.International Boxing Club, 248–251
"It would baffle the subtlest ingenuity to find a single differentiating factor between other sporting exhibitions, whether boxing or football or tennis, and baseball insofar as the conduct of the sport is relevant to the criteria or considerations by which the Sherman Law becomes applicable to a 'trade or commerce'", Frankfurter wrote. "It can hardly be that this Court gave a preferred position to baseball because it is the great American sport. I do not suppose that the Court would treat the national anthem differently from other songs if the nature of a song became relevant to adjudication."International Boxing Club, 248–251
Minton, conversely, believed that the Court should have held boxing equally beyond the reach of antitrust law. Accusing the majority of having misread Toolson, he wrote:
Radovich v. National Football League
Two years later, the Court heard Radovich v. National Football League (NFL), in which another player, like Gardella, who believed himself to have been blacklisted from the major league in his sport due to his decision to play in a team in the competing All-America Football Conference (AAFC), had brought suit. The NFL asserted at trial that baseball's antitrust exemption applied equally to it, and the district judge dismissed the case on those grounds. At appeal, Radovich argued that International Boxing had held otherwise, but the Ninth Circuit distinguished boxing by noting that football, like baseball, was a team sport where "very good arguments do exist for the indulgence of restraints on individual players."
The Court reversed. After reiterating Shusters holding that Toolson was limited to baseball and did not automatically extend to any other business despite any apparent similarities, Justice Tom C. Clark wrote for a majority of six that "the volume of interstate business involved in organized professional football places it within the provisions of the Act". He admitted that "were we considering the question of baseball for the first time upon a clean slate, we would have no doubts.", hereafter Radovich II
Frankfurter again dissented. "[T]he most conscientious probing of the text and the interstices of the Sherman Law fails to disclose that Congress, whose will we are enforcing, excluded baseball—the conditions under which that sport is carried on—from the scope of the Sherman Law, but included football", he wrote.Radovich II, at 455 Newer justices John Marshall Harlan II and William J. Brennan Jr., who had replaced Minton, also dissented. "What was foreshadowed by International Boxing has now come to pass", Harlan lamented. "The Court, in holding that professional football is subject to the antitrust laws, now says in effect that professional baseball is sui generis so far as those laws are concerned."Radovich II, at 456
State v. Milwaukee Braves
Within a decade, a case would be brought alleging MLB came under state antitrust laws when Wisconsin sought to block the Braves' move from Milwaukee to Atlanta. The state alleged that baseball had exercised its monopoly power in an unreasonable way that had a substantially negative effect on business within the state, and sought to either have the move prevented or an expansion team be located in Milwaukee. A lower court agreed, and granted an injunction that delayed the Braves' move until their appeal, arguing that federal preemption and the Dormant Commerce Clause put baseball out of reach of Wisconsin's antitrust laws, could be heard by the state's Supreme Court.
A narrowly divided court lifted the injunction. After reviewing the Supreme Court's precedents at length, Justice Thomas E. Fairchild wrote for the four-justice majority that while baseball's antitrust exemption might not cover all the businesses a baseball team could and did engage in, "it does seem clear that the exemption at least covers the agreements and rules which provide for the structure of the organization and the decisions which are necessary steps in maintaining it." Since Congress had not explicitly barred the states from regulating baseball, "the ultimate question is whether the state action conflicts with national policy", Fairchild concluded, noting that either preventing the Braves' move or requiring MLB to locate an expansion team in Wisconsin would have nationwide implications, particularly if other states similarly brought their laws to bear.Braves, 725–732
The majority, Fairchild said, either found it "unrealistic to interpret these decisions of the supreme court of the United States plus the silence of Congress as creating a mere vacuum in national policy, leaving the states free to regulate the membership of the baseball leagues" or followed Toolson in deferring to the reliance interests the federal antitrust exemption had established and Congress's sole power to change that. It did, however, note in its conclusion that "[t]he record strongly suggests that the defendants gave little heed to the interests of the Milwaukee community, and to the injury which the move would cause", expressing a wish for Congress to deal with the issue.
Justice Nathan Heffernan, writing for the three dissenters, castigated the majority for ignoring well-established Supreme Court precedent that Congressional inaction is never to be taken as proscribing state action without an express provision to that effect. "Can we conclude that congressional silence amounts to a manifestation that it is the national policy and the congressional will that baseball be free of all regulation? We think not", he wrote. "The most that possibly can be concluded from the failure of Congress to enact some regulation of baseball is that it reveals a congressional complacency with its own policy of nonaction and inertia." The majority had similarly disregarded a recent reiteration of an older admonition from the Supreme Court not to infer federal intent to pre-empt the states merely from congressional inaction, Heffernan added.Braves, at 734–35
To the dissenters, the other majority theory, that the reliance interests nationally precluded any exercise of state authority, was at odds with another Supreme Court precedent, California v. Thompson. Recalling "the cavalier disregard of either law or reasonableness in the exercise of the baseball monopoly" that the majority had itself taken note of, "[w]e cannot conclude that the state is less able to resist this treatment of its legitimate interests by organized baseball than it is to prevent the entrance into its boundaries of contagious disease, although such disease is carried in interstate commerce",,  Heffernan wrote. "It is difficult to see what national interest is preserved by immunizing this organization from the consequences of its violation of state law."
Salerno v. American League
In 1970, the Second Circuit affirmed the dismissal of Salerno v. American League, a case brought by two umpires who contended that their terminations for incompetence actually resulted from their attempts to organize their colleagues, held that their antitrust claims were largely irrelevant to a case they had failed to make even if baseball were not exempt. But on that matter, Judge Henry Friendly wrote for the court, "[t]he ground upon which Toolson rested was that Congress had no intention to bring baseball within the antitrust laws, not that baseball's activities did not sufficiently affect interstate commerce. We freely acknowledge our belief that Federal Baseball was not one of Mr. Justice Holmes' happiest days, that the rationale of Toolson is extremely dubious and that, to use the Supreme Court's own adjectives, the distinction between baseball and other professional sports is 'unrealistic,' 'inconsistent' and 'illogical'". But it remained the Supreme Court's prerogative to overrule those cases, and "[w]hile we should not fall out of our chairs with surprise at the news that [they have] been overruled, we are not at all certain the Court is ready to give them a happy despatch."
Spencer Haywood cases
After leading the U.S. team to a gold medal at the 1968 Olympics, 19-year-old Spencer Haywood sought to play professionally but was stymied by a National Basketball Association (NBA) rule that players were not eligible to be drafted until four years after their high school class had graduated. He chose to instead play for the rival American Basketball Association's (ABA) Denver Rockets for two seasons, then attempted to switch to the NBA with the Seattle SuperSonics for the 1970–71 season when he was dissatisfied with the Rockets' latest salary offer. The league fined Sonics owner Sam Schulman; individual teams formally protested the result of every game Haywood played in regardless of the outcome. Haywood filed suit, seeking an injunction against the NBA on the grounds that its actions were a group boycott illegal under antitrust law.
The case came before Justice Douglas for an expedited appeal after the Ninth Circuit stayed the injunction pendente lite Haywood had won in the Central District of California, in order to allow him to take the floor for the Sonics in the impending playoffs. "The college player draft binds the player to the team selected", Douglas conceded. "Basketball, however, does not enjoy exemption from the antitrust laws. Thus, the decision in this suit would be similar to the one on baseball's reserve clause which our decisions exempting baseball from the antitrust laws have foreclosed." He said the group boycott issue was "significant" in professional sports. 
The full Court, en banc, declined to reverse Douglas. On remand, District Judge Warren J. Ferguson took note and held the NBA subject to the Sherman Act. "[B]y pooling their economic power, the individual members of the NBA have, in effect, established their own private government", he wrote, permanently enjoining the league from enforcing the four-year rule and sanctions against Haywood, Schulman and the Sonics.Denver Rockets, 1060 et seq.
 Curt Flood 
thumb|Flood with the St. Louis Cardinals
Charles Curtis Flood was born on January 18, 1938, in Houston, Texas, the youngest of Laura and Herman Flood's six children. The family moved to Oakland, California, two years later in search of the naval jobs that had been created by the United States's pending entry into World War II. Flood began playing baseball around the age of seven or eight, and he joined his first organized team in 1947, catching for Junior's Sweet Shop. In addition to playing American Legion Baseball, Flood attended McClymonds High School with future MLB player Frank Robinson, who was two years his senior. Throughout his adolescence, Flood transitioned from catcher to shortstop and finally center fielder. Outside of baseball, his primary passion was in the visual arts, inspired by his high school art teacher Jim Chambers. Flood knew that he wanted a career in either art or baseball, but he had been warned by coach George Powles that his diminutive size and his race would impede his progression in professional baseball.
On January 30, 1956, three days after graduating from high school, Bobby Mattick, a scout for the Cincinnati Reds, offered Flood a $4,000 contract to join the team. Flood was assigned to the minor league High Point-Thomasville Hi-Toms, where he encountered segregation and racist chants from the fans. He was successful on the field, however, batting .340 with 29 home runs and 128 runs scored, and he was promoted to the Reds as a September call-up. Flood made his major league debut on September 9, pinch running for Smoky Burgess in a 6–5 loss to the St. Louis Cardinals.
Once the season ended, Flood met with Reds general manager Gabe Paul, who explained that while the team had been impressed by Flood's performance, they were not in a financial position to increase his salary, which would stay at $4,000 ($ in modern dollars) again for the 1957 season. Flood realized after this meeting the gravity of the reserve system, later saying, "I could only play where they elected to send me. This was baseball law. It was beyond question or dispute. It was taken entirely for granted." The Reds assigned Flood to the Dominican Winter League to teach him third base, which they hoped he would play in the future. When he returned, he was assigned to the Savannah Reds of the South Atlantic League. Flood's batting average fell significantly in Savannah, which Paul used as a reason not to raise his salary for the 1958 season. Paul also informed Flood that he would have to report to the Venezuelan Winter League and learn how to play second base.
On December 5, 1957, the Reds traded Flood and Joe Taylor to the St. Louis Cardinals in exchange for Marty Kutyna, Ted Wieand, and Willard Schmidt, a trade which came with a 25 percent raise. The Cardinals' owner, Gussie Busch, was motivated to acquire more black baseball players to increase the team's local popularity, and he had failed to acquire Willie Mays and Ernie Banks. Flood spent three weeks in the Cardinals' farm system before debuting with his new team on May 2, 1958, where he faced the team that traded him. He did not become an everyday player in St. Louis until midway through the 1961 season, when manager Solly Hemus was fired and replaced by Johnny Keane.
From 1965 to 1967, Flood had a reputation as an all-star defensive center fielder, setting an MLB record for playing 226 consecutive games without making an error in 555 chances. Flood's salary increased throughout this period as well: he made $45,000 in 1966, significantly more than the average MLB player's $13,000 salary. After making $50,000 in 1967, Flood came to offseason negotiations demanding that his salary be doubled for 1968. When general manager Bing Devine refused, Flood threatened to retire from baseball entirely, and the two parties settled on a $72,000 salary. That season, Flood appeared on the cover of Sports Illustrated, where he was deemed the best center fielder in baseball.
The Cardinals faced the Detroit Tigers in the 1968 World Series. The matchup was fairly even, and both teams remained scoreless through the first six innings of Game 7. Both Norm Cash and Willie Horton singled for the Tigers in the seventh inning, leaving Cash in scoring position. Next up to bat, Jim Northrup hit a long fly ball to center field. Flood slipped on the wet outfield turf, his stumble causing the ball to miss his glove and roll towards the outfield wall. That error allowed both Cash and Horton to score, putting the Tigers up 2–0. Flood apologized to pitcher Bob Gibson after the inning, but Gibson insisted, "It was nobody's fault." The Tigers won the game 4–1, defeating the Cardinals and becoming World Series champions.
thumb|left|The letter sent by Bing Devine informing Flood he was traded to the Phillies
During offseason contract negotiations, Flood rejected the Cardinals' proposed salary of $77,500 ($ in modern dollars) for the 1969 season. He insisted on $90,000, telling Busch that number "is not $77,500 and is not $89,999". Although he acquiesced, Busch was upset that the negotiations had turned sour at all, as he believed he had a good relationship with Flood. Busch was the first to ask Keane to give Flood a regular playing opportunity in the outfield, he had provided Flood's family with financial assistance, and Flood had once painted Busch's portrait.
Overall, the team's relationships with each other and with management suffered in 1969. The on-field camaraderie that Flood had previously praised seemed to have diminished, while the players were unhappy with Busch after he accused them of being greedy for boycotting spring training in the name of higher wages. Also during spring training, Flood had suffered an injury during an exhibition game against the New York Mets, and the sedatives he was provided by a team doctor caused him to sleep through the Cardinals' annual season ticketholder banquet. Flood was fined $250 for missing the banquet, at which point he began to publicly criticize the Cardinals' front office to local news media. On the field, MLB had made several changes that were meant to increase hitting, including lowering the pitcher's mound and expanding the strike zone. While Flood batted .285 for the year, he was no longer one of the top 50 hitters in the league.
Early one morning in October 1969, a sportswriter notified Flood that he, Tim McCarver, Joe Hoerner, and Byron Browne had been traded to the Philadelphia Phillies in exchange for Dick Allen, Cookie Rojas, and Jerry Johnson. Shortly afterwards, he received the official phone call from Jim Toomey, an executive for the Cardinals that he later referred to as "a middle-echelon coffee drinker in the front office". After hanging up the phone, Flood began to cry, and he spent the remainder of the day waiting for another call with more information.
The next day, Flood, who had been preparing for a vacation in Copenhagen, received a one-sentence letter from Devine saying that he had been traded outright to the Phillies. Flood responded by announcing his retirement from baseball and embarking on his previously scheduled vacation. Devine did not immediately believe Flood, who had previously threatened to retire in order to improve his own salary.
After returning from Copenhagen, Flood scheduled a meeting with Phillies general manager John Quinn, who attempted to convince him that the team was better than its reputation. At the time, the Phillies were known for their lackluster treatment of their players, sending them on red-eye commercial propeller flights where other teams would charter private jets for away games. Flood was particularly concerned about Philadelphia's reputation for mistreating its black players, as Allen had been vocal about the racism he experienced from management, fans, and the press during his time with the Phillies. Flood was not active in the Black Power movement, but he was sympathetic to the cause, and he remained sensitive to the racism and segregation that he had experienced earlier in his baseball career.
 Path to the Supreme Court 
 Initial meetings 
thumb|Curt Flood's letter to Bowie Kuhn, dated Christmas Eve of 1969.
After his meeting with Quinn, Flood contacted Allan H. Zerman, the attorney who had helped him set up his photography business in St. Louis, to ask for advice. Zerman suggested that Flood sue, and so he contacted Marvin Miller, the executive director of the Major League Baseball Players Association (MLBPA). In their first meeting, Miller explained to Flood and Zerman that Federal Baseball and Toolson had created a precedent that would make it difficult to eliminate the reserve clause, but that Gardella's case had given them an opening. While Miller warned Flood that he would inevitably lose the court decision and his baseball career, he also provided Flood with attorney Arthur Goldberg, a former U.S. Supreme Court justice. Miller and Goldberg had known each other from their time in the United Steelworkers labor union, and Goldberg had written the majority opinion on several Supreme Court cases relating to antitrust, which Miller believed would help Flood's case.
In December 1969, the MLBPA questioned Flood for two hours at its annual meeting in San Juan, Puerto Rico. Some team representatives, including Los Angeles Dodgers catcher Tom Haller, asked if Flood's case was primarily a race issue, to which Flood responded that his concerns about race were secondary to his belief that there should be a free market of players. Other players worried that Flood was only threatening legal action as a ploy to increase his salary with the Phillies. He assured the union that he was singularly opposed to the reserve clause, promised that he would not drop the case no matter what pressure he received from the owners, and offered to donate any damages he might be awarded to the union. All 25 representatives voted to provide Flood with the funds needed to mount his lawsuit. Despite the unanimous vote, Carl Yastrzemski sent a letter to Miller complaining that his voice had not been heard and fearing legal action would irreparably harm the relationship between owners and players.
The day afterwards, baseball commissioner Bowie Kuhn met with the players, an opportunity he had asked Miller for. He recalled years later that he was surprised none of them brought up the reserve issue, and only later when he learned of the lawsuit did he surmise (correctly) that Miller had told the players not to bring it up with him as it was "too sensitive". This course of action led Kuhn to believe that Miller had already committed to litigating the issue. Kuhn believed the MLBPA had had its chance at contract negotiations two years earlier and should wait until the next contract to try again rather than get free agency through the courts, which he believed alienated the owners. 
During this time, Paul A. Porter, one of MLB's top lawyers, met with the Players Association and denied any amendments to the reserve clause. When Jim Bouton asked the league's attorneys if they would consider terminating a player's reservation upon their 65th birthday, long after the player would have retired, Louis Carroll replied, "No, next thing you'll be asking for is a fifty-five limit." Meanwhile, in a final effort to avoid legal action, Flood sent a letter to Kuhn on December 24 petitioning the commissioner to let him become a free agent. Kuhn responded that his contract remained under Philadelphia's control and could not be changed.
Shortly after the New Year, Flood appeared on Wide World of Sports for an interview with newscaster Howard Cosell. Cosell asked Flood, "What's wrong with a guy making $90,000 being traded from one team to another? Those aren't exactly slave wages", to which Flood replied, "A well-paid slave is nonetheless a slave."
 District Court 
thumb|Bowie Kuhn, the Commissioner of Baseball during Flood's litigation.
Flood filed a complaint in federal district court for the Southern District of New York in January 1970. He named Kuhn, the presidents of the NL and AL, and all 24 MLB team presidents as defendants. While Flood did not seriously believe he would be awarded the $1 million in damages that he requested, he was more concerned with having the reserve clause struck down. The following day, Joe Cronin and Chub Feeney, the presidents of the AL and NL, respectively, issued a statement reiterating that the clause was "absolutely necessary", and that without it, "professional baseball would simply cease to exist". Three of the five causes of action in Flood's suit related directly to the reserve system as an antitrust violation. The fourth suggested that the system was a violation of the Thirteenth Amendment, as it "subjects plaintiff to peonage and involuntary servitude". The final cause of action suggested that the Cardinals and Yankees were engaged in additional antitrust violations unrelated to the reserve clause. The Cardinals, owned by Anheuser-Busch, sold only that brewery's products at Busch Stadium, while the Yankees, owned by CBS, only broadcast their games on that network.
At the first hearing, held before Judge Dudley Baldwin Bonsal, the owners were granted an additional two weeks to prepare their reply. Flood sought a preliminary injunction at a February hearing, which Judge Irving Ben Cooper rejected a month later. The injunction was the only recourse Flood's attorneys had to block his trade to Philadelphia, making him either a free agent or reverting his rights back to the Cardinals, and so in April, the Phillies placed Flood on the restricted list for failure to report. Flood's attorneys chose not to appeal Cooper's ruling on the injunction, not wanting to delay the trial further.
Flood's federal bench trial began in May. Shortly beforehand, he received a call from Monte Irvin telling him that Kuhn was willing to give Flood a limited free agency where he would be allowed to negotiate a contract with any NL team. Flood rejected the offer, realizing that to accept it would damage his legal argument. Goldberg, meanwhile, had announced his candidacy for Governor of New York earlier that year, and his campaign afforded him little time to prepare for the trial.
Flood was the first to testify. He was nervous on the witness stand and struggled to recall his salaries and playing statistics from previous years, often using his own baseball card, provided by attorney Jay Tompkins, as a reference. Flood said that he wanted to continue playing in St. Louis, where his photography and portrait businesses were located, but fundamentally wanted the option to accept the best deal that any team offered him. When defense attorney Mark Hughes directly asked Flood if he wanted to abolish the reserve clause, as had been his position throughout, Flood misspoke and said he simply wanted it modified. At the end of his testimony, Hughes asked Flood what he believed would happen if every MLB player became a free agent at the end of the season, to which Flood responded, "I think then every ballplayer would have a chance to really negotiate a contract just like in any other business." Cooper asked Goldberg if he would like his client's response struck from the record, to which Goldberg replied, "No, I like that answer."
thumb|left|Arthur Goldberg, Flood's attorney
Miller was the next to testify, arguing to abolish the reserve clause. He referred to it exclusively as the "reserve clause system", as the specific clause was no longer included in contracts but was a fundamental aspect of MLB, and he critiqued the fairness of such a system. Flood and Miller were supported by former baseball players such as Jackie Robinson, who testified that without "some change in the reserve system, I can see nothing else but that the players go on strike". Hank Greenburg, a former Detroit Tiger, recalled that he had been notified of his trade to the Pittsburgh Pirates by telegram, and he testified that the "reserve clause should be eliminated entirely, thereby creating a new image for baseball". The one MLB owner to testify in Flood's favor was Bill Veeck, who declared that every player "at least once in his career should be able to determine his own future and not be held in perpetuity".
Defense witnesses included Kuhn, Feeney, Pro Football Commissioner Pete Rozelle, and several MLB executives. One day of the trial consisted entirely of the testimony of Robert R. Nathan, an economic consultant who said that the reserve system did stifle competition, but that the alternative would lead to smaller-market teams like the Milwaukee Braves being choked out by teams in large markets like Philadelphia and New York. This sentiment was later echoed by team owners including Bob Reynolds of the Los Angeles Angels, Frank Dale of the Cincinnati Reds, John McHale of the Montreal Expos, and Ewing Kauffman of the Kansas City Royals, all of whom insisted that the reserve system was necessary to preserve the "economic health" of their respective franchises. On the sixth day of the trial, Kuhn argued in favor of the historical precedents set by the reserve clause and Supreme Court. He was careful not to criticize Flood personally, instead attacking the MLBPA as acting in bad faith and not committing to "realistic negotiations" with the owners.
The trial ended in June, and both sides were given a month to submit post-trial briefs to Cooper. By this time, Flood appeared to have lost interest in the proceedings. He had been absent from Veeck's testimony, having gone to Shea Stadium to watch Gibson pitch against the New York Mets. Flood's team produced an 88-page document detailing the inconsistencies on baseball's position: while baseball may have been exempted from federal antitrust laws under Federal Baseball and Toolson, it was still subject to state antitrust laws. The 133-page brief from MLB's attorneys, meanwhile, suggested that Flood was acting as a pawn of the Players Association. In August, Cooper delivered a 47-page opinion in which he upheld the reserve clause under the precedent set by Toolson. He also rejected the Thirteenth Amendment cause of action, saying that Flood was under no obligation to actually play for Philadelphia: while retiring from baseball would bring him financial harm, that option was still open., hereafter Flood I
Flood had also argued that if federal antitrust state law did not reach baseball, then equivalent state laws had to. Cooper disagreed, citing the Wisconsin Supreme Court's ruling for the Braves and the Second Circuit's in Salerno, the latter of which was binding precedent on the Southern District/ Noting that the reserve clause had not been at issue there, Cooper concluded that "[the] application of various and diverse state laws here would seriously interfere with league play and the operation of organized baseball.Flood I, at 280
 Court of Appeals 
Shortly after Cooper rendered his decision, Flood appealed it to the Second Circuit. In April 1971, a unanimous opinion by Judge Sterry R. Waterman upheld Cooper's decision under Federal Baseball and all subsequent rulings on the principle of stare decisis., hereafter Flood II It also cited Radvovich to suggest that while baseball's exemption from the antitrust laws under which other sports leagues fell was "unrealistic", "inconsistent", and "illogical", it was still the Supreme Court's prerogative to overrule it and Toolson. Judge Leonard P. Moore wrote a concurring opinion tracing in greater detail the history of baseball and its antitrust exemption, which he did not believe the Supreme Court would revoke. He concluded that, aside from the Chicago Black Sox scandal baseball had managed to grow and retain the public's interest remarkably well without judicial intervention. "[I] would limit the participation of the courts in the conduct of baseball's affairs to the throwing out by the Chief Justice (in the absence of the President) of the first ball of the baseball season."Flood II, 268–273
In July, Flood's attorneys filed a  certiorari petition with the clerk of the U.S. Supreme Court, the first step towards asking the Court to hear the case. MLB's attorneys submitted their response to the writ in August, and the Court agreed to hear the case two months later, a decision that troubled Kuhn since it indicated that at least four justices saw a potential issue with the case and might be inclined to reverse.
In his absence from the Phillies as the case moved through the courts, Flood's rights returned to the Cardinals, who negotiated another trade with Philadelphia. The Phillies received two minor league prospects and placed Flood on their voluntary retirement list, which meant that he did not count against their 40-man roster, but if he chose to return to baseball, he could only play for Philadelphia. The Washington Senators acquired Flood's rights from Philadelphia partway through the 1971 season, and Flood accepted a one-year, $110,000 contract to recoup the financial losses that came with missing the 1970 season. Senators owner Bob Short promised Flood that accepting a deal with the team would not damage his court case, as he could argue that he had already accrued damages from missing the previous season. 
Flood played only 13 games with the Senators, quitting on April 28 after performing poorly, and moved to Madrid to distance himself from baseball and the stress of his court case, but still collecting $55,000 in salary. "I tried", he wrote in a telegram to Short. "Very serious problems mounting every day. A year and a half is too much."
 Before the Court 
Once the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case, both sides submitted briefs. Flood's attorneys received a two-week extension from Justice Thurgood Marshall and submitted theirs in December 1971, while MLB responded at the end of January 1972. Goldberg's brief had eliminated the Thirteenth Amendment concerns entirely and focused on how the reserve system had become "drastically more restrictive" since its introduction and previous litigation. Paul Porter and Lou Hoynes responded to Goldberg's antitrust assertions by arguing that Flood's case was a labor dispute that should have been settled in a collective bargaining agreement (CBA) between league and union, not in court.
Oral arguments
Oral arguments in Flood v. Kuhn were heard on March 20, with both sides allowed to speak for 30 minutes. Goldberg, appearing before the Court since he had left it in 1965, went first on Flood's behalf, speaking of the unfairness of the reserve clause and how it had in 1965 been made worse through its extension to rookie players signing their first contracts to play in the minor leagues. He told Justice William J. Brennan Jr. that Flood would oppose the reserve clause even if it had been the result of collective bargaining. Justice Byron White asked if playing baseball was not covered under the labor exemption to antitrust law; Goldberg noted that Kuhn himself had described baseball as entertainment, which the Court had previously ruled was interstate commerce. "Every commentator has said it's an anomaly in the law to adhere to Federal Baseball and Toolson as wrongly decided", Goldberg concluded, commenting that if the steelworkers union, a former client, had agreed to similar terms with any employers binding a member or members to them for his entire working life, that contractual provision would clearly be seen as a per se violation of the law.
Paul A. Porter came next, arguing for Kuhn and MLB in rebuttal that baseball was unique, even compared to other sports, in the antitrust context because of the portion of its revenues invested in player development through their extensive farm systems. Louis Hoynes, counsel for the NL, argued MLB's case. He placed great emphasis on the MLBPA, which he said "has in fact controlled this litigation from beginning to end", to suggest that the real goal of the lawsuit was to make far more sweeping changes to the business aspect of baseball, and that these matters were far better addressed at the bargaining table.
Deliberations
Following oral arguments, the Court took an unofficial voice vote in order of seniority. Chief Justice Warren E. Burger began by admitting that "Toolson is probably wrong", but he did not say whether he believed the lower courts' rulings should be reversed. William O. Douglas voted to reverse the previous decisions and wanted to remand the case to district court for a new trial. Brennan agreed that Toolson should be overturned, but he also believed that Flood was primarily a labor dispute that should remanded for a new trial that did not focus on antitrust concerns. Justice Potter Stewart voted to uphold the lower courts' rulings under Congress's explicit decision to exempt baseball from antitrust laws, and his position was joined by Marshall and Justice Byron White. Justice Harry Blackmun also saw the case as a labor dispute and tentatively voted to affirm. Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr. recused himself, as he owned stock in Anheuser-Busch. While waiting for confirmation that the Cardinals were a subsidiary of the company, he stated in a voice vote that he believed the lower courts' rulings should be reversed, as it made "no sense" that baseball received different treatment in antitrust cases than other sports such as football. Justice William Rehnquist, the last to vote, affirmed the decision of the lower courts.
Without Powell, the court remained at a 4–4 deadlock until Burger changed his vote in favor of MLB. On June 19, 1972, the Court delivered its decision, with both parties notified by telegram that the lower courts' rulings had been upheld by a 5–3 margin. Blackmun, Stewart, Rehnquist, Burger, and White formed the majority, with Douglas, Marshall, and Brennan dissenting. Had the 4–4 tie remained, the decision of the lower courts would have been affirmed, but the Court would not have published any opinions. None of the opinions specifically addressed the reserve clause; all instead focused on baseball's antitrust exemption.
Decision
 Blackmun's opinion 
thumb|Harry Blackmun wrote the majority opinion in Flood v. Kuhn, with the first section described as an "ode to baseball".
Stewart had been asked to select the writer for the majority, a duty which he imparted on Blackmun, a noted baseball fan and the only member of the majority whose opinions seemed to have wavered on the case. Stewart told Blackmun to "do it very briefly ... Write a per curiam and we'll get rid of it". Blackmun's draft was over 20 pages long and divided into five sections. Rather than rewriting the majority opinion after seeing a draft of the dissenting opinions, as is custom, Blackmun's only major alteration between his first and second drafts was in expanding his list of notable baseball players from 74 to 88.
Section I of Blackmun's opinion, hereafter Flood III has been described as an "ode to baseball". The first three paragraphs detail the history of the sport, beginning with the first organized game in 1846 and continuing through the formation of the MLBPA in 1966. This is followed by a list of 88 players he considered great. Some of them were beyond an average fan's knowledge, including Heinie Groh, Dan Brouthers, and Chief Bender. While Blackmun never explicitly cited the origins of his list, he kept a copy of the Encyclopedia of Baseball on his chambers desk, and many of the players he lists are found in The Glory of Their Times by Lawrence Ritter. It is rumored that Marshall called Blackmun after seeing the original draft of the opinion to ask why no black players were included. Blackmun responded that there were no great black players in the golden age of baseball, but he ultimately included Jackie Robinson, Satchel Page, and Roy Campanella. Blackmun denied this rumor, saying that Campanella had been on his original list, and he later said that the one player he had forgotten was Mel Ott. Section I concludes with various baseball arcana, including Ring Lardner's reference to the "World Serious", a line from the poem "Baseball's Sad Lexicon", and quotes from George Bernard Shaw, Franklin Pierce Adams, and "Casey at the Bat".
The remainder of Blackmun's opinion proceeds as standard. Section II, titled "The Petitioner", outlines Flood's career, salary history, and the trade that had provided the impetus for the lawsuit.Flood III, 264–66 Section III, titled "The Present Litigation", summarized Flood's lawsuit.Flood III, 266–69 Section IV discusses the legal precedents set by Federal Baseball and Toolson.Flood III, 269–82 Finally, Section V presents the rationale of the court, with eight specific findings concluding that baseball, while a type of interstate commerce, is also a unique industry exempt from antitrust laws.Flood III, 282–85 Blackmun's opinion focuses primarily on stare decisis, conceding that while the decision in Federal Baseball to exempt the sport from antitrust status was an "anomaly", its precedent was sufficient that changes could only be made through Congress.Flood III, at 284
Concurrences
White indicated his concurrence in a note, and Burger with a short written opinion. Both explicitly said that they did not concur with Blackmun's Section I. White, a former football star at the University of Colorado, believed that Blackmun's rambling ode to baseball was demeaning to the Court. Burger, meanwhile, showed his sympathy for Douglas's dissent but argued that Toolson had been precedent for so long that he could not support Flood and the upheaval that would cause. "The error, if such it be, is one on which the affairs of a great many people have rested for a long time", he wrote. "Courts are not the forum in which this tangled web ought to be unsnarled."Flood III, at 286 Bob Woodward and Scott Armstrong's 1979 Supreme Court biography, The Brethren, claimed that many justices were embarrassed by Section I's overt sentimentality.
 Dissenting opinions 
The three remaining justices wrote two dissents. Justice Douglas, with Brennan concurring, called Federal Baseball "a derelict in the stream of the law that we, its creator, should remove. Only a romantic view of a rather dismal business account over the last 50 years would keep that derelict in midstream." Douglas directly critiqued the assertion that baseball had remained the same in the 50 years following the decision in Federal Baseball, and that the sport had become "big business that is packaged with beer, with broadcasting, and with other industries". He particularly rebuked Blackmun's assurance that Congress would handle any alterations to the antitrust exemption, writing that they had not done so to this point. Douglas was the only member of the Court who had also been on the bench for the Toolson decision, in which he had voted in favor of upholding Federal Baseball. He used his dissent in Flood to express his regret for that decision, writing that "the unbroken silence of Congress should not prevent us from correcting our own mistakes".Flood III, 286–288
Brennan also concurred in Marshall's dissent, a reversal of his voice vote, in which he had implied that he would affirm the appellate ruling on the basis of Congress's antitrust exemption for baseball. "This is a difficult case", he admitted, "because we are torn between the principle of stare decisis and the knowledge that 
Federal Baseball and Toolson are totally at odds with more recent and better reasoned cases." Marshall focused his dissent on the issue of Flood as an individual, whose rights he believed were impinged upon by a system that held players in perpetuity. He would have overruled both precedents and reversed.'Flood III, 290–291 
He explicitly invoked Radovich and International Boxing, as cause for the Court to reverse its rulings on baseball to consistently apply antitrust legislation across all professional athletics.'Flood III, 291–293:
Marshall clarified that he believed the particulars of Flood's case belonged at the level of the district courts as a labor dispute, where that lower court could investigate whether the antitrust violations practiced by MLB circumvented the league's CBA with the Players Association.'Flood III, 294–296
 Aftermath 
The ruling in Flood v. Kuhn came as a surprise to many sportswriters and scholars who were following the case. Harold Spaeth, a political scientist at Michigan State University, had predicted that Flood would prevail either unanimously or with Rehnquist as the sole dissent. Sportswriter Tom Dowling, who had been present for the oral arguments, believed that the case would be remanded, Flood awarded damages, and Kuhn would have to work with the players to create a free agency system. Despite the owners' legal victory, popular opinion had turned against the league, with some polls showing baseball fans favoring Flood by an 8:1 margin.
Kuhn called the decision "constructive" and said he looked forward to discussing free agency with the players in the next contract negotiation. "The last thing I wanted was for the clubs to view the Flood decision as an excuse for doing nothing," he wrote later. "Change was in the wind. Other sports were changing; we could not possibly sit still."
Flood never returned to professional baseball. He lived in Spain for four years, owning a bar and laying carpet. Upon his return to the United States, he worked as a broadcast announcer for his hometown Oakland Athletics, as a Little League Baseball coach, and as commissioner of a senior baseball league. While working for the Athletics, he ran into Kuhn at a 1980 pregame party at Yankee Stadium. During an amicable conversation, Kuhn told Flood that while he had never doubted Flood's sincerity in pursuing the case and did not take it personally, Flood should still not have taken his Senators' salary.
The Gold Glove Award Flood had won for the 1969 season but not formally received due to his legal dispute was presented to him in 1994. He was diagnosed with throat cancer in 1996 and died of pneumonia at a Los Angeles hospital in January 1997. The year after his death, he was posthumously elected to the Baseball Reliquary, which honors players both for their on-field statistics and for their off-field character.
The breakdown of Busch's relationship with Flood was compounded by the Cardinals' decision to terminate Harry Caray's announcer contract. These upheavals left Busch emotionally disturbed, with his son Adolphus Busch IV later writing, "[s]omething had occurred that made him question whether he should stay on as CEO of the company or retire". In 1975, his other son, August Busch III, began a boardroom coup to oust his increasingly erratic father from Anheuser-Busch. While August took over the brewing industry, he allowed Gussie to remain president of the Cardinals as long as he accepted his son's usurpation and publicly announced that he was retiring of his own accord. Busch died of pneumonia and congestive heart failure in September 1989.
 Move toward free agency in baseball 
 Seitz decision 
thumb|Dave McNally was one of the first players to attain free agency through the Seitz decision.
Their loss in Flood signalled to the MLBPA that any serious revisions to the league's operations could not go through the courts. The original CBA between the league and Players Association had created an arbitration system for labor disputes. Miller used it to the players' advantage, encouraging them not to sign contracts and arbitrate their salary disputes. MLB's first official free agent was Catfish Hunter, who in 1974 took the Oakland Athletics to arbitration over a breach of contract. Arbitrator Peter Seitz declared Hunter's contract with the Athletics void, allowing him to sign with whatever team he wished. The $5.5 million contract he eventually signed with the Yankees was at the time the largest of any major league player.
Also in 1974, Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Andy Messersmith, who had led the NL in wins that season, asked owner Walter O'Malley for both a raise and a no-trade clause added to his 1975 contract. O'Malley granted Messersmith the raise, but he could not offer a no-trade contract, arguing that it was against league rules. Messersmith refused to sign his contract until the clause was added, and the Dodgers renewed his previous contract without his consent. When O'Malley refused to include a no-trade clause again at the end of the 1975 season, Messersmith discussed his options with Miller. The union director connected him with Dave McNally, who had retired partway through the previous season after the Baltimore Orioles traded him to the Montreal Expos. If McNally ever chose to unretire from baseball, the reserve clause meant that he would have to play for the Expos. McNally, a strong union supporter, joined Messersmith to ensure the case went to arbitration rather than letting the Dodgers negotiate independently.
In October 1975, the MLBPA filed grievances on behalf of Messersmith and McNally, arguing that their contracts with the Dodgers and Expos had expired after the 1975 season, leaving both players essentially free agents. The central argument around Messersmith's case regarded the Uniform Player's Contract of the Basic Agreement, which stated that "the Club shall have the right ... to renew his contract for the period of one year on the same terms". Messersmith understood the contract to mean that the Dodgers had the right to extend his contract unilaterally for the 1975 season, but now that the season had passed, he was no longer under contract with the team. The Dodgers front office argued that renewing Messersmith's contract also renewed the one-year option, and that they could continue to extend his contract in perpetuity.
On December 23, 1975, Seitz ruled in favor of the two pitchers that the Basic Argument only allowed unilateral extensions for a period of one year. Moments after issuing his ruling, the owners fired him as an arbitrator. Seitz's decision was based on the question of whether the reserve clause extended to players whose contracts had expired. Rule 4-A(a) suggested that reservations only applied to players under active contract, while Major League Rule 3(g) prohibited opposing owners from approaching reserved players regardless of their contract status. Seitz rested his decision on the Cincinnati Peace Compact that had united the National and American Leagues in 1903, which applied the reserve clause only to players under active contract.
Seitz never addressed the antitrust exemption in his ruling, focusing on the CBA, particularly this provision of the 1970 version: "Regardless of any provision herein, this Agreement does not deal with the reserve system." Because the CBA did not directly deal with the system, any challenges to it were allowed to pass through arbitration. After Seitz's ruling, the owners challenged his decision in federal court for the Western District of Missouri before Judge John Watkins Oliver. 
The case turned on the three 1960 Supreme Court cases known collectively as the "Steelworkers Trilogy", which define the role and scope of arbitration in resolving labor disputes. MLB, through the plaintiff Kansas City Royals, argued that a more recent Court decision modified the Steelworkers precedents such that the issue of the reserve clause was not arbitrable because the agreement demonstrated an intent to exclude it from arbitration. Oliver did not find the record to support that claim and reiterated the dictum from one of the trilogy casesWarrior & Gulf, at 583 that doubts as to arbitrability are to be resolved in its favor.Royals, 246–249 
Oliver's decision was upheld again by the Eighth Circuit, where Judge Gerald Heaney wrote for a unanimous panel that found no fault with his reasoning. The owners decided against taking their case to the Supreme Court.
 1976 collective bargaining agreement 
Kuhn did not consider the Flood decision to be a victory for MLB's ownership, as it made the reserve clause a target for future contract negotiations. The MLB collective bargaining agreement made its first amendment to the reserve system after the 1973 Major League Baseball lockout. The "Curt Flood rule" provided that any player with 10 years of major league service, five of which had been with their current team, could veto a proposed trade. This CBA expired at the end of 1975, requiring the owners and players to negotiate a new one. After clashing with the players over many aspects of this agreement, the owners instituted another lockout in March 1976 and came to an agreement in July.
Under the 1976 agreement, players who had signed a contract with their team before August 9 of that year would become free agents at the end of that season. The club was allowed to extend their contract for one year, at which point the player would enter free agency in 1977. All players who signed contracts after that date would automatically reach free agency after six years of major league service. Any player with five seasons of service, meanwhile, could demand a trade from the owner and provide a list of teams he did not wish to be traded to. If that player was not moved to an agreeable team by March 15, he would also become a free agent.
 Congressional response 
While Congress responded to Flood with two bills that would have repealed baseball's antitrust exemption, they were unpopular with legislators, and the only immediate legal effect was a 1973 bill expanding the broadcast of sold-out regular-season professional sporting events. Their next move was to create the Select Committee on Professional Sports in May 1976, which was presided over by California Democrat B. F. Sisk. 
The Sisk Committee explored several contemporary issues in professional sports, including baseball's antitrust exemption. The league argued that the exemption was necessary to maintain a competitive balance among teams, and the Committee was also tempted to uphold the exemption through veiled promises that new MLB franchises would expand into their districts. While the Sisk Committee ultimately found that there was no adequate justification for baseball's antitrust exemption and recommended that it be lifted accordingly, no bills to that effect were introduced. The committee also recommended a successor committee be established on sports antitrust law, but it was never established; a study was done in 1981. Representative Gillis Long attempted to pass a bill that would strip MLB of its "favorite son treatment", which he announced in a hearing with NBA Commissioner Larry O'Brien, but it died in committee.
In January 1995, a bill that would have eliminated baseball's antitrust exemption was introduced to the Senate, where it died in committee soon after the resolution of the 1995 strike. Senator Orrin Hatch reintroduced the bill the day after Flood's death as the "Curt Flood Act of 1997". The bill amended the Clayton Act to "clarify that major league baseball players and owners have the same legal rights, and the same restrictions, under the antitrust laws as the players and owners in other professional sports leagues". The bill was voted out of committee that October and was approved by Congress the following January. President Bill Clinton signed the Curt Flood Act of 1998 (CFA) into law on October 28, 1998. While the relationships between major league players and ownership now fell under federal antitrust protections, other aspects of professional baseball, including franchise expansion, relocation, ownership, and ownership transfers, as well as "the marketing and sales of the entertainment product", remained exempt.
The Furthering Access and Networks for Sports Act, known as the FANS Act, initially proposed to further limit the exemption. Introduced in the Senate by Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of  Connecticut, in 2013, with cosponsorship by Republican John McCain of Arizona, it was primarily motivated by fan anger over the control exerted over cable and Internet broadcasts of games by all four professional sports leagues and major cable providers. While its greatest changes were proposed for the SBA, primarily affecting the NFL's blackout policies, it also would have repealed the language of the CFA that keeps the reserve clause in force for minor league players and the language that applies to broadcasting. The Judiciary Committee held hearings on it over a year later, but it never came to any vote. In the next Congress the two senators reintroduced the bill, but without the provisions amending the CFA. It was again referred to the Judiciary Committee and died there.
thumb|Sen. Dick Durbin, in 2019
Seven years later, in the wake of the 2021–22 lockout, MLB's first work stoppage in a quarter-century, Democratic Senator Dick Durbin of Illinois, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, said that "at this moment in time we should be revisiting this issue" of baseball's antitrust exemption. A Republican member of the committee, Mike Lee of Utah, had already introduced a bill to end the exemption the year before. "There's no reason that Major League Baseball should be treated any differently than any other professional sports leagues in America" he had said then. Other Republicans on the committee, such as Ted Cruz of Texas, supported the bill because they were upset about MLB's decision to move the 2021 All-Star Game from Atlanta following protests over the Georgia legislature's passage of a controversial electoral reform law.
Subsequent jurisprudence
 Philadelphia Hockey case 
Later in 1972, Judge Leon Higginbotham of the Eastern District of Pennsylvania became the first to consider an extension of the baseball antitrust exemption in the wake of Flood. Philadelphia World Hockey Club, Inc. v. Philadelphia Hockey Club, Inc. was brought by the Philadelphia Blazers of the World Hockey Association (WHA) against the National Hockey League's (NHL) Philadelphia Flyers. The WHA, the first league to attempt to compete with the NHL in offering major league professional ice hockey, alleged that the older league had violated the Sherman Act with its attempts to deter its players from signing with WHA teams. Higginbotham easily found that the NHL was not exempt from antitrust law:
In a footnote, Higginbotham acknowledged that the Supreme Court had never had to decide whether hockey shared baseball's exemption. He based his decision on the cases that had denied it to other sports and similar industries, such as Shuster, International Boxing and Radovich. From the text of Flood, he took further notePhiladelphia Hockey, at 466n3 of Blackmun's passing statement that hockey was "presumably" among the other major professional team sports subject to antitrust law.Flood III, at 283
Piazza v. Major League Baseball
Two decades later, another judge of the Eastern District, John R. Padova, heard a case claiming baseball's antitrust exemption sufficed to make it a private-party state actor. The plaintiffs, two Philadelphia-area members of a partnership that sought to acquire the San Francisco Giants and move the team to Florida, alleged that MLB had not only conspired with other defendants at the behest of the federal government, the city of San Francisco and other local governmental entities in the Bay Area to prevent the move but, in the process, defamed plaintiffs by insinuating that they had connections to organized crime. Padova cited Jackson v. Metropolitan Edison Co., in which the Supreme Court had held that the extensive regulation of a public utility does not make it a state actor, and San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Committee, which held the same regarding the respondent's trademark on the term "Olympic" regarding athletic contests, denying its use by the organizers of the Gay Games. "Simply uttering the word 'encouraged,' however, is not enough to equate Baseball's actions with those of the federal government", Padova wrote. "[T]he governmental involvement alleged here can, at best, be viewed as mere acquiescence, as opposed to the 'significant,' active encouragement required to adequately link defendants' actions to the federal government."
Postema v. National League
A 1992 suit by a female minor league umpire alleging gender discrimination revisited the question Salerno had brought but in the post-Flood era: does the antitrust exemption extend to baseball's relationships with its non-player employees? Finding that the baseball trilogy offered "little guidance" in that area, Judge Robert P. Patterson Jr. of the Southern District took note of Floods reference to the exemption being rooted in baseball's "unique characteristics and needs"Flood III, at 282 and the Wisconsin Supreme Court's Braves dictum that the antitrust exemption probably did not cover all business activities related to baseball.Milwaukee Braves, at 725 "[T]he exemption does not provide baseball with blanket immunity for anti-competitive behavior in every context in which it operates", Patterson concluded. "Anti-competitive conduct toward umpires is not an essential part of baseball and in no way enhances its vitality or viability."
Major League Baseball v. Crist
Florida officials again attempted to investigate MLB in the wake of its 2001 contraction plan, which would have shut down two franchises that conducted spring training in the state. Again MLB responded that the antitrust exemption applied to quash the state's civil investigative demands (CIDs).  On appeal, an Eleventh Circuit panel revisited the issue of Milwaukee Braves: what aspects of baseball can state antitrust law regulate?
Judge Gerald Bard Tjoflat wrote that the amount of teams that play was another decision "integral to the business of baseball" and thus beyond the reach of federal law. A paragraph in Flood that briefly addressed the state antitrust issue was, while "hardly a model of clarity", led him to accept MLB's theory that under the Supremacy Clause, "the Supreme Court's Commerce Clause jurisprudence, when applied to professional baseball, must be read to establish a unique per se rule that prohibits the application of state antitrust laws when the federal exemption is triggered ... [F]ederal law establishes a universal exemption in the name of uniformity."Crist, 1184–1186 In his conclusion, Tjoflat conceded that while "[t]he exemption was founded upon a dubious premise, and it has been upheld in subsequent cases because of an equally dubious premise", and it was thus understandable that Florida should seek a more limited exemption, that was nevertheless the prerogative of the Supreme Court or Congress.Crist, 1188–1189
Right Field Rooftops v. Chicago Cubs
thumb|right|Wrigley Rooftops during a game
In 2013 the owners of two of the Wrigley Rooftops, the viewing areas erected atop privately owned buildings on the streets adjacent to Wrigley Field, from which Chicago Cubs games and other events at Wrigley Field can be seen, sued the team alleging its owners, the Ricketts family, had been indulging in anticompetitive practices to force the sale of  some of the remaining rooftops to the team in violation of an earlier agreement. The plaintiffs anticipated the team's likely invocation of the baseball antitrust exemption by arguing that it applied only to MLB and not individual franchises. Judge Virginia M. Kendall of the Northern District of Illinois rejected that argument in denying them a preliminary injunction, noting that Toolson had affirmed Federal Baseball with a team as defendant, as well as the Cincinnati Reds in its companion case, Corbett v. Chandler.
Scope of exemption
Since Flood lower courts have divideed over whether baseball's antitrust exemption was limited in scope to the reserve clausePiazza, 435–438 (the minority position, taken by only two courts, hereafter Butterworth II) or covered baseball generally. To resolve this question, some courts have generally turned the inquiry to the role the reserve clause played in the original Federal Baseball case, or looked to the text of the three Supreme Court decisions establishing and affirming the exemption.
Broad "business of baseball" exemption
The first court to consider this question after Flood was the Seventh Circuit, when it heard Charles O. Finley & Co. Inc. v. Kuhn on appeal in 1977. The plaintiff, the Oakland Athletics (A's), had sued over the commissioner's decision to block the sales of three players before the 1976 season as "not in the best interests of baseball", a power of the office rarely invoked; Kuhn believed that Finley was almost giving away star players in a "fire sale" in advance of free agency to other teams already rich in talent that did not have to part with any of their stars. The A's argued that Kuhn and Major League Baseball had engaged in restraint of trade and sought damages, in part under antitrust law, which they argued covered the commissioner's actions as Flood had only held the reserve clause covered by the antitrust exemption as outlined in Federal Baseball and affirmed in Toolson.
After the district court had granted summary judgement for defendants on all counts, Judge Robert Arthur Sprecher wrote for a panel that unanimously affirmed. In considering the scope of the antitrust exemption, Sprecher looked to Radovich and the three baseball cases. In all of them, the Court had regular referred to "the business of baseball" as the subject of the exemption, leading Sprecher to conclude that "it appears clear ... that the Supreme Court intended to exempt the business of baseball, not any particular facet of that business, from the federal antitrust laws." In a short concurrence, Thomas E. Fairchild, now the circuit's chief judge, referred to his majority opinion from Milwaukee Braves during his time on the Wisconsin Supreme Court to support his belief that Federal Baseball had not been concerned with the reserve clause.Finley, at 546
In 1982 Judge Gabrielle Kirk McDonald of the Southern District of Texas heard a suit brought against the Houston Astros by KYST-AM after the team cancelled its radio broadcasting contract with the station in favor of KENR (now KNTH), also a defendant. The Astros moved to dismiss on the basis of the antitrust exemption, but McDonald noted that Gardella had left unresolved the question, alluded to in later cases, of whether the exemption reached broadcasts of baseball games. She observed that the Sports Broadcasting Act of 1961 (SBA), granting all professional team sports including baseball an exemption from the Sherman Act to allow leagues to negotiate television broadcast rights contracts on behalf of all member clubs. "The fact that interstate broadcasting has on the one hand subjected other professional sports to the antitrust laws, but has not on the other hand affected the baseball exemption, is perplexing."
McDonald decided that there was nothing in the Supreme Court's jurisprudence on the baseball exemption to show that it was anything more than an "abberation" to be left undisturbed. As for Congress, reports prepared prior to Toolson and, later, during the passage of the SBA, showed that it read Federal Baseball as concerned primarily with protecting baseball's right to protect its own league structure, which was not an issue in the instant case. "Congress has not exempted radio broadcasting from the antitrust laws, and there is no reason to believe Congress intended to exempt radio broadcasting of baseball from those laws."  
While Finley had held the exemption broadly applicable to the business of baseball, McDonald pointed to where the Seventh Circuit had qualified it as "not apply[ing] wholesale to all cases which may have some attenuated relation with the business of baseball".Finley, 434n5 Other lower court cases demonstrated this with two recent examples of lawsuits involving baseball and allegations of unfair trade practices in concession stand operations and baseball trading cards, in which she noted that neither defendant had raised the antitrust exemption. "The baseball exemption today is an anachronism" she concluded. "Defendants have not presented a reason to extend it."
Three cases in the 21st century have dealt with the scope of the antitrust exemption following the CFA. In the early 2010s a group of fans brought suit against MLB, the NHL and several cable companies and regional sports networks (RSNs) over their out-of-market (OOM) sports packages. At the time those who wished to watch all their favorite teams' away games could only do so if they bought a costly OOM package which included virtually all games; many of them were only interested in a small fraction of them and thus found the expense of an OOM package undesirable. Cablecast agreements between the leagues, cable providers and RSNs blacked out OOM games in the team's home markets if they were cablecast on national cable networks. The fans alleged these arrangements were an antitrust violation meant to force them to buy the OOM packages.
thumb|left|Judge Scheindlin
MLB had raised its antitrust exemption and the Federal Baseball–Toolson–Flood trilogy as a defense. Judge Shira Scheindlin of the Southern District rejected it in 2014. "The continued viability and scope of the baseball exemption are far from clear", she wrote. MLB had argued the language of Toolson applied to all aspects of its business, not just the reserve clause, which had been rendered moot by the CFA. But she responded that none of the cases consolidated with Toolson had mentioned broadcasting. "Indeed, because television broadcasting is an interstate industry by nature, it cannot fall within the exemption defined by Federal Baseball", she wrote. "It would be strange to read Toolson to expand Federal Baseballs holding to territorial broadcasting restrictions sub silentio."
Case law had not resolved the issue. While most courts had found that after Flood the exemption still applied to all aspects of baseball, another had found in 1993 that it only applied to the reserve clause. The SBA indicated to Scheindlin that Congress at that time understood the broadcast of baseball games was not covered by the exemption. She was also unpersuaded by a Congressional Budget Office cost estimate of the CFA that included broadcast rights, since that could not be seen as sufficiently indicative of congressional intent, and language in the Act listing aspects of the baseball business that would not be affected by the law were also too vague to conclude that they were intended as specifically targeted at broadcast rights.
"Exceptions to the antitrust laws are to be construed narrowly", Scheindlin wrote, citing Supreme Court precedent to that effect. Noting again that outside Flood the Supreme Court had indicated baseball's antitrust exemption to be so legally dubious that it could not extend it to other sports, "I therefore decline to apply the exemption to a subject that is not central to the business of baseball, and that Congress did not intend to exempt—namely baseball's contracts for television broadcasting rights.
A year later, another case reached the appellate courts seeking to apply state antitrust law to baseball, when the Ninth Circuit heard City of San Jose v. Office of the Commissioner of Major League Baseball. The case concerned an effort by the Athletics to move to a new stadium proposed to be built in San Jose in order to remain in the Bay Area. In order to do so, the Giants had to give their assent as Santa Clara County was within their exclusive territory, and they had not been willing to. The city claimed that MLB was conspiring with other defendants to prevent the move.
The circuit's chief judge, Alex Kozinski, wrote for a panel that unanimously held for MLB. He rejected the city's argument that the antitrust exemption was limited to the reserve clause by pointing out that the circuit had held otherwise in deciding the Portland Beavers case shortly before Flood, which had turned on franchise relocation, the same issue at hand in the instant case. Further, the CFA had specifically exempted franchise relocation. " Floods clear implication" Kozinski wrote, "is that the scope of the baseball exemption is coextensive with the degree of congressional acquiescence, and the case for congressional acquiescence with respect to franchise relocation is in fact far stronger than it was for the reserve clause at issue in Flood itself."San Jose, 689–691
In 2017, hearing the appeal of Right Field Rooftops, the Seventh Circuit considered its Finley precedent and held that the sale of seats at locations outside the ballpark was within the antitrust exemption as well. "This exemption protects the general 'business of baseball' from antitrust laws, and the public display of baseball games is integral to that business", wrote Judge William J. Bauer. "By attempting to set a minimum ticket price, purchasing rooftops, threatening to block rooftops with signage that did not sell to the Cubs, and beginning construction at Wrigley Field, the Cubs' conduct is part and parcel of the 'business of providing public baseball games for profit' that Federal Baseball and its progeny exempted from antitrust law."
Limited to reserve clause
In Piazza, Judge Padova found Finleys reading of Flood and the cases leading to it incorrect. The more expansive reading sought by MLB to bar suit in the instant case, he allowed, might have been correct prior to Flood. But since that case had conceded that the factual basis for the exemption was no longer consistent with the Court's broadened reading of the Commerce Clause, Padova saw Federal Baseball and Toolsons continuing value as precedent to rest solely on those aspects covered by stare decisis in Flood.
For Padova, the "gravamen" of Federal Baseball, as shown in the D.C. Circuit's decision affirmed in that case, was MLB's use of the reserve clause to hamper the FL's efforts to sign players. The Flood Court, he noted, had more than once referred to the clause as the specific issue in Toolson as well, and saw its instant case as similarly limited: "For the third time in 50 years the Court is asked specifically to rule that professional baseball's reserve system is within the reach of the antitrust laws."Flood III, at 259(emphasis Padova's).
Padova identified two shortcomings with the Seventh Circuit's Finley opinion. First, it downplayed the role the Flood Court saw the reserve clause playing in the previous cases, wrongly suggesting it had only been mentioned twice, and peripherally, in the majority, omitting the quotations he had found significant. Second, "[a]pplication of the doctrine of stare decisis simply permits no other way to read Flood than as confining the precedential value of Federal Baseball and Toolson to the precise facts there involved."
right|thumb|Bob Butterworth
A year later, the Florida Supreme Court was considering another case related to the Giants' possible move to that state. The state's attorney general, Bob Butterworth, had issued civil investigative demands (CIDs) to the NL and other parties in an attempt to find out whether any of them broke Florida state antitrust law to keep the team from moving. The NL argued the antitrust exemption meant they would not have to comply. A trial court agreed, as did the state's Fifth District Court of Appeal, but it certified the question to the state's Supreme Court.
Writing for the six majority justices, Major B. Harding found Piazza more convincing than Finley and other cases that had held similarly. "There is no question that Piazza is against the great weight of federal cases regarding the scope of the exemption. However, none of the other cases have engaged in such a comprehensive analysis of Flood and its implications", he wrote. "In fact, many of the cases simply state that baseball is exempt and cite to one or more of the baseball trilogy without any discussion at all."Butterworth II, at 1025 
Concurring justice Ben Overton said that Piazza had changed his mind on the issue. He called on the U.S. Supreme Court to take the case and settle the question.Butterworth II, 1025–1026 The one dissenter, Parker Lee McDonald, mostly quoted at length from the trial judge's opinion holding that the question of franchise relocation was an essential part of the business of baseball and thus the antitrust exemption applied, barring the CIDs.Butterworth II, 1026–1027
The following year, in dismissing a suit against MLB brought by fans and businesses claiming to have been adversely affected by the recent strike, Judge Carolyn R. Dimmick of the Western District of Washington rejected the plaintiffs' reliance on Piazza and Butterworth as attacks on the validity of the antitrust exemption as a bar to their claims. She conceded that the Florida Supreme Court's complaint that Finley and the other precedents supporting a broad exemption were deficient in their reasoning, but noted that both they and Padova had omitted from their analysis the Flood Court's concluding statement quoting from Toolson: "Congress had no intention of including the business of baseball within the scope of the federal antitrust laws."Flood III at 285, quoting Toolson at 357
Major League Baseball v. Butterworth
But after Butterworth raised Piazza again in a 2001 suit over CIDs he issued again in response to MLB's plan to eliminate two teams the following season, federal judge Robert Lewis Hinkle of Florida's Northern District was unimpressed. Engaging in the same close reading of the baseball trilogy, he held that "[t]he assertion that [Federal Baseball] was solely a reserve clause case is simply not true", noting that the case discussed a wide range of allegedly unlawful trade practices., hereafter Butterworth III  He criticized Piazza in a footnote: "Whatever the lower court might have thought, the Supreme Court thought Federal Baseball dealt with other issues, over and above the reserve clause. It is an odd approach to interpreting Supreme Court cases to disregard that Court's own description of a case in favor of a lower court's description."Butterworth III, at 1324n9
The brief per curiam opinion in Toolson had not mentioned the reserve clause. The later cases in the 1950s—Shuster, International Boxing and Radovich—also lent support to a broad scope for baseball's antitrust exemption. Hinkle observed that the first mentioned only "the business of baseball", and the latter two, as they had also concerned sports, would likely have mentioned the reserve clause in declining to extend baseball's exemption to those sports (The judge found International Boxing particularly on point as the reserve clause has no equivalent in that sport, and thus the Court would have said that if it saw baseball's exemption as so confined).Butterworth III, 1325–1326
In Flood, "[n]ot once did the Court intimate in any way that it was only the reserve clause that was exempt", Hinkle wrote. "To the contrary, the Court's articulation of the exemption was always phrased as the business of baseball, never as simply the reserve clause." He followed this with a detailed review of the Flood Court's view of all the predecessor cases. "Not once did the Court intimate in any way that it was only the reserve clause that was exempt. To the contrary, the Court's articulation of the exemption was always phrased as the business of baseball, never as simply the reserve clause."Butterworth III, 1327–1330
Hinkle read Flood as establishing that it was up to Congress to modify or repeal baseball's antitrust exemption, rather than defining the scope of that exemption:Butterworth III, 1330–1331
Alston and Nostalgic Partners
In 2021 the Supreme Court ruled in National Collegiate Athletic Association v. Alston  that the petitioner did not have the same antitrust exemption as baseball. Justice Neil Gorsuch disparaged that exemption in his opinion for a unanimous Court:
That passage set off speculation that the next time the baseball exemption, almost a century old, came before the Court, it might be ready to finally overrule Federal Baseball. Baseball America noted that the opinion also took the unusual step of citing, inline, the amicus curiae brief filed by Advocates for Minor Leaguers, which has sought to have the antitrust exemption overturned. "I think that today's opinion signals that the current composition of the Supreme Court has a significant skepticism about baseball's antitrust exemption", said Harry Marino, director of that organization. "I read their segment of the opinion about the antitrust opinion as an invitation to litigants to raise the issue in front of the court".
thumb|left|Staten Island Yankees' logo
The case that has been seen as possibly giving the Court that opportunity was already in the courts.  As a result of the Minor League Baseball consolidation plan, the Staten Island Yankees' ownership group, Nostalgic Partners, decided late in 2020 that they had no choice but to fold the team after the parent New York Yankees revoked their affiliation with the club. They were not the only minor league team so affected. Since they had bought the club's majority interest 10 years earlier under the promise that the major-league Yankees, who owned a 5 percent stake, would retain that affiliation in perpetuity, Nostalgic brought suit in state court for breach of contract, promissory estoppel and tortious interference. MLB and its commissioner's office were also named as defendants. A month later the Tri-City ValleyCats, based in the upstate city of Troy, who had moved to the independent Frontier League after their MLB parent, the Houston Astros, similarly ended their affiliation, filed a similar suit.
Later in 2021 the court dismissed most, but not all, of both teams' claims. The ValleyCats lost on breach of contract, since their agreement with the Astros had ended in 2020, but prevailed on tortious interference. Conversely, the Staten Island Yankees lost their tortious interference claims while the court found the parent Yankees, from whom Nostalgic had bought the team, had represented at the time of sale that they would never de-affiliate regardless of the status of the contract. Both teams called the results a success and indicated they would proceed with discovery. The parent Yankees noted how many of the Staten Island Yankees' claims had been dismissed and anticipated that the remaining ones would fall on appeal.
In December, both teams, joined by the similarly de-affiliated Norwich Sea Unicorns and Salem-Keizer Volcanoes, filed a federal antitrust suit in the Southern District against MLB. The plaintiffs pointed to the skeptical passage in Alston and said "[we] thus have objectively good reasons to believe that the Supreme Court would no longer apply the 'unrealistic' and 'inconsistent' and 'aberration[al]' baseball antitrust exemption if presented with a proper case for reconsidering it ... This is that case." One of the lawyers involved told a sports podcast that since it seemed that the Court had been inviting a challenge in Alston, "[w]e've decided we're going to accept that invitation."
Sam Ehrlich, a Boise State legal studies professor whose writings about the baseball antitrust exemption include an amicus brief in Alston, told The Washington Post that claim was more than just talk. "Everything in the complaint is compelling. Everything they said is a clear antitrust violation. Baseball, the way it's been operating in the minor leagues, is a clear violation of antitrust law except that it has this exemption."
In a University of Cincinnati Law Review article, Ehrlich was more equivocal. He called the case "arguably the most compelling threat to the baseball exemption in nearly two decades", and suggested two paths to victory once the case reached the Supreme Court, as it likely would have to. One was for the Court to accept  Piazza and Butterworths reading of Flood that limited it to the reserve clause and that the CFA thus merely left the existing exemption intact without clarifying it or defining it in any way. The other way was to follow the "changing market realities" line of thinking that had led to Alston from its predecessor, NCAA v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma, and hold similarly that the changes in baseball since Flood justified setting that decision aside.
But he also pointed to reasons why the case might fail to overturn the exemption. Six of the current justices at that time had been part of a Court that had denied certiorari to recent cases challenging the exemption such as San Jose and Right Field. Also, Alston had targeted a "quasi-exemption" aimed at preserving amateurism in college athletics by one previous decision, whereas Flood reaffirmed an exemption established in two earlier decisions and addressed to some degree by legislation. Lastly, Gorsuch's language in Alston may also have been meant to affirm how unique and special the baseball exemption is: "To this end, Alston and other cases which declined to extend the baseball exemption to other sports only serve to strengthen the baseball exemption even more." Ehrlich described this as the "better read" rather than an invitation to bring a case bringing down the exemption.
 Analysis 
Blackmun's opinion was immediately unpopular among sportswriters such as Arthur Daley of The New York Times, who decried it as revealing "a total lack of logic". It has retrospectively been criticized by legal scholars as well, who are unhappy both with the rigid application of stare decisis and with the continued exemptions received by baseball for its reputation as the "national pastime".
William Eskridge has referred to Flood v. Kuhn and the other cases in the "baseball trilogy" as "the most frequently criticized example of excessively strict stare decisis" among legal scholars. For Kevin D. McDonald, the case is both "indefensible as a matter of fact or policy" and "an embarrassment to the Court".  Roger Ian Abrams, at Northeastern, wrote that the Court had "boxed itself in" by insisting on upholding Federal Baseball in Flood despite acknowledging the different circumstances regarding those two cases. David Snyder went so far as to say that in arguing Flood, "the Supreme Court had completely lost sight of the factual, legal and conceptual underpinnings of Federal Baseball". Morgen Sullivan notes that there is a contradiction in the Flood ruling, as the opinion explicitly states that baseball's antitrust exemption is limited to the reserve system, but ends by quoting a line in Toolson that expands the exemption to "the business of baseball". Mitchell Nathanson, meanwhile, states that the Supreme Court "finally acknowledged the absurdity of Holmes' contention ... but then inserted its own absurdity when it concluded that the fact that baseball is engaged in interstate commerce was nevertheless irrelevant".
Some judges upholding Flood have said they do so reluctantly, only out of duty to precedent, and have criticized it themselves. In Crist, after calling Toolson "shaky" and questioning its divination of Congressional intent from its inaction, Judge Tjoflat called the Court's "beneath that consistency is a layer of inconsistency"Flood III, at 284 defense of the baseball exemption in Flood "puzzling ... [T]he reasoning behind the present rule seems to be a rigid notion of stare decisis, coupled with a hesitancy to render a decision that would operate prospectively only."Crist, 1188n25
Of particular contention to scholars is the Court's assertion that Congress would undo baseball's antitrust exemption. Citing their previous inaction, Abrams argues that Congress had sufficiently demonstrated its refusal to act, leaving the matter to the Courts. William Basil Tsimpris has contrasted the application of stare decisis in Flood with the Court's ruling in Helvering v. Hallock, in which it was stated that Congress was unlikely to take action on a precedent, giving the Court the burden of self-correction. For McDonald, the decision to leave baseball's antitrust status to Congress was a poor interpretation of Federal Baseball, as Holmes never specified that legislation was the only pathway to undo his ruling.
Section I
In attempting to understand why MLB repeatedly enjoyed antitrust exemptions not afforded to other sports, scholars have largely targeted baseball's romantic reputation in American culture, as exemplified by Floods Section I. Abrams wrote that Blackmun "may have confused the business of baseball with the glorious game of baseball, thus explaining the sentimentality of Section I, which has been criticized as "rambling and syrupy", "juvenile", and even "bizarre". Savanna Nolan observed that even "the more serious elements of the opinion have a touch of ridiculousness" due to Blackmun's feelings towards the sport. Abrams also argued that Blackmun had likely used Lawrence Ritter's 1966 book The Glory of Their Times as his primary source, and showed how the careers of many of the players Blackmun listed had been impacted, often adversely, by the reserve system.
Stephen Ross takes a slightly more positive view, justifying Section I as a means "to establish the unique role that baseball plays in American culture", but nevertheless rationalizes that romantic picture influenced the Court's decision to exempt baseball from other business rules. Another commentator, Paul Campos of the University of Colorado Law School, has defended it as a "trace of resistance to the hyperrationality of contemporary legal discourse". Blackmun, he wrote:
"If Flood is seen ...  as a decision grounded in a desire to adopt sound legal rules for sports leagues, Part I makes eminent sense", says Illinois law professor Stephen F. Ross. He reads it as doing exactly that, countering critics who charge it with being an overly strict application of stare decisis by showing how Blackmun and the other majority justices could reasonably, at that time, have been convinced that "contemporary antitrust doctrines would condemn many arrangements among owners that are arguably essential to baseball".
Blackmun himself acknowledged in 1987, that his colleagues on the Court had, as Burger and Douglas's opinions suggest, seen it as "beneath [our] dignity". But he expressed no regrets, "In a 1987 television interview, Justice Blackmun noted that some people, including some Supreme Court colleagues, had viewed the style of the opinion as 'beneath the dignity of the Court.' But he said, 'I would do it over again because I think baseball deserved it.'" save the discovery by his clerks that, after the decision had issued, he had forgotten Mel Ott. In his personal copy of the decision he penciled Ott's name in.
See also
1972 in baseball
Baseball law
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court
Bosman ruling – 1995 European Court of Justice decision that allowed unrestricted free agency in the European Union
 Notes 
 References 
 Works cited 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:Major League Baseball litigation
Category:Major League Baseball labor relations
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:History of Major League Baseball
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:1972 in baseball
"""

From "Flora v. United States" ==> """
Flora v. United States, 357 U.S. 63 (1958), affirmed on rehearing, 362 U.S. 145 (1960), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a taxpayer generally must pay the full amount of an income tax deficiency assessed by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue before he may challenge its correctness by a suit in a federal district court for refund under 28 U.S.C. § 1346(a)(1).. The Supreme Court agreed with the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, stating that the full payment rule requires the entire amount of an asserted deficiency to be paid before a refund suit may be maintained.
Importance
If the taxpayer chooses to pay less than the deficiency asserted, the taxpayer's only remedies are (A) a deficiency proceeding in the Tax CourtSee generally . or, (B) in a bankruptcy case, a determination under section 505(a) of the US Bankruptcy Code.See . That rule can be a problem for a taxpayer who lets the 90-day period (following the issuance of a statutory notice of deficiency, during which he may file a Tax Court petition) expire and then cannot fully pay because of insufficient assets.
See also
Chief Justice Warren
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 357
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1958 in United States case law
"""

From "Florence County School Dist. Four v. Carter" ==> """
Florence County School Dist. Four v. Carter, 510 U.S. 7 (1993), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that, in certain circumstances, a court may order that parents be reimbursed for unilaterally withdrawing disabled children from schools that do not comply with the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.Florence County School Dist. Four v. Carter, .
Background
Parents of a learning-disabled child alleged that the child's public school did not provide appropriate resources, and the parents sought reimbursement for costs they incurred for placing their child in a private school.Florence County School Dist. Four, 510 U.S. at 10. The United States District Court for the District of South Carolina found that public school's proposed individual education plan violated the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act and that placement with private school was appropriate, and ordered reimbursement.Florence County School Dist. Four, 510 U.S. at 10-11. The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed, and United States Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve a circuit split regarding reimbursement under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.507 U.S. 907 (1993)
Opinion of the Court
In a unanimous opinion written by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, the Court held that the parents were entitled to reimbursement.Florence County School Dist. Four, 510 U.S. at 9-10, 16. Justice O'Connor wrote that the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act84 Stat. 175, as amended, 20 U.S.C. § 1400 et seq. (1988 ed. and Supp. IV). requires States to provide disabled children with a "free appropriate public education".Florence County School Dist. Four, 510 U.S. at 9-13 (citing § 1401(a)(18)). In cases where children are unable to receive an appropriate education in public schools, reimbursement may be available for when parents unilaterally place their children in private schools.Florence County School Dist. Four, 510 U.S. at 11-13. The Court also held that reimbursement is not barred because private school chosen by the parents did not meet IDEA's definition of free appropriate public education;Florence County School Dist. Four, 510 U.S. at 12-14. reimbursement is not barred because private school is not on state's approved list of private schools;Florence County School Dist. Four, 510 U.S. at 14-15. and courts may consider relevant factors in fashioning discretionary equitable relief, and total reimbursement is not appropriate if a court determines that cost of private education is unreasonable.Florence County School Dist. Four, 510 U.S. at 15-16.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 510
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:United States disability case law
"""

From "Florence v. Board of Chosen Freeholders" ==> """
Florence v. Board of Chosen Freeholders, 566 U.S. 318 (2012), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that officials may strip-search individuals who have been arrested for any crime before admitting the individuals to jail, even if there is no reason to suspect that the individual is carrying contraband.Supreme Court Ruling Allows Strip Searches for Any Arrest Retrieved April 8, 2012.
 Background 
Albert W. Florence was riding in a BMW sport-utility vehicle in New Jersey driven by his wife with their three children when she was pulled over for a traffic offense. The officer looked up Florence in the police computer database and discovered an outstanding warrant issued in Essex County. Florence had paid the fine, but the computer erroneously listed an outstanding warrant. Florence was placed under arrest in Burlington County and spent six days in jail before being transferred to Essex County's jail. At both jails, custody officers "conducted a visual inspection of his body, instructing him to open his mouth, lift his tongue, lift his arms, and then lift his genitals." Florence went before a judge and was quickly released from jail.
Florence filed suit against the two jails under  alleging that his Fourth and Fourteenth Amendment rights had been violated.. Florence, with Counsel of Record Susan Chana Lask, argued that "persons arrested for minor offenses cannot be subjected to invasive ... (Fourth Amendment-unreasonable searches) ... searches unless prison officials have ... (Fourteenth Amendment-due process clause) ... reason to suspect concealment of weapons, drugs, or other contraband." A federal judge agreed. On appeal, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals reversed, holding that the "jails' interest in safety and security outweighed the privacy interests of detainees – even those accused of minor crimes." The case was subsequently appealed to the United States Supreme Court; the Court granted certiorari on April 4, 2011.Albert W. Florence, Petitioner v. Board of Chosen Freeholders of the County of Burlington, et al. Retrieved April 8, 2012.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a 5–4 decision written by Justice Anthony Kennedy, the Court held that officials may strip-search individuals who have been arrested for any crime before admitting the individuals to jail, even if there is no reason to suspect that the individual is carrying contraband. Kennedy was joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Antonin Scalia, Samuel Alito, and Clarence Thomas. Justice Thomas joined all parts of Kennedy's opinion except part IV.
In his opinion, Kennedy noted that Timothy McVeigh was stopped by a state trooper after the Oklahoma City federal building bombing for driving without a license plate. And, one of the September 11 hijackers was "stopped and ticketed for speeding just two days before hijacking Flight 93," emphasizing the discrepancies that may exist between why an individual is arrested and the kind of threat they pose to society.
Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Alito issued separate concurrences.
Justice Stephen Breyer dissented, joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan. In the dissent, they argued that empirical evidence on strip-searches suggests there is no convincing reason that, in the absence of reasonable suspicion, involuntary strip-searches of those arrested for minor offenses are necessary. They cited a study conducted in New York under the supervision of federal courts, where out of 23,000 people searched, only one inmate had hidden contraband in his body in a way that would have avoided detection by x-ray and a pat-down. A cited California study found only three instances out of 75,000 inmates strip-searched in a five-year period.
 Subsequent developments 
The American Civil Liberties Union released a press statement saying that the decision "puts the privacy rights of millions of Americans at risk."
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 566
 Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution
 Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution
 Search and seizure
 Strip search
 References 
Further reading
  Fordham Law Review
External links
 Coverage of the case on SCOTUSblog
 Coverage of the case on the New Jersey ACLU's site
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2012 in United States case law
Category:Burlington County, New Jersey
Category:Strip search
"""

From "Flores-Figueroa v. United States" ==> """
Flores-Figueroa v. United States, 556 U.S. 646 (2009), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States, holding that the law enhancing the sentence for identity theft requires proof that an individual knew that the identity card or number he had used belonged to another, actual person.. Simply using a Social Security Number is not sufficient connection to another individual.
Background
Ignacio Flores-Figueroa, an illegal alien from Mexico, used a counterfeit Social Security card bearing his real name and a false Social Security number to obtain employment at a steel plant in East Moline, Illinois. Though he did not know it, the number belonged to a real person, a minor. The question in the case was whether workers who use false Social Security and alien registration numbers must know that they belong to a real person to be subject to a two-year sentence extension for "aggravated identity theft."
Specifically, the case hinged on whether the adverb "knowingly" applies only to the verb or also to the object in 18 U.S.C. § 1028A(a)(1) (which defines aggravated identity theft): "Whoever [...] knowingly transfers, possesses, or uses, without lawful authority, a means of identification of another person [...]".Jason Merchant (February 25, 2009) Adverbial modification at the Supreme Court today, Language Log.
Opinion of the Court
In a unanimous decision delivered by Justice Breyer on May 4, 2009, the Court held that a prosecutor must be able to show that a defendant knew that the identification he used actually belonged to another person.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 556
Mens rea
Morissette v. United States (1952)
References
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:Social Security lawsuits
Category:Illegal immigration to the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States identity theft case law
Category:East Moline, Illinois
"""

From "Florida Bar v. Went For It, Inc." ==> """
Florida Bar v. Went For It, Inc., 515 U.S. 618 (1995), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld a state's restriction on lawyer advertising under the First Amendment's commercial speech doctrine.  The Court's decision was the first time it did so since Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, , lifted the traditional ban on lawyer advertising.
 Background 
In 1989, the Florida Bar completed a two-year survey of public opinion of lawyers.  It discovered that lawyers had a bad reputation stemming from their advertising activities.  Accordingly, the Florida Bar proposed modifications to its rules regulating lawyer advertising in Florida.  These modifications had the effect of creating a thirty-day blackout period after an accident or disaster during which lawyers were forbidden from soliciting business from the victims of such accidents or disasters, either directly or through a referral service.
On March 22, 1992, a lawyer named G. Stewart McHenry, together with a lawyer referral service he owned called Went For It, Inc., filed a suit for declaratory and injunctive relief in U.S. District Court.  McHenry argued that the 30-day blackout period violated the First Amendment right to free speech, insofar as Went For It sought to contact victims of accidents and disasters within 30 days of the incident.  After McHenry was disbarred for unrelated reasons, another lawyer, John Blakely, was substituted for McHenry.
Relying on Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, , the district court entered summary judgment for Blakely and Went For It, believing that Bates compelled it to set aside the blackout period.  The Eleventh Circuit affirmed on similar grounds, although it claimed to be "disturbed that Bates and its progeny required the decision" in the case.  The U.S. Supreme Court accepted the Florida Bar's request that it review the case.
Analysis
Advertising by lawyers is commercial speech protected by the First Amendment.  The First Amendment allows states to ban commercial speech that is false or misleading.  If the speech is not false or misleading, then a state may only regulate or ban the speech if it asserts a substantial interest in support of its regulation, demonstrates that the restriction directly and materially advances that interest, and shows that the regulation is narrowly drawn.
The state, through the Florida Bar, asserted that it had a "substantial interest in protecting the privacy and tranquility of personal injury victims and their loved ones against intrusive, unsolicited contact by lawyers."  This interest stemmed from its perception that such solicitation "negatively affects the administration of justice," and hence also the reputation of lawyers as a whole. 
In the district court, the Florida Bar had submitted a 106-page report containing "statistical and anecdotal" evidence supporting the contention that the public viewed direct-mail solicitations from lawyers soon after an accident as intrusive.  In light of this evidence, the Supreme Court concluded that Florida's blackout period on direct solicitation advanced its interest in protecting the public from unwanted intrusions. 
Additionally, the Court believed that the Bar's means of advancing its interest was acceptable.  The Court found that the Bar's rule was" reasonably well tailored to its stated objective of eliminating targeted mailings whose type and timing are a source of distress to Floridians, distress that has caused many of them to lose respect for the legal profession." 
Although Went For It had suggested that the Bar could have banned only solicitations to seriously injured citizens, the Court noted that the commercial speech test did not mandate that a state use the least restrictive means to implement its objective.  Furthermore, the blackout period was brief, and there remained other ways for injured Floridians to learn about available legal services during that time. 
For all these reasons, the Court ruled that the First Amendment allowed Florida to impose this blackout period on direct-mail solicitation of accident victims by lawyers.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Legal history of Florida
Category:American Bar Association
Category:Advertising in the United States
Category:1995 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Paul" ==> """
Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Paul, 373 U.S. 132 (1963), was a 1963 decision of the United States Supreme Court in which the Court declined to invalidate a California law that imposed minimum fat content standards on avocados sold in the state, including those imported from other states..  The law prohibited the sale of avocados that did not contain at least 8% oil by weight. Florida, a major avocado producer, employed, for wholesale marketing purposes, a federal standard unrelated to oil content.  Most Florida avocados that were marketable at home failed to meet the California standard, because they were a different variety from those sold in California, with a lower fat content. Accordingly, Florida avocado growers brought this suit, arguing (unsuccessfully) that the California law (1) was preempted by federal law, (2) violated equal protection, and (3) unduly burdened and interfered with their right to engage in interstate commerce. The case is widely used in law school casebooks on constitutional law and federal jurisdiction as illustrative of preemption issues.See. e.g.,  410 (3d ed. 2006).
Background
thumb|right|California avocado (Haas)
thumb|Florida avocado (West Indian)
thumb|right|This is a comparison of a West Indian avocado (left) with a Mexican avocado (right) – human hand shows sizes.
There are three principal races or groups of avocado: Mexican, Guatemalan and West Indian, named for the areas where they were originally cultivated. Mexican avocados have foliage with an anise scent and small fruits about the size of a plum, with black or purple smooth skin. Guatemalan avocados have larger, blackish-green, rough-skinned fruits. The West Indian avocado has the largest fruits, up to 2 lbs (1 kg), with smooth light green skin. Mexican avocados have the highest oil content; West Indian the lowest. The important cultivars now in commercial production are mostly hybrids between these three original races., Persea americana.
In 1925, California enacted a law requiring that "all avocados, at the time of picking, and at all times thereafter, shall contain not less than 8 percent of oil, by weight of the avocado excluding the skin and seed."This is now § 792 of California's Agricultural Code. In 1925, practically all the avocados in the United States came from California. The purpose of this legislation was to prevent the marketing of immature avocados, which never ripen properly, but decay or shrivel up and become rubbery and unpalatable. The effect of marketing immature avocados is to antagonize consumers; this increases future sales resistance against buying avocados.
In 1925, most of the avocados grown in California were, as they are at the present time, from trees derived from Mexican varieties (e.g. Haas avocados). Such avocados contain at least 8% oil when mature. The Florida avocado growers, however, mostly cultivate West Indian, Guatemalan, and hybrid varieties, which may reach maturity and be acceptable and reach their prime for marketing prior to reaching an 8% oil content, or they may never reach that level of oil content.373 U.S. at 160-61. All members of the Court agreed that there is no health issue; the question is "a purely economic one."373 U.S. at 137 n.4, 168-69.
The Florida avocado growers objected to the California law because it severely restricts the access of Florida growers to the California market.The Florida growers alleged, at an earlier stage of this case, that California officials had consistently condemned Florida avocados as unfit for sale in California, "thus requiring [the Florida growers]—to prevent destruction and complete loss of their shipments—to reship the avocados to and sell them in other States." .
While California's avocado maturity standard is provided by statute, Florida's is set by a marketing order under the Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA), a New Deal measure creating a regime of self-government for farmers, designed to "promote orderly competition among the South Florida growers" of avocados. The marketing orders for avocados are drafted by the South Florida Avocado Administrative Committee, which consists entirely of representatives of the growers concerned. The Secretary of Agriculture invariably adopts the committee's recommendations for avocado maturity dates, sizes, and weights.373 U.S. at 150-51.
Proceedings in district court
Because the Florida avocado growers sued to enjoin the enforcement against them of the California law because it was unconstitutional, the case was brought before a three-judge district court. The growers challenged the constitutionality of the statute on three grounds:
(1) that, under the Supremacy Clause, the California standard must be deemed displaced by the federal standard for determining the maturity of avocados grown in Florida;
(2) that the application of the California statute to Florida-grown avocados denied appellants the Equal Protection of the Laws, in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment; and
(3) that its application unreasonably burdened or discriminated against interstate marketing of Florida-grown avocados in violation of the Commerce Clause.373 U.S. at 134-35.
At the initial stage of the case, the three-judge district court dismissed the case on jurisdictional grounds, finding that there was not a current justiciable case or controversy. On direct appeal, the Supreme Court held that the suit was one for a three-judge court and presented a justiciable controversy to be tried on the merits.Jacobsen, 362 U.S. at 85-86.
After a trial, the three-judge court denied an injunction against the enforcement of § 792 on the ground that the proofs did not establish that its application to Florida avocados violated any provision of the Federal Constitution. The District Court held for several reasons that the Supremacy Clause did not operate to displace § 792: (1) no actual conflict existed between the statute and the federal marketing orders; (2) neither the AAA nor the marketing orders occupied the field to the exclusion of the state statute, and (3) Congress had not ordained that a federal marketing order was to give a license to Florida producers to "market their avocados without further inspection by the states" after compliance with the federal maturity test.
Rather, the court observed, "[t]he Federal law does not cover the whole field of interstate shipment of avocados," but, by necessary implication, leaves the regulation of certain aspects of their distribution to the States. Further, the District Court found no violation of the Equal Protection Clause, because the California statute was applicable on identical terms to Florida and California producers, and was reasonably designed to enforce a traditional and legitimate interest of the State of California in the protection of California consumers. The District Court concluded, finally, that § 792 did not unreasonably burden or discriminate against interstate commerce in out-of-state avocados—that the 8% oil content test served, in practice, only to keep off California grocers' shelves fruit which was unpalatable because prematurely picked. This holding rested, in part, on the conclusion that mature Florida fruit had not been shown to be incapable of attaining 8% oil content, since only a small fraction of Florida avocados of certain varieties in fact failed to meet the California test.373 U.S. at 134–36.
Both parties then appealed to the Supreme Court.
Ruling of the Supreme Court
Majority opinion
thumb|right|150px|Justice Brennan delivered the majority opinion
Justice William J. Brennan delivered the 5-4 opinion of the Court, joined by Chief Justice Earl Warren, and Justices John Marshall Harlan II, Potter Stewart, and Arthur J. Goldberg.
Supremacy Clause issues
The Florida avocado growers' main challenge was under the Supremacy Clause, because some avocados that satisfy the standard set by the AAA marketing order do not satisfy the California 8% oil test.
The Court began by putting aside two issues that it considered beside the point. First, "a federal license or certificate of compliance with minimum federal standards [does not] immunize[] the licensed commerce from inconsistent or more demanding state regulations."373 U.S. at 141. (To this, the dissent responded that Gibbons v. Ogden is to the contrary.See 373 U.S. at 178 n.21.) Second, it is incorrect to claim that "the coexistence of federal and state regulatory legislation should depend upon whether the purposes of the two laws are parallel or divergent." The proper test, the Court said, "is whether both regulations can be enforced without impairing the federal superintendence of the field, not whether they are aimed at similar or different objectives." And preemption should be found only when there are "persuasive reasons—either that the nature of the regulated subject matter permits no other conclusion or that the Congress has unmistakably so ordained."373 U.S. at 142.
The Court then outlined the different ways preemption occurs. First, a holding of federal exclusion of state law "is inescapable, and requires no inquiry into congressional design where compliance with both federal and state regulations is a physical impossibility." This would occur, for example, if the federal marketing order forbade the marketing of any avocado testing more than 7% oil, while the California test excluded from the State any avocado measuring less than 8% oil. "As to those Florida avocados of the hybrid and Guatemalan varieties which were actually rejected by the California test, the District Court indicated that the Florida growers might have avoided such rejections by leaving the fruit on the trees beyond the earliest picking date permitted by the federal regulations, and nothing in the record contradicts that suggestion."373 U.S. at 142-43. (The dissent pointed out, however, that doing this would shorten the marketing window for those avocados, contrary to the federal scheme. Therefore, "inevitable collision between the two schemes of regulation" is present.373 U.S. at 176.)
Another basis for preemption would be whether "the nature of the subject matter, namely, the maturity of avocados, or any explicit declaration of congressional design to displace state regulation require § 792 to yield to the federal marketing orders." The Court said this is not a subject requiring national uniformity. On the contrary, as a regulation of food, "the maturity of avocados is a subject matter of the kind this Court has traditionally regarded as properly within the scope of state superintendence," because it is regarded as a matter of "peculiarly local concern." The majority distinguished between pre- and post-commerce federal regulation; it said that regulation of standards of the picking, processing, and transportation of agricultural commodities in commerce as properly a field of comprehensive federal regulation, but it should not displace "state control over the distribution and retail sale of those commodities in the interests of the consumers of the commodities within the State." Thus a state such as Florida could not prohibit exportation in commerce of federally certified avocados, but another state such as California may regulate their marketing in that state. At least: "Such a displacement may not be inferred automatically from the fact that Congress has regulated production and packing of commodities for the interstate market."373 U.S. at 144-45. The Court found it immaterial that this was an economic rather than health and safety measure: "neither logic nor precedent invites any distinction between state regulations designed to keep unhealthful or unsafe commodities off the grocer's shelves and those designed to prevent the deception of consumers."373 U.S. at 146.
The Court then turned to whether Congress intended that the AAA scheme should displace state law. "The settled mandate governing this inquiry, in deference to the fact that a state regulation of this kind is an exercise of the historic police powers of the States, is not to decree such a federal displacement "unless that was the clear and manifest purpose of Congress." There must be "an unambiguous congressional mandate to that effect," but the Court concluded, "We search in vain for such a mandate." Nothing in the AAA or its legislative history disclosed a "comprehensive congressional design."373 U.S. at 147-49.
Finally the Court expressed skepticism about the truly federal nature of the scheme:
 The regulations show that the Florida avocado maturity standards are drafted each year not by impartial experts in Washington or even in Florida, but rather by the South Florida Avocado Administrative Committee, which consists entirely of representatives of the growers and handlers concerned. It appears that the Secretary of Agriculture has invariably adopted the Committee's recommendations for maturity dates, sizes, and weights. Thus, the pattern which emerges is one of maturity regulations drafted and administered locally by the growers' own representatives, and designed to do no more than promote orderly competition among the South Florida growers.373 U.S. at 150-51. The Court added in a footnote at this point that the avocado marketing agreement was undertaken chiefly as a "self-help program." Id. n.17.
The Court therefore concluded that Congress did not intend "to oust or displace state powers to enact the regulation embodied in § 792." Rather: "The most plausible inference from the legislative scheme is that the Congress contemplated that state power to enact such regulations should remain unimpaired."373 U.S. at 152.
Equal Protection Clause
The Court affirmed the district court's conclusion that the state standard does not work an irrational discrimination as between persons or groups of persons." While "it may well be" that arguably superior tests of maturity could be devised than the 8% oil test, this possibility does not make the state's choice "either arbitrary or devoid of rational relationship to a legitimate regulatory interest." That is not a question for the courts to decide, and "it is sufficient that, on this record, we should conclude, as we do, that oil content appears to be an acceptable criterion of avocado maturity."
Undue burden on interstate commerce
The Court insisted that "the present record permits no inference that the California statute had a discriminatory objective." Nor has it been shown that "notwithstanding a legitimate state interest in some form of regulation," § 792 "exceeded the limits necessary to vindicate that interest"; or that § 792 was "an illegitimate attempt to control the conduct of producers beyond the borders of California." Nonetheless, the record was inadequate. Much of the proof was directed to other issues than those that would be probative on these points, and the court and parties left it uncertain what evidence entered the record. Therefore, a remand on the Commerce Clause issue was necessary for a new trial on this issue.373 U.S. 152-56.
California's cross-appeal
California cross-appealed on the ground that the district court should have dismissed the action for want of equity, rather than for lack of merit. The contention is that there was no justiciable controversy and an insufficient showing of injury (there must be an irreparable injury) to the Florida growers to invoke the district court's equity jurisdiction. The Court rejected both arguments.
First, in the earlier appeal, Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Jacobsen, the Court had held that, because of the Florida growers' allegations that California officials had consistently condemned Florida avocados as unfit for sale in California, "thus requiring [the Florida growers]—to prevent destruction and complete loss of their shipments—to reship the avocados to and sell them in other States." Thus it was evident that "there is an existing dispute between the parties as to present legal rights amounting to a justiciable controversy which appellants are entitled to have determined on the merits."
Second, even on the present inadequate and ambiguous record, the Florida growers demonstrated sufficient injury to warrant at least a trial of their allegations. It was conceded that the State, in objecting to the growers' proffered evidence, did not dispute the claim that some shipments of Florida avocados had, in fact, been rejected by California for failure to comply with the oil content requirement, to at least the extent of as much as 6.4% of the total shipments of Florida avocados into California. That is enough to warrant a trial on the merits. Furthermore, the case is not moot. It is clear that the California officials will continue to enforce the statute against the Florida-grown avocados, for the State's answer to the complaint declared that these officials "have in the past and now stand ready to perform their duties under their oath of office should they acquire knowledge of violations of the Agricultural Code of the State of California.373 U.S. 157-59.
Dissenting opinion
thumb|150px|right|Justice Byron White
Justice Byron White filed a dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Hugo Black, William O. Douglas, and Tom C. Clark.
The four-justice dissent addressed only the preemption issue: "Since we in the minority have concluded that the Agricultural Adjustment Act and regulations promulgated thereunder leave no room for this inconsistent and conflicting state legislation, we reach only the Supremacy Clause issue."373 U.S. at 160.
The dissent invoked the same legal standard for preemption as the majority: 
The ultimate question for the Court is whether the California law may validly apply to Florida avocados which the Secretary or his inspector says are mature under the federal scheme. We in the minority believe that it cannot, for, in our view, the California law "stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress." Hines v. Davidowitz.373 U.S. at 165.
But it reached the opposite legal conclusion:
The central and unavoidable fact is that six out of every 100 Florida avocados certified as mature by federal standards are turned away from the California markets as being immature, and are excluded from that State by the application of a maturity test different from the federal measure. Congress empowered the Secretary to provide for the orderly marketing of avocados, and to specify the quality and maturity of avocados to be transported in interstate commerce to any and all markets. Although the Secretary determined that these Florida avocados were mature by federal standards and fit for sale in interstate markets, the State of California determined that they were unfit for sale by applying a test of the type which the Secretary had determined to be unsatisfactory. We think the state law has erected a substantial barrier to the accomplishment of congressional objectives.373 U.S. at 166.
The dissent asserted that the Secretary of Agriculture:
has promulgated a comprehensive and pervasive regulatory scheme for determining the quality and maturity of Florida avocados, pursuant to the statutory mandate to "effectuate orderly marketing of such agricultural commodities." He prescribes in minute detail the standards for the size, appearance, shape, and maturity of avocados. Inspection procedures and, for violation of the regulations, criminal and civil sanctions are provided. No gap exists in the regulatory scheme which would warrant state action to prevent the evils of a no-man's land . . . No aspects of avocado maturity are omitted under the federal regulations. Any additional state regulation to "supplement" federal regulation would pro tanto supplant it with another scheme, thereby compromising to some degree the congressional policy expressed in the Act.373 U.S. at 166-67.
Both the California and Secretary's regulatory scheme have the same purpose, a purely economic one—to protect against the marketing of immature avocados, which would antagonize consumers and thus harm the industry. But the California scheme uses one test and the Secretary's scheme uses another. The result is to interfere with national marketing of agricultural products, contrary to the stated purposes of the AAA:
It is declared that the disruption of the orderly exchange of commodities in interstate commerce . . . destroys the value of agricultural assets which support the national credit structure . . . and burden[s] and obstruct[s] . . . commerce.It is declared to be the policy of Congress . . . to establish and maintain such minimum standards of quality and maturity and such grading and inspection requirements for agricultural commodities . . . as will effectuate . . . orderly marketing. . . .373 U.S. at 170 (quoting 7 U.S.C. §§ 601, 602).
It may be, as the majority suggests, White went on, that "local conditions of soil, climate, and the like" might call for different rules at the production end of the stream of commerce, but uniformity at the market end of the flow of commerce can be necessary to prevent burdens on commerce in agricultural produce:
It may not obstruct or burden commerce to admit avocados into commerce on diverse bases in different parts of the country; any individual grower in that situation would face but one standard. But it does burden commerce and frustrate the congressional purpose when each grower faces different standards in different markets. To slip from permissible nonuniformity at one end of the stream of commerce to permissible nonuniformity at the other end thus is to read the statute too casually and gloss over the congressional purpose, which expressly was to facilitate marketing in and transportation to "any and all markets in the current of interstate commerce."373 U.S. at 170-71.
The dissent saw a clear case of conflict between the state and federal regulatory schemes:
The conflict between federal and state law is unmistakable here. The Secretary asserts certain Florida avocados are mature. The state law rejects them as immature. And the conflict is over a matter of central importance to the federal scheme. The elaborate regulatory scheme of the marketing order is focused upon the problem of moving mature avocados into interstate commerce.373 U.S. at 173.
Because the Secretary of Agriculture adopted one avocado maturity test and California adopted a different one, the state test must give way to the federal one. It is not this Court's duty to decide which test is better. "Neither California nor this Court has any place second-guessing the wisdom of Congress or its delegate," the Secretary of Agriculture. The majority "ignores the plain words of the statute in concluding that the California law does not frustrate the federal scheme."373 U.S. at 175.
The dissent concluded:
The conclusion is inescapable that the California law is an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the congressional purposes and objectives, and that the California law and the Agricultural Adjustment Act, as supplemented by the regulations promulgated thereunder, cannot be reconciled, and cannot consistently stand together. The Court should not allow avocados certified as mature under the federal marketing order to be embargoed by any State because it thinks that they are immature.373 U.S. at 177-78.
Subsequent developments
After the remand, and a decade later, a three-judge federal district court decided J.R. Brooks & Son, Inc. v. Reagan.J.R. Brooks & Son, Inc. v. Reagan, No. C-71-1311 SC, 1973 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 15732 (N.D. Cal. Sep. 18, 1973). Brooks is a Florida agricultural firm that claims to be "the premier grower, packer and shipper of tropical produce grown in Florida" and "the largest grower of Florida avocados." Brooks Tropicals - company profile. Reagan was now the principal defendant because he was state governor. The court found that "the California 8 percent oil content requirement has been maintained and applied against Florida-grown avocados, as the result of pressure from the California avocado industry, for the purpose . . . of excluding competition from Florida avocados in California markets," and the statute has been "maintained and applied to operate, and in fact has operated, as an embargo against Florida-grown avocados" with the effect that it "has caused higher avocado prices to California consumers by preventing the sale of competitive Florida fruit."J.R. Brooks & Son, 1973 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 15732, at *8.
The court also found that the U.S. Secretary of Agriculture's regulations governing Florida avocado maturity "effectively keep [...] immature Florida avocados out of the channels of commerce." Moreover, these regulations "provide a better index of maturity than does an 8 percent oil content requirement."J.R. Brooks & Son, 1973 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 15732, at *11. "Absent the 8 percent oil content requirement, Florida shippers of avocados would market substantial quantities of West Indian varieties of avocados in California," but even though they are in fact mature they will not pass the California 8 percent test.J.R. Brooks & Son, 1973 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 15732, at *14. The effect is that the California statute "as applied to Florida avocados, discriminates in favor of California avocado growers and shippers and against Florida avocado growers and shippers" and "arbitrarily and unreasonably burdens interstate commerce in Florida avocados by imposing a standard which is irrational as applied to Florida avocados."J.R. Brooks & Son, 1973 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 15732, at *19.
The court accordingly concluded:
Were it not for the United States Supreme Court decision in Florida Avocado Growers v. Paul, we would conclude that: the application of [the relevant section of the] California Agricultural Code . . . to Florida avocados previously certified as mature under the Federal Marketing Order, violates the Supremacy Clause. The application of the California statute to Florida avocados discriminates against Florida avocados and unreasonably burdens interstate marketing of Florida avocados in violation of the Commerce Clause.J.R. Brooks & Son, 1973 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 15732, at *21.
The court therefore held that California could no longer enforce its law requiring 8 percent oil content "with respect to avocados grown in Florida and shipped to California in interstate commerce."Id.
Commentary
O'Neil
Robert M. O'Neil, who had been Justice Brennan's law clerk at the time of the Avocado decision, analyzed the case in a 1975 article.Robert M. O'Neil, State Consumer Protection in a Federal System, [1975]  L.J. 715. O'Neil asserted:
Federal regulation of one end of a stream of commerce did not inherently require the states to keep their hands off the other end. The Court did not distinguish
between protecting consumers against wasting money on immature produce and protecting health or safety. In fact, the Court seems to have deliberately declined a clear invitation to establish a hierarchy of state regulatory interests. Thus, by implication, preventing deception is as constitutionally valid a purpose as preventing disease in event of a federal-state conflict.Id. at 720.
O'Neil compared the Avocado case with the Head case. decided during the same term of Court, in which Justice Brennan had concurred separately. In that case, a radio station challenged a New Mexico law forbidding the advertising of eyeglass prices, arguing that the law was in unconstitutional conflict with the regulatory authority of the Federal Communications
Commission. The majority held that Congress could not have intended its grant of authority to the FCC to supplant all
the detailed state regulation of professional advertising practices. According to O'Neil, "Justice Brennan, who wrote the majority opinion in the Avocado case, offered a . . . different view" in a separate concurring opinion. He disagreed that the FCC regulatory scheme did not address advertising practices. "Thus, preemption could not be avoided because of any lack of federal authority in the field." Rather, it was avoided by the teachings of the Avocado case. These were:
 The field of retail advertising, was not one that required exclusive federal superintendence, because a broadcaster could comply with both federal and state law.
 There was no clear evidence of federal intent to preempt the field; FCC regulation of broadcasting was confined to certain specific facets of licensee conduct, with the implication that other facets should remain open to state regulation.
 Finally, the operation of the state law did not threaten the federal superintendence of the field. It was a general law forbidding certain advertising in all media, not just radio. "Such legislation, whether concerned with the health and safety of consumers, or with their protection against fraud and deception, embodies a traditional state interest of the sort which our decisions have consistently respected."O'Neil, at 722.
O'Neil concluded that of the few preemption cases since 1963:
None of these has shed more light on consumer
protection issues than the Avocado and Head cases. Meanwhile, lower federal and state courts, faced with regulatory conflicts in the consumer area, have looked to Avocado for guidance.
Deutsch
Jan Deutsch, who had been the law clerk of Justice Potter Stewart at the time of the Avocado and Head decisions, wrote at length about the Avocado case.Jan G. Deutsch, Precedent and Adjudication, 83  L.J. 1553 (1974), Deutsch emphasized the difference between the majority's and dissent's respective views of the contexts of the two regulatory schemes, and in particular the legitimacy of each scheme. The majority opinion insists, "[T]he present record permits no inference that the California statute had a discriminatory objective."See 373 U.S. at 153. At the same time, the majority questioned the legitimacy of the AAA marketing order scheme because:
[T]he Florida avocado maturity standards are drafted each year not by impartial experts in Washington or even in Florida, but rather by the South Florida Avocado Administrative Committee, which consists entirely of representatives of the growers and handlers concerned. It appears that the Secretary of Agriculture has invariably adopted the Committee's recommendations for maturity dates, sizes, and weights. Thus the pattern which emerges is one of maturity regulations drafted and administered locally by the growers' own representatives, and designed to do no more than promote orderly competition among the South Florida growers.
On the other hand, the dissent defends the legitimacy of the AAA scheme:
 It is suggested that the regulations involved here are "simply schemes for regulating competition among growers . . . initiated and administered by the growers and shippers themselves." From this proposition, it is in some way reasoned that "the self-help standards of this marketing program" should not be deemed to preclude application of state law which conflicts with and interferes with the operation of the comprehensive federal marketing program. The "simply" part of the proposition overlooks, however, the fact that these are the Secretary's regulations, promulgated under congressional authority. It also overlooks the Secretary's extensive supervisory powers, and his statutory duty under 7 U.S.C. § 602(3) to insure that regulations be carried on "in the public interest." And no case has been cited to us which indicates that the delegation to the regulatees of the power to propose regulations in the first instance violates any provision of general law.373 U.S. at 177 n.20.
The state legislature rubber-stamping the demands of the California avocado industry and the Secretary of Agriculture rubber-stamping the proposals of the Florida avocado industry thus appear to present a pot and kettle in a relative blackness contest. Deutsch concludes by asking a question that was never answered: given the findings of the 1973 remand decision in Brooks v. Reagan about blatant state protectionism for its domestic avocado industry and that the California 8% oil law "arbitrarily and unreasonably burdens interstate commerce in Florida avocados by imposing a standard which is irrational as applied to Florida avocados," what could the Court say on the appeal of the Brooks case to justify its 1963 decision?The question was never answered because there was no appeal to the Supreme Court.
WSJ 2016
A June 2016 article in the Wall Street Journal describes the current state of the Avocado War between Florida and California.Erin Ailworth, Lowly Guacamole! Florida's 'SlimCado' Lands With a Thud,  (June 3, 2016). J.R. Brooks (now Brooks Tropicals LLC), the successful plaintiff in the remand after the Supreme Court opinion, established the trademark "SlimCados" to designate several different Florida avocado varieties that it markets. Brooks promotes the lower fat content of Florida avocados as a desirable diet feature in "trying to compete with California's Hass variety, which accounts for 95% of the American avocado market and 80% of global demand." However, according to the Journal, "the oversize SlimCados look like a guacamole lover's dream," because their weight is up to six times that of a Hass, but "their different taste has left many disappointed, making them the avocado some foodies love to hate." The Journal quotes one detractor of Florida avocados as complaining, "I've never felt so betrayed by a piece of food in my life," because the Florida "avocado's innards were watery, producing a soupy guacamole that lacked the rich, creamy flavor she craved."
References
Further reading
Robert M. O'Neil, State Consumer Protection in a Federal System, [1975]  L.J. 715.
 Jan G. Deutsch, Precedent and Adjudication, 83  L.J. 1553 (1974),
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States constitutional law
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States federal preemption law
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of California
"""

From "Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Education Expense Board v. College Savings Bank" ==> """
Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Education Expense Board v. College Savings Bank, 527 U.S. 627 (1999), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States relating to the doctrine of sovereign immunity.
Florida Prepaid was a companion case to the similarly named (but not to be confused) College Savings Bank v. Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Education Expense Board, 527 U.S. 666 (1999). Where College Savings Bank was an action brought under the Lanham Act, Florida Prepaid was a concurrent action brought under the Patent and Plant Variety Protection Remedy Clarification Act. Although it was unnecessary to reach the question of whether Congress had validly abrogated Florida's sovereign immunity in College Savings Bank, the question was unavoidable in Florida Prepaid.
Findings
In a 5–4 decision authored by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, the court held that the Act's abrogation of States' sovereign immunity was invalid. Congress could only abrogate sovereign immunity pursuant to its powers under § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment and not Article I (see Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer; Seminole Tribe of Florida v. Florida).  Applying the § 5 test provided in City of Boerne v. Flores, the validity of the Act could not be sustained.
Implications
The results of the case are cited repeatedly in subsequent patent cases, and criticized.
Justice Stephen Breyer, in Active Liberty (Federalism), mentions the case as example of potentially overreaching or counterproductive restriction of federal authority to "create uniform individual remedies under legislation dealing with nationwide problems—for example, private civil damages actions for citizens injured by a state's unlawful use of their intellectual property."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 527
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:Legal history of Florida
Category:1999 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
"""

From "Florida Star v. B. J. F." ==> """
Florida Star v. B.J.F., 491 U.S. 524 (1989), is a United States Supreme Court case involving freedom of the press and privacy rights. After The Florida Star newspaper revealed the full name of a rape victim it got from a police report, the victim sued for damages. State law made it illegal for a publication to print a rape victim's name, and the victim was awarded damages. On appeal, the Supreme Court ruled the imposition of damages for truthfully publishing public information violates the First Amendment.
 Background 
Betty Jean Freedman (referred to as B.J.F. in the filings) was a woman who reported to the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office that she had been robbed and sexually assaulted. The Sheriff's Office put the details of what happened, including the victim's full name, in the general crime report for the county, which is placed in its press room and made available. A trainee reporter for The Florida Star, a local newspaper in Jacksonville, Florida, copied the item verbatim.  A Florida Star reporter then included the item in the October 29, 1983 issue of the paper, but erroneously included the victim's name in violation of the newspaper's internal policy not to identify rape victims.
On September 26, 1984, Freedman sued both the Sheriff's Office and the newspaper for violating Florida's shield law, Stat. § 794.03, which makes it  unlawful to "print, publish, or broadcast... in any instrument of mass communication" the name of the victim of a sexual offense.  The Sheriff's Office settled, paying the victim $2,500, but the newspaper would not. The trial court rejected the newspaper's defense that § 794.03 was unconstitutional, and the jury awarded Freedman $75,000 in compensatory damages and $25,000 in punitive damages.
The Florida First District Court of Appeal affirmed the trial court verdict, the Supreme Court of Florida denied discretionary review, and the United States Supreme Court granted certiorari.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court decided the facts in this case were not the same as those in Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn (1975), where a television station had obtained and reported the name of a rape victim from open court records, and the Supreme Court found the law there unconstitutional.  The Court decided that the law was unconstitutional, but on much narrower grounds.  First, the law made no effort to punish any party who disseminated the name of a rape victim except an "instrument of mass communication" which the law did not define.  This meant that the most vicious gossip who spread the details around was not subject to the law, but supposedly a newspaper was.  Second, the law basically punishes a newspaper which truthfully prints information which it had legitimately obtained from a government agency.
While a newspaper could be punished for truthfully reporting facts which were not public knowledge or which it unlawfully obtained (the Court referred back to prior cases where it gave examples of material a newspaper might legally be punished for publishing, such as the dates and times of troop ship movements during war), it is unconstitutional for a government agency to impose punishment upon a newspaper for truthfully publishing information that the government had in fact released publicly.
The judgment in favor of Freedman was reversed and the newspaper was found not liable.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 491
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 Google v González, C-131/12 (2014)
 publication bans
 Post-assault treatment of sexual assault victims
 References 
 Further reading 
 External links 
Category:Florida state case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:Rape in the United States
Category:Duval County, Florida
Category:History of women in Florida
"""

From "Florida v. Bostick" ==> """
Florida v. Bostick, 501 U.S. 429 (1991), was a United States Supreme Court case that overturned a per se rule imposed by the Florida Supreme Court that held consensual searches of passengers on buses were always unreasonable. The Court ruled that the fact that the search takes place on a bus is one factor in determining whether a suspect feels free to decline the search and walk away from the officers.
Background
The sheriff's department in Broward County, Florida, instituted a drug interdiction program. A bus bound from Miami to Atlanta made a stop in Fort Lauderdale, and two Broward County sheriff's department officers boarded. The two officers approached Bostick, who was a passenger on the bus, and asked for his ticket and his identification. They then explained that they were narcotics interdiction officers, and asked Bostick for permission to search his luggage. Whether or not Bostick was told that he was free to decline the search is a matter of dispute. The officers found cocaine in Bostick's luggage, and arrested him.
Bostick asked the trial court to suppress the cocaine. The trial court denied the motion, and Bostick pleaded guilty to trafficking in cocaine but specifically reserved the right to appeal against the denial of his suppression motion. The intermediate appellate court affirmed, but the Florida Supreme Court ruled that the search violated the Fourth Amendment because it took place on a bus.
The State of Florida petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari, which was granted. Joan Fowler argued the case for the State of Florida, and Solicitor General Kenneth Starr also argued for reversing the judgment of the Florida Supreme Court. Donald B. Ayer argued for Bostick, and the ACLU submitted an amicus curiae brief on Bostick's behalf.
Opinion of the Court
The Fourth Amendment forbids "unreasonable" searches and seizures. When the police detain a person for any length of time, it is a "seizure" within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment. The Court has found not all seizures to be unreasonable, and much Fourth Amendment law consists of explaining what makes certain governmental actions "unreasonable."
Justice O'Connor began by reciting certain basic ideas about what does not make a seizure unreasonable. It is not unreasonable for the police to approach a citizen and ask him a few questions, as long as a reasonable person would feel free to disregard the questions and carry on with his business. For police activity to constitute a seizure, the Court had held in Terry v. Ohio, , that there must be a show of physical force or other authority.  And in Florida v. Royer, , the Court had remarked that the police could approach a suspect in a public place (there, an airport concourse) and ask him a few questions without violating the Fourth Amendment.
The question in Bostick was whether the fact that the police approached the defendant while he was a passenger on a bus, by itself, rendered the encounter "unreasonable" under the Fourth Amendment. Justice O'Connor held it did not. In Michigan v. Chesternut, , the Court had suggested that a seizure occurs whenever a reasonable person does not feel "free to leave" an encounter with the police. Justice O'Connor suggested that the Florida court's error in Bostick was that it "focus[ed] on whether Bostick was 'free to leave' rather than on the principle those words were intended to capture."
Bostick claimed he was not "free to leave" because the bus was scheduled to depart soon, and if it were to depart without him he would be separated from his luggage. But Bostick "would not have felt free to leave the bus even if the police had not been present. Bostick's movements were 'confined' in a sense, but this was the natural result of his decision to take the bus; it says nothing about whether or not the police conduct at issue was coercive." Thus, it was not through any display of authority or show of force on the police's part that Bostick felt he was not free to leave the scene of the encounter with the police. In the absence of such a show of authority, there was no justification for the Florida court's per se rule that a seizure had occurred simply because the encounter had taken place on a bus.  Because the Florida courts had not engaged in the correct legal analysis, the Supreme Court sent the case back so that they could do so in the first instance.
Justice Marshall's dissent
Justice Marshall wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by Justice Blackmun and Stevens, portraying the law enforcement technique at issue in Bostick as one more likely to affect poor and minority citizens. Citing the low yield of actual drug traffickers, the admittedly arbitrary nature of the search, and the intrusive and intimidating style in which the police carry them out, Justice Marshall disputed the points relied on by Justice O'Connor to reach her conclusion.
To Justice Marshall, the facts of the case "exhibit all of the elements of coercion associated with a typical bus sweep." The officers wore jackets displaying the logo of the Broward County Sheriff's Department and brandished their badges. One of them carried a gun. They cornered Bostick at the back of the bus, blocking the aisle so that Bostick could not leave. While Justice O'Connor relies on the fact that the officers reminded Bostick he could refuse consent to the search, Justice Marshall points out that if Bostick had been unreasonably seized before they posed that question to Bostick, his consent was irrelevant. And for Justice Marshall, it was obvious that Bostick was not, in fact, free to terminate the encounter with the police. "Rather than requiring the police to justify the coercive tactics employed here, [Justice O'Connor] blames respondent for his own sensation of constraint....  Thus..., because respondent's freedom of movement was restricted by a factor independent of police conduct - i.e., by his being a passenger on a bus - [Bostick] was not seized for purposes of the Fourth Amendment."
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 501
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Florida
Category:Broward County, Florida
Category:Bus transportation in Florida
"""

From "Florida v. Georgia (1855)" ==> """
Florida v. Georgia, 58 U.S. (17 How.) 478 (1854), was a United States Supreme Court case invoking the Court's original jurisdiction to determine boundary disputes between states.  In this case the boundary dispute was between the State of Florida and the State of Georgia.
 Background 
Florida claimed that the state line was a straight line (called McNeil's line, for the man who surveyed it for the U.S. government in 1825) from the confluence of Georgia's Chattahoochee and Flint rivers (forming the Apalachicola River, at a point now under Lake Seminole), then very slightly south of due east to the source of the St. Mary's River, which was the point specified in Pinckney's Treaty in 1795. That eastern point of the straight line was near Ellicott mound, which was erected in 1799 at "about 30° 34' N." The McNeil line was looked upon for more than 20 years as the proper location of the boundary. 
Georgia claimed that the headwaters of the St. Mary's River were at the source of the southern branch, some 30 miles or nearly 50 kilometers south, at Lake Spalding or Lake Randolph. If upheld, Georgia would have obtained additional territory estimated at 800 to 2,355 square miles. The position of the U.S. commissioners was that the actual source of the St. Mary's was two miles north of the Ellicott mound.
Other Supreme Court cases involving Georgia boundary disputes include: State of Alabama v. State of Georgia, 64 U.S. 505 (1860), and two Georgia v. South Carolina cases in 1922 and 1990.
 Opinion of the Court 
175px|left
Chief Justice Taney delivered the opinion of the Court, ruling in favor of Florida and setting the state boundary line along "McNeil's line." This outcome was followed in 1859 by the surveying of the Orr and Whitner line. On April 9, 1872, Congress approved the Orr and Whitner Line as part of the border between Georgia and Florida.
 Dissent 
Justice Curtis, joined by Justices McLean, Daniel and Campbell, delivered the dissenting opinion, asserting that the United States was effectively made a party through the Attorney General, and such intervention by the United States government was an impermissible intervention in matters of the individual states.
 See also 
 New Hampshire v. Maine
 State of New Mexico v. State of Texas
 References 
 External links 
Category:1854 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:Internal territorial disputes of the United States
Category:Legal history of Florida
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:1854 in Florida
Category:1854 in Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taney Court
"""

From "Florida v. Georgia (2018)" ==> """
Florida v. Georgia, 585 U.S. ___ (2018), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in an original jurisdiction case. It involves a long-running dispute over waters within the ACF River Basin, running from the north Georgia mountains through metro Atlanta to the Florida panhandle, which is managed by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. Waters in the area have been stressed by the population growth of Atlanta over previous decades. The immediate case stemmed from droughts in 2011 and 2012 that caused economic damage to Florida due to lower water flows from the ACF River Basin into the panhandle, impacting its seafood production; Florida sought relief to have more water allocated towards them from the ACF by placing a water allocation cap on Georgia. The Supreme Court assigned a special master to review Florida's complaint, but ultimately found in 2016 that Florida had not fully demonstrated the need for more allocation. Florida challenged this determination to the Supreme Court. On June 27, 2018, the Supreme Court ruled 5–4 that the special master had not properly considered Florida's argument and remanded the case to be reheard and reviewed.
Subsequently, the court replaced the special master, who later ruled against Florida in the dispute. Florida challenged the conclusions of the special master's report, but the Supreme Court overruled Florida's exceptions and unanimously dismissed the case in Florida v. Georgia, 592 U.S. ___ (2021).
Background
The case involves the Apalachicola-Chattahoochee-Flint (ACF) River Basin, which includes three major rivers in the southeast United States.  The Chattahoochee River runs from the southern end of the Appalachian Mountains in northern Georgia and runs south-southwest and towards the Gulf of Mexico; it forms the state border between Georgia and Alabama. The Flint River forms from groundwater seepage in northern Georgia, and also runs south-southwest until it meets with the Chattahoochee at the southern edge of both Georgia and Alabama. The combined rivers become the Apalachicola River which then crosses Florida's panhandle and empties into Apalachicola Bay, an estuary abutting the Gulf. Besides serving as water sources for various municipal water systems, the ACF River Basin also provides significant quantities of water for agricultural irrigation, and numerous wildlife species reside along the rivers, particularly within the Bay.
With approval from Congress, the United States Army Corps of Engineers completed Buford Dam on the Chattahoochee in Georgia in the 1950s that created the reservoir Lake Lanier. This was intended to help manage the water flow along the Chattahoochee so that it could be used for both hydroelectric power and for water-bourne transport through a series of locks, as well as for flood control. 
In the second half of the 20th century, Atlanta saw a significant boost in population growth, stressing its water supply that was also coupled with droughts. The Corps, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the state of Georgia, and the Atlanta Regional Commission conducted a study in 1989 to determine that to meet Atlanta's water needs in the future, the city could be offered the right to purchase some of the water stored in Lake Lanier as long as the city and state paid for the costs of constructing and operating the offtake from the lake to metro Atlanta. The Corps determined that there was no significant environmental impact of this approach.
Prior litigation
In 1990, Alabama filed a lawsuit to stop the Corps from implementing this plan, and other suits followed from Georgia and Florida. These suits were ultimately combined into a signal case designed to examine two questions: whether the Corps had the authority to grant water usage rights, and whether the plan ignored elements of the Endangered Species Act of 1973. By 1992, the parties had come to a memorandum of understanding (MOU) that would stay the lawsuit, with the Corps holding off on implementing their water supply plan with Atlanta, while a comprehensive water usage study of both the ACF and the neighboring Alabama-Coosa-Tallapoosa (ACT) River Basin was conducted. The MOU also included allowance for the Corps to provide reasonable quantities water to the metro Atlanta area to meet their needs while the study was in progress.
By 1997, the study had yet to be completed, but Congress ratified two interstate compacts, the ACF and the ACT Compact, which allowed the involved states to enter into negotiations to derives formulas for how the water was to be allocated from these two basins. As with the 1992 MOU, the ACF Compact allowed the Corps to continue to provide water to the metro Atlanta area as it saw needed while the negotiations progressed. The states attempted to reach an agreement in the compact, but by 2003, these negotiations for the ACF Compact had failed, and 2004 for the ACT Compact, and both compacts were dissolved.
Alabama restarted its 1990 lawsuit following the dissolution of the ACF Compact. This ended up splintering into eight different cases at state and federal level, but were ultimately condensed into two cases. The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit ruled in 2011 that the Corps did have the right to allocate waters from Lake Lanier to Atlanta, as Congress had authorized this use in the legislation used to approve of the project. Within the year, the Corps made a preliminary decision that it could offer 705 million gallons per day from Lanier to Atlanta to be added to its Master Manual for the ACF Basin, but that decision was pending an environmental impact statement. Alabama petitioned the case to the Supreme Court but they declined to hear the challenge, effectively ending decades of litigation.
Case history
In 2011 and 2012, droughts in the southeast states led to lower water levels in the ACF rivers, increasing the salinity of the waters in Apalachicola Bay, and caused a collapse of Florida's oyster industry. In 2013, Florida filed a motion for leave with the Supreme Court, issuing a complaint for equitable apportionment and injunctive relief against the state of Georgia. Florida claimed that the increased offtake of water by Georgia had caused "serious harm" to the ecosystem, and demanded that Atlanta cap its water offtake from the Chattahoochee to the 1992 levels (at the time of the MOU). The Court accepted the motion, and assigned  Ralph I. Lancaster, Jr. as a special master to review the complaint. Lancaster performed discovery and pre-trial hearings from 2014 to 2016, and held a six-week trial in late 2016. He provided the Court with his report in February 2017, rejecting Florida's complaint towards Georgia. Lancaster had agreed that there was environmental impact from lower water levels, he stated that Florida had “not proven by clear and convincing evidence" that a water offtake cap would improve water availability during drought periods. Additionally, as Florida had not included the Army Corps within its complaint, they could not seek the required relief. 
In May 2017, the Corps updated its Master Manual to include the Atlanta water usage, with notice that should the Supreme Court issue a ruling in the case, they would update the Manual appropriately. Based on this new information, Florida filed their exceptions to Lancaster's report, specifically taking objection that they had to show clear evidence that capping Atlanta's water support would provide the redress they requested.
 At the Supreme Court 
Oral arguments took place on January 8, 2018.
The Court issued its ruling on June 27, 2018. In a 5–4 decision, the Court found that the Special Master used too strict a standard to the case presented by Florida, and ordered the case be remanded to be reheard to take appropriate considerations for Florida's arguments.
Subsequent actions
Following the ruling, on August 9, 2018, the Supreme Court discharged Special Master Lancaster with the thanks of the court and replaced him with Judge Paul Joseph Kelly Jr. of the Tenth Circuit. Kelly discussed if the case needed additional discovery with the parties, but all agreed that the current documented history of the case should be sufficient, so Kelly, by January 2019, sought final statements and conclusions from the parties to review, with responses and counter-statements made by March 2019. In December 2019, the special master found in favor of Georgia. In his 96-page report to the Supreme Court, Kelly recommended denying Florida's request for a decree allocating the water between the two states. He found that Florida failed to show that Georgia's use of water was excessive or that the harm to their domestic oyster industry was caused by Georgia's activity. He also found that the benefit to Florida would not outweigh the harm to Georgia under the doctrine of equitable apportionment.
Florida dispute the ruling of the Special Master in a new challenge to the Court. The Court heard oral arguments to this case on February 22, 2021 and issued a unanimous ruling on April 1, 2021, overruling the exemptions that Florida had with the Special Master's findings and dismissing their case (Florida v. Georgia, ) The unanimous opinion, written by Justice Amy Coney Barrett, stated that Florida failed to prove out its exceptions it had on the Special Master ruling, and that "Considering the record as a whole, Florida has not shown that it is 'highly probable' that Georgia's alleged overconsumption played more than a trivial role in the collapse of Florida's oyster fisheries."
 References 
 External links 
 Tri-State Water Wars — Background and History (ARC)
 SCOTUS Blog
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court original jurisdiction cases
Category:2018 in United States case law
"""

From "Florida v. Harris" ==> """
Florida v. Harris, 568 U.S. 237 (2013), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court addressed the reliability of a dog sniff by a detection dog trained to identify narcotics, under the specific context of whether law enforcement's assertions that the dog is trained or certified is sufficient to establish probable cause for a search of a vehicle under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution..  Harris was the first Supreme Court case to challenge the dog's reliability, backed by data that asserts that on average, up to 80% of a dog's alerts are wrong.  Twenty-four U.S. States, the federal government, and two U.S. territories filed briefs in support of Florida as amici curiae.
thumb|238px|right|alt=A dog with a police badge attached to its collar|Police dog
Oral argument in this case – and that of another dog sniff case, Florida v. Jardines – was heard on October 31, 2012. The Court unanimously held that if a bona fide organization has certified a dog after testing his reliability in a controlled setting, or if the dog has recently and successfully completed a training program that evaluated his proficiency, a court can presume (subject to any conflicting evidence offered) that the dog's alert provides probable cause to search, using a "totality-of-the-circumstances" approach.
Background
Prior to this case, the United States Supreme Court has on three occasions dealt with cases involving "dog sniffs" by detection dogs trained to identify narcotics, and has addressed whether or not a dog sniff constituted a "search" under the Fourth Amendment.  In those three cases, the Supreme Court has held that:
Indeed, the question of whether or not a canine sniff is a "search" was not at issue in this case.  One passage from Caballes does, however, foretell the issue in the instant case:
This case addressed whether that dog's alert alone is sufficient to establish probable cause for a search, or whether law enforcement must first establish the reliability of such an alert.
Facts of the case
On June 24, 2006, a Liberty County, Florida Sheriff's Canine Officer Wheetley and his drug-detection dog, Aldo, were on patrol. The officer conducted a traffic stop of defendant Clayton Harris's truck because his tag had expired. Approaching the truck, the officer noticed that the defendant was shaking, breathing fast, and appeared agitated – he also noticed an open beer container in the vehicle's cup holder. When the defendant refused consent to search the truck, the officer deployed Aldo to walk around the truck. As he performed a "free air sniff" of the truck's exterior, the dog alerted his handler to the driver's side door handle.
The officer then searched the vehicle, and found over 200 pseudoephedrine pills in a plastic bag under the driver's seat.  On the passenger's side, the officer found boxes containing a total of 8000 matches. Harris was then placed under arrest, and a further search uncovered muriatic acid, antifreeze/water remover, a foam plate inside a latex glove, and a coffee filter with iodine crystals.  The officer testified that these chemicals are precursors of methamphetamine. After being read his Miranda rights, Harris stated that he had been "cooking meth" for about one year, and had most recently cooked it at his home two weeks prior.  As no methamphetamine was found in the vehicle, the State charged Harris with possession of the listed chemical pseudoephedrine with intent to use it to manufacture methamphetamine.
About two months after the June 24 stop, Harris was again stopped by the same officer for another traffic infraction. During that stop, the officer again deployed Aldo – who once again alerted to the driver's side door handle. The officer again searched the vehicle, and found no illegal substances, save for an open bottle of alcoholic beverage.
The trial court denied Harris's motion to suppress the evidence produced by the search, and instead found that there was probable cause to support the search.  The decision of the Florida First District Court of Appeal (DCA), in a per curiam decision, affirmed the trial court's ruling.  The First District, without elaboration, cited State v. Laveroni (2005) and State v. Coleman (2005) as authority in support of affirming the trial court.
Harris sought review by the Supreme Court of Florida, based on contradictory appellate rulings from other districts, namely Gibson v. State (2007) and Matheson v. State (2003).
In his challenge, Harris pointed out that on each of the two occasions in which his vehicle was searched, the dog alerted his handler to contraband which was not present in the vehicle.
Aldo's training and reliability
The police officer testified that on the date of Harris's arrest, he had been on the force for three years, and had been a canine handler for two. Aldo completed a 120-hour drug detection training course two years earlier with his handler at the time, and was certified by an independent company that certifies K-9s.  Aldo is trained and certified to detect cannabis, cocaine, ecstasy, heroin, and methamphetamine – he is not trained to detect alcohol or pseudoephedrine.  Although pseudoephedrine is a precursor to methamphetamine, there was no testimony as to whether a dog trained to detect methamphetamine would also detect pseudoephedrine.
Officer Wheetley and Aldo were partnered for a year before the Harris stop, and they completed an annual forty-hour training seminar four months prior to that stop.  In addition, the officer spends four hours per week training Aldo in detecting drugs in vehicles, buildings, and warehouses. For example, the officer testified, he may take Aldo to a wrecker yard and plant drugs in six to eight out of ten vehicles.  Aldo must alert the handler to the vehicles with drugs, and he is rewarded when he does so.  Aldo's rate of success during these sessions was described as "really good".  The dog's training records, which the officer began keeping six months prior to Harris's stop, showed that on a dual grade of "satisfactory" or "unsatisfactory", Aldo performed "satisfactory" 100% of the time. The officer did not track false positives, nor did he explain whether any false positive alerts by Aldo would affect his "satisfactory" performance rating.
In Florida, a single-purpose dog like Aldo, such as one trained only to detect drugs, is not required by law to carry certification.  In contrast, a dual-purpose dog, such as one trained in both apprehension and drug detection, must carry Florida Department of Law Enforcement (FDLE) certification.
As for Aldo's performance in the field, the Florida Supreme Court noted that:
Lower court
As a result, the Florida Supreme Court reversed, saying:
Additionally, the Florida Supreme Court cited one commentator's description of the "'mythic infallibility' of the dog's nose":
Supreme Court
The State of Florida petitioned the United States Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari, which was granted on March 26, 2012.
Question presented
Harris raises the following issues:
 Whether officers may search a vehicle based solely on an alert by a drug dog.
 What is required to establish that a drug dog is well-trained?
Amicus curiae
Briefs of amicus curiae were filed in support of the petitioner by:
 United States of America
 The States of Alabama, Arizona, Colorado, Delaware, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Maine, Michigan, Missouri, Nebraska, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington and Wisconsin, plus Puerto Rico and Guam
 National Police Canine Association and Police K-9 Magazine
Briefs of amicus curiae were filed in support of the respondent by:
 National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, the American Civil Liberties Union, et al.
 Rutherford Institute
 Electronic Privacy Information Center  (EPIC)
 Fourth Amendment Scholars (34 college law professors)
 Institute for Justice
Arguments
Oral argument was heard on October 31, 2012.  This case was heard on the same day as that of another dog sniff case, Florida v. Jardines.  That case addresses whether a dog sniff at the front door of a house is a Fourth Amendment search requiring probable cause and a search warrant, or whether it is an acceptable minimally invasive warrantless search.
False alerts in the field
In Harris, one of the major points raised by a number of the amici curiae is that a dog's training or certification does not necessarily reflect that dog's reliability in the field.  They point to what they say are "the most comprehensive data available on the rate of false alerts in real-world settings"  – several years' of studies undertaken by an independent government agency in Sydney, Australia, under the Police Powers (Drug Detection Dogs) Act 2001.  Police dogs went through an initial 6 weeks of training to detect cannabis, ecstasy, methamphetamine, cocaine and heroin, received additional training weekly, and were tested and re-certified every three months.  The police dogs would randomly sniff individuals at train stations, licensed premises, on streets and sidewalks, at nightclub strips, shopping centers, concerts, and other public locations – the dog would sit next to a person if it alerted.  In the first 9 months of 2011, dogs alerted (and police searched) 14,102 times, and drugs were found only 2,854 times—a false alert rate of 80%.  Those results, they say, are surprisingly consistent – in 2010, the false alert rate was 74%.  Further still, the study found that individual dog's performance varied wildly, with accuracy rates ranging from a high of 56% to a low of 7%, with two-thirds of the dogs performing below the average. The New South Wales' Ombudsman summarized his report by saying:
Prosecutors, on the other hand, say that does not prove anything.  They point to "residual odors", meaning that the individuals may have in fact been in contact with drugs earlier and the drugs were no longer present, or the drugs may have been extremely well-hidden. In a reply brief, P.J. Bondi, Attorney General of Florida, wrote:
Decision
The United States Supreme Court returned a unanimous decision on February 19, 2013, ruling against Harris and overturning the ruling of the Florida Supreme Court.  In the unanimous opinion, Justice Elena Kagan stated that the dog's certification and continued training are adequate indication of his reliability, and thus is sufficient to presume the dog's alert provides probable cause to search, using the "totality-of-the-circumstances" test per Illinois v. Gates. She wrote that the Florida Supreme Court instead established "a strict evidentiary checklist", where "an alert cannot establish probable cause ... unless the State introduces comprehensive documentation of the dog's prior 'hits' and 'misses' in the field ... No matter how much other proof the State offers of the dog's reliability, the absent field performance records will preclude a finding of probable cause."Florida v. Harris,  (slip op., at 6).
The Court did not, however, rule out the questioning of reliability where specific grounds are present. Kagan also stated that "a defendant must have an opportunity to challenge such evidence of a dog's reliability, whether by cross-examining the testifying officer or by introducing his own fact or expert witnesses. The defendant may contest training or testing standards as flawed, or too lax, or raise an issue regarding the particular alert."Harris, 568 U.S., (slip op., at 8).
 See also 
 Detection dog
 Police dog
 Rodriguez v. United States, 
 Florida v. Jardines, 
 Illinois v. Caballes, 
 Katz v. United States, 
 Kyllo v. United States, 
 United States v. Karo, 
 Payton v. New York, 
 Aguilar–Spinelli test
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 568
 References 
 External links 
 U.S. Supreme Court, Docket # 11-817, Proceedings and Orders
 SCOTUSBlog page for Florida v. Harris
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:Detection dogs
Category:Liberty County, Florida
"""

From "Florida v. J. L." ==> """
Florida v. J. L., 529 U.S. 266 (2000), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court determined that a police officer may not legally stop and frisk someone based solely on an anonymous tip that describes a person's location and appearance, but does not furnish information as to any illegal conduct.
 Facts and procedural history
In 1995 the Miami-Dade Police Department received an anonymous tip that a young black male was at a bus stop wearing a plaid shirt and carrying a firearm.  The police went to the bus stop and saw three young black men, one wearing a plaid shirt. Acting solely on the tip (the officers did not observe any criminal or suspicious behavior), they searched all three, and found a pistol in the pocket of the man wearing the plaid shirt.  
At trial the court granted the juvenile defendant's motion to suppress evidence as fruit of an unreasonable search and seizure.  However, the Florida Third District Court of Appeal reversed the trial court.  J.L. appealed the decision to the Florida Supreme Court, which overruled the decision of the District Court of Appeal, holding that the tip did not give sufficient indicia of reliability to justify a stop and frisk of the subject.  The appellee sought certiorari review from the United States Supreme Court.
 Opinion of the Court 
The United States Supreme Court held in a unanimous opinion by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg that the search was unreasonable. That the tip accurately identified the defendant and that the allegation of the firearm ultimately proved to be accurate was insufficient to justify the seizure. For a completely anonymous tip to justify even a "stop and frisk" of a suspect pursuant to Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968), it must be "suitably corroborated" with both the accurate prediction of future activity of the subjectsee Alabama v. White, 496 U.S. 325 (1990). and accurate in its assertion of potential criminal activity.  The tip given in the J.L. case was only sufficient to identify the subject and nothing more, making the police reliance upon it unjustified.
The Court further declined to create a standard "firearms exception" to the Terry doctrine, as was recognized in some Federal circuits, stating, among other things, that "[s]uch an exception would enable any person seeking to harass another to set in motion an intrusive, embarrassing police search of the targeted person simply by placing an anonymous call falsely reporting the target's unlawful carriage of a gun . . . ."Florida v. J.L., 529 U.S. 266, 272 (2000).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 529
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
References
External links
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
v. J.L.
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:Miami-Dade Police Department
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Florida v. Jardines" ==> """
Florida v. Jardines, 569 U.S. 1 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court case which resulted in the decision that police use of a trained detection dog to sniff for narcotics on the front porch of a private home is a "search" within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution, and therefore, without consent, requires both probable cause and a search warrant..
thumb|238px|right|Police dog
In 2006, police in Miami, Florida received an anonymous tip that a home was being used as a marijuana grow house. They led a drug-sniffing police dog to the front door of the home, and the dog alerted at the front door to the scent of contraband. A search warrant was issued, which led to the arrest of the homeowner.
Twenty-seven U.S. states and the Federal government, among others, had supported Florida's argument that this use of a police dog was an acceptable form of minimally invasive warrantless search.  In a 5–4 decision, the Court disagreed, despite three previous cases in which the Court had held that a dog sniff was not a search when deployed against luggage at an airport, against vehicles in a drug interdiction checkpoint, and against vehicles during routine traffic stops. The Court made clear by this ruling that it considers the deployment of a police dog at the front door of a private residence to be another matter altogether.
 Background 
On November 3, 2006, an anonymous, unverified tip was given to the Miami-Dade Police Department through its "crime stoppers" tip-line, indicating that the residence of Joelis Jardines was being used as a marijuana grow house. About a month later, on December 6, 2006, two detectives and a drug-detection dog approached the residence, while other officers of the Miami-Dade Police Department established perimeter positions around the residence, with agents of the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) in stand-by positions as backup units.
As summarized by the written opinion of the Florida Third District Court of Appeal:
While the Miami-Dade narcotics detective was away from the scene in order to secure the search warrant, Federal DEA agents remained behind to maintain surveillance of Jardines' home.  The search warrant was secured about an hour later, and was executed by officers from both agencies. The defendant was apprehended by a DEA agent as he attempted to flee through the rear door of the residence.
 Lower courts 
Initially, the trial court granted the defendant's motion to suppress evidence that was obtained from his home, citing the authority of State of Florida v. Rabb.  The State appealed that decision to suppress, and the Florida Third District Court of Appeal (DCA) reversed, while certifying a conflict with the earlier Rabb decision.Jardines, 9 So.3d, at 10–11.  Summarizing their reasoning, the DCA stated:
The foundation for the principle that "a canine sniff is not a Fourth Amendment search" was derived from the Supreme Court's previous dog sniff cases, discussed below, and lies at the heart of the instant case and of several other similar cases.
Jardines sought review in the Florida Supreme Court, based on the Rabb conflict.Jardines, 73 So.3d, at 39.  In a 5–2 decision rendered on April 14, 2011, Florida's Supreme Court sided with Jardines, saying:
The State filed a motion for rehearing, which the Florida Supreme Court denied on July 7, 2011.
 Previous dog sniff cases 
In its written opinion, the Florida Supreme Court referenced and analyzed the only three dog sniff cases to have been heard by the U.S. Supreme Court to date.  In the first, United States v. Place (1983),United States v. Place, . that Court answered the question of whether police, based on reasonable suspicion, could temporarily seize a piece of luggage at an airport and then subject the luggage to a sniff test by a drug-detection dog.  After the defendant's behavior at an airport attracted suspicion, police seized his luggage and subjected it to a sniff test by a drug-detection dog while en route through another airport, and ultimately discovered cocaine inside.  The Supreme Court concluded that the seizure, which lasted ninety minutes, was an impermissibly long Terry stop, but with respect to the dog sniff, the Court said that:
Next, in City of Indianapolis v. Edmond (2000),City of Indianapolis v. Edmond, . the Supreme Court tackled the question of whether police could stop vehicles at a dragnet-style drug interdiction checkpoint and subject each vehicle to a sniff test around the vehicle's exterior by a drug-detection dog.  The Court ruled that the vehicle checkpoint itself was an impermissible seizure, but as to whether the dog sniff was a search, however, the Court again held that:
In the third case, Illinois v. Caballes (2005),Illinois v. Caballes, . the Supreme Court ruled that a minimally intrusive warrantless dog sniff of a vehicle was permissible at routine traffic stops. The Caballes Court said that:
This conclusion, which upheld the constitutionality of certain minimally intrusive warrantless searches, was based on the premise that:
 such a vehicle has already been legally seized, albeit only temporarily, during a traffic stop;
 police never entered the car;
 both the vehicle and the police were on public property when they performed the dog sniff;
Consistent with previous rulings, the Court again maintained that an individual has no reasonable expectation of privacy while on public property, and that a dog sniff, being sui generis, revealed only information about contraband which nobody has the right to possess.
 Other relevant cases 
The Florida Supreme Court reviewed two additional U.S. Supreme Court cases related to the instant case, the first being United States v. Jacobsen (1984).United States v. Jacobsen . In Jacobsen, the Supreme Court answered the question of whether police could temporarily seize and inspect a package without probable cause, because it had been damaged in transit and had white powder spilling from it.  Subjecting a small portion of the powder to a field test for cocaine, it tested positive.  Again, it was considered not to be a search under the Fourth Amendment:
The other related case was Kyllo v. United States (2001).Kyllo v. United States, . In Kyllo, police had used a thermal imaging device from a public vantage point so as to monitor the radiation of heat from a person's home – enabling them to identify the tell-tale heat signature from the lights that were used in a home marijuana grow operation.  The Court held that this use of "advanced technology" to learn private details about the inside of a person's home without a warrant was unconstitutional.  The Court's decision on Caballes a few years later called into question certain aspects of Kyllo, but Justice Stevens distinguished Caballes from Kyllo in this passage:
 Dog sniff at a private residence 
In its analysis of the above cases, the Florida Supreme Court drew a clear distinction with respect to a dog sniff test that was not conducted against a vehicle, but against a private residence:
In a separate concurrence, joined by two justices from the Florida Supreme Court, Judge Lewis went a step further:
 U.S. Supreme Court 
 Questions presented 
On October 26, 2011, Florida petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari, which was granted on January 6, 2012. (Certiorari granted).  The petition included the following questions of law:
I.  Whether a dog sniff at the front door of a suspected grow house by a trained narcotics detection dog is a Fourth Amendment search requiring probable cause?
II.  Whether the officers' conduct during the investigation of the grow house, including remaining outside the house awaiting a search warrant is, itself, a Fourth Amendment search?
The Supreme Court granted certiorari, but with the scope limited only to Question I as presented in the petition.
 Amicus curiae 
Briefs of amicus curiae were filed in support of the petitioner by:
 United States of America
 The States of Texas, Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Delaware, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Maine, Michigan, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Mexico, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington and Wisconsin
 National Police Canine Association and Police K-9 Magazine
 Wayne County, Michigan
Briefs in support of the respondent were filed by:
 Rutherford Institute
 Cato Institute
 Fourth Amendment Scholars (52 college law professors)
 National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, et al.
 Arguments 
In each of the Supreme Court's prior dog sniff cases, the Court's core belief that a dog sniff is sui generis and is only capable of detecting contraband substances has been the basis for concluding that a dog sniff did not constitute a 'search' within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment.  This fundamental assumption has remained largely unchallenged in any of the aforementioned "dog sniff" cases.  One Amicus brief directly challenged this assumption, by pointing out that:
In their petitioner's brief, the State of Florida argues that the lower court improperly relied on Kyllo and erred in equating the dog sniff with a search, in that:
 there was no physical intrusion or entry into the residence, and police have the right to approach a home's front door to "knock and talk" with the owner;
 "While a drug-detection dog may smell many different odors emanating from a source, it will convey only one thing: whether illegal drugs are present. ... and [it] reveals no private facts in the process";
 a dog is not a "device", nor is it the rapidly "advancing technology" that concerned the Kyllo Court;
 "This Court has held repeatedly that a dog's sniff is not a Fourth Amendment search".
Oral argument was heard on October 31, 2012.  This case was heard on the same day as that of another "dog sniff" case, Florida v. Harris.  That case focused on  whether law enforcement's assertions that the dog is "trained" or "certified" is sufficient to establish probable cause for a search.  The decision in Harris was handed down over a month before that of Jardines.Florida v. Harris, .
 Decision 
On March 26, 2013, by a 5-4 margin, the Supreme Court held that the government's use of trained police dogs to investigate the home and its immediate surroundings is a "search" within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment, thus affirming the Florida Supreme Court.
Justice Scalia wrote the majority opinion, joined by Justices Thomas, Ginsburg, Sotomayor and Kagan. Justice Kagan also filed a concurring opinion, joined by Justices Ginsburg and Sotomayor. Justice Alito wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Kennedy and Breyer.
In this instance, the Court did not divide along "typical" liberal-conservative ideologies.  The conservative justices were evenly split, with Justices Scalia and Thomas joining three of the four liberal justices on the majority.  Likewise, liberal Justice Breyer and Justice Kennedy – often the "swing vote" on cases determined along strict ideological lines – joined the minority in dissent.
 Majority opinion 
thumb|right|140px|Justice Antonin Scalia delivered the majority opinion, joined by Justices Kagan, Thomas, Ginsburg and Sotomayor.
Justice Scalia's majority opinion, joined by Justices Kagan, Thomas, Ginsburg and Sotomayor, did not focus on the right to privacy, which is implicated by most modern-day Fourth Amendment cases. Rather, the decision hinged on the basis of a citizen's property rights. It followed the 2012 precedent from United States v. Jones, that when police physically intrude on persons, houses, papers, or effects for the purpose of obtaining information, "a 'search' within the original meaning of the Fourth Amendment" has "undoubtedly occurred."United States v. Jones, , (slip op., at 3, n.3). This conclusion is consistent with the Court's early Fourth Amendment jurisprudence, which until the latter half of the 20th century was tied to trespass under common law. At the Fourth Amendment's "very core", the Court said, stands "the right of a man to retreat into his own home and there be free from unreasonable governmental intrusion."Silverman v. United States, .
Scalia cited precedents as far back as 1765, from Entick v. Carrington, a case before England's Court of King's Bench, quoting, "[O]ur law holds the property of every man so sacred, that no man can set his foot upon his neighbour's close without his leave."Boyd v. United States, , quoting Entick v. Carrington, 2 Wils. K. B. 275, 291; 95 Eng. Rep. 807, 817 (K. B. 1765).  He went on to say:Florida v. Jardines, , (slip op., at 6–7).
The Court acknowledged that a doorbell or knocker is typically treated as an invitation, or license, to the public to approach the front door of the home to deliver mail, sell goods, solicit for charities, etc.  This license extends to the police, who have the right to try engaging a home's occupant in a "knock and talk" for the purpose of gathering evidence without a warrant.  However:
Scalia used the analogies of a "visitor exploring the front path with a metal detector", or allowing police to "peer into the house through binoculars with impunity" to illustrate such activities that are not implicitly licensed by the homeowner, which would constitute a trespass under common law. The Court concluded that bringing a police dog into the home's curtilage to perform a forensic exploration for incriminating evidence was therefore an unreasonable search, absent a warrant.Jardines, 569 U. S., (slip op., at 7).
Having determined the unreasonableness of the search on the basis of property rights, the Court stated that it was unnecessary to address whether or not Jardines' right to privacy was also implicated.Jardines, 569 U. S., (slip op., at 9).
 Concurring opinion 
thumb|140px|Justice Elena Kagan concurred, joined by Justices Ginsburg and Sotomayor.
Justice Kagan, however, joined by Justices Ginsburg and Sotomayor, expanded upon the binoculars example to argue further that both property and privacy rights are equally implicated:
The controlling case supporting this position is Kyllo v. United States, the previously-discussed case involving the use of a thermal imaging device.Jardines, 569 U. S., (Kagan, J., concurring slip op., at 3). Referring to the drug-detection dog as a "super-sensitive instrument", she argued that, "[a drug-detection dog is] to the poodle down the street as high-powered binoculars are to a piece of plain glass. Like the binoculars, a drug-detection dog is a specialized device for discovering objects not in plain view (or plain smell)."Jardines, 569 U. S., (Kagan, J., concurring slip op., at 2–3).  It need not matter that the device is "animal, not mineral", crude or sophisticated, new technology or old, small or large.  Where the device is not "in general public use," and is used against a home, it unreasonably violates a person's "minimal expectation of privacy".Kyllo, 533 U.S., at 34, 36.Jardines, 569 U. S., (Kagan, J., concurring slip op., at 4).
 Dissenting opinion 
thumb|left|140px|Justice Samuel Alito dissented, joined by Roberts, Kennedy and Breyer.
Dissenting, Justice Alito, joined by Chief Justice Roberts, Justice Kennedy and Justice Breyer, wrote that the majority's decision is "based on a putative rule of trespass law that is nowhere to be found in the annals of Anglo-American jurisprudence".Jardines, 569 U. S., (Alito, J., dissenting slip op., at 1). Alito instead argued that under the traditional laws of trespassing, visitors (including police officers) also are not considered trespassing if they "approach the door, pause long enough to see if someone is home, and (if not expressly invited to stay longer), leave ... a visitor who adheres to these limitations is not necessarily required to ring the doorbell, knock on the door, or attempt to speak with an occupant."Jardines, 569 U. S., (Alito, J., dissenting slip op., at 6). In addition, an officer attempting a "knock and talk" may also "gather evidence by means other than talking. The officer may observe items in plain view and smell odors coming from the house."Jardines, 569 U. S., (Alito, J., dissenting slip op., at 8). Alito also stated that detection dogs have been used for centuries, citing a 1318 Scottish law mentioning its use, and then wrote, "If bringing a tracking dog to the front door of a home constituted a trespass, one would expect at least one case to have arisen during the past 800 years. But the Court has found none."Jardines, 569 U. S., (Alito, J., dissenting slip op., at 9).
Alito also disagreed with the concurrence opinion that a detection dog was analogous to a thermal imaging device as per the Kyllo v. United States ruling. First, he argued that there should be no reasonable expectation of privacy if odors coming from the inside reach outside to areas where people may lawfully stand. Secondly, unlike a thermal imaging device, he stated that a dog, "is not a new form of 'technology' or a 'device'. And, as noted, the use of dogs' acute sense of smell in law enforcement dates back many centuries."Jardines, 569 U. S., (Alito, J., dissenting slip op., at 11). Alito also noted that in the Kyllo case, police officers operated their thermal imaging device while on a public street, and if that same standard were applied to a dog, he feared that it would not be able to be used to detect, for example, "explosives, or for a violent fugitive or kidnapped child," outside from a public sidewalk as well.Jardines, 569 U. S., (Alito, J., dissenting slip op., at 11-12).
 See also 
 Detection dog
 Police dog
 Florida v. Harris, 
 Rodriguez v. United States, 
 United States v. Place, 
 City of Indianapolis v. Edmond, 
 Illinois v. Caballes, 
 Katz v. United States, 
 Kyllo v. United States, 
 United States v. Karo, 
 References 
 External links 
 U.S. Supreme Court, Docket # 11-564, Proceedings and Orders
 SCOTUSBlog page for Florida v. Jardines
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:Detection dogs
Category:Miami-Dade Police Department
Category:Cannabis in Florida
"""

From "Florida v. Jimeno" ==> """
Florida v. Jimeno, 500 U.S. 248 (1991), was a U.S. Supreme Court case involving the exclusionary rule of evidence under the Fourth Amendment..
Background
A police officer pulled over Enio Jimeno for a traffic violation after following him due to information that he may have been involved in a drug deal. Jimeno consented to a search of his car, but nothing more. The officer had informed Jimeno that he suspected him of having drugs in the car. The officer opened up a package and found cocaine inside. At trial, Jimeno argued that his consent to search his car did not extend to his permission to search within containers and packages. The lower court and the Florida Supreme Court upheld that Jimeno's consent did not cover the officer's efforts and thus ruled in Jimeno's favor. The State of Florida appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
Opinion of the Court
In a 7-2 vote, the Court overturned the lower courts' decision and ruled that the officer's search of containers within the car were not considered unreasonable. Since a reasonable person would expect narcotics to be carried in a container, and because the officer told Jimeno of his suspicions, the Court ruled that the officer acted within reason. Jimeno was thus found guilty and the officer was not in violation of the 4th amendment.
Significance
This case grants law enforcement greater ability to conduct searches. It also narrows the definition of unreasonable searches and thus limits the protection citizens can seek against such searches. Evidence cannot be excluded from a case if it is deemed to have been discovered through reasonable means.
References
External links
Category:United States evidence case law
Category:Search and seizure case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1991 in United States case law
"""

From "Florida v. Powell" ==> """
Florida v. Powell, , was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled on the language requirements for Miranda warnings. In the case, a suspect was advised of his right to consult with an attorney before questioning, as well as his right to consult with an attorney at any time during questioning. However, he was not advised of his right to the physical presence of an attorney during questioning.
Background
On August 10, 2004, officers from the Tampa Police Department sought to apprehend the respondent, Kevin Dewayne Powell, in connection with an ongoing robbery investigation. Officers entered an apartment rented by Powell's girlfriend and spotted him coming from a bedroom. After searching the bedroom, officers recovered one 9-millimeter handgun, and Powell was subsequently arrested.
After he was transported to the headquarters of the Tampa Police Department, officers read Powell the standard departmental consent and release form. It stated:
Powell acknowledged that he had been informed of his rights, that he understood them, and that he was willing to talk to the police. He signed the departmental consent and release form. He disclosed to police officers that he was aware of his inability (as a convicted felon) to possess a firearm, but that he nonetheless purchased and carried the firearm that police recovered at the apartment.
Powell was charged in a Florida state court with possession of a weapon by a prohibited possessor. He moved to suppress his statements, contending that his Miranda warning was deficient as it did not advise him of the right to the presence of an attorney during questioning. The trial court denied, reasoning that officers had adequately notified Powell of his rights. A jury would later find him guilty of the gun-possession charge.
On appeal, the Florida Second District Court of Appeal held that Powell's statements should have been suppressed, contending that they did not adequately inform Powell of his right to the presence of an attorney throughout the interrogation. The Court of Appeal, recognizing the importance of the issue at hand, recommended the case to the Florida Supreme Court, which affirmed the lower appellate court's decision. It reasoned that both Miranda and the Florida Constitution "require that a suspect be clearly informed of the right to have a lawyer present during questioning", and that the warnings Powell received did not properly inform him of this right.
Supreme Court Opinions
In a 7-2 decision authored by Justice Ginsburg, the court held that it retained jurisdiction over this case, and that the warnings given to Powell before his questioning adequately informed him of his right to the presence of an attorney. Justice Stevens authored a dissenting opinion.
 Ginsburg's Majority Opinion 
On the jurisdictional question, Justice Ginsburg concedes that the Florida Supreme Court rested in part on a provision of its own state constitution, in addition to Miranda, in reaching its decision. However, the decision handed down by the Florida Supreme Court appeared to rest heavily on federal law, and that it was interwoven with federal law. Additionally, Ginsburg's opinion casts doubt on the extent to which the Florida law can be seen as independent from federal judicial review. As such, it presumes that the lower court's decision was primarily governed by federal law, and as such the case is federally justiciable. 
The court also reversed the holding of the Florida Supreme Court. They agree that Miranda requires that suspects "be warned prior to any questioning" and "that he has the right to the presence of an attorney", but that it does not specify any precise language that must be used in giving these warnings. It simply must reasonably convey to a suspect his rights as required by Miranda. Powell undoubtedly received such warnings.
In its reasoning, the court explains why it would not have been necessary for officers to directly inform Powell of his right to the presence of an attorney. Police had informed Powell that he had the right to consult an attorney before answering "any" of their questions, and not simply the first one. They additionally notified him of his ability to use this right at "any time" he wanted during the interrogation, not simply at the outset. For Powell, or any reasonable person, to reach the opposite conclusion (i.e., that he did not have the right to the presence of an attorney for the duration of the interview) would require dubious reasoning on the part of the suspect. He would have to think that, to consult an attorney, he could leave the room as he wished, consult an attorney, and then return. The court reasoned that a suspect (who had been arrested and taken into police custody) would not infer such a right, under the circumstances, to simply pop in and out as he pleased. Rather, he would come to the more plausible inference that a lawyer would be present with him the whole time.
References
External Links
Miranda warning case law
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Florida v. Riley" ==> """
Florida v. Riley, 488 U.S. 445 (1989), was a United States Supreme Court decision which held that police officials do not need a warrant to observe an individual's property from public airspace..
Background
The Pasco County Sheriff's Office received a tip that Michael Riley was growing marijuana on his  of rural property.Florida v. Riley, Oyez A deputy sheriff subsequently investigated the tip and went to Riley's mobile home. Unable to see inside a greenhouse, which was behind the defendant's mobile home, the deputy  circled over the property using a helicopter. The absence of two roof panels allowed the deputy to see, with his naked eye, what appeared to be marijuana growing. A warrant was obtained and marijuana was found inside the greenhouse.
Procedural history
Riley successfully argued before the trial court that the aerial search violated his reasonable expectation of privacy and Fourth Amendment rights. The Florida Second District Court of Appeal disagreed, siding instead with the state, but the Florida Supreme Court agreed with Riley and overturned the Court of Appeal.
Supreme Court
Issue(s) before the Court
"Whether surveillance of the interior of a partially covered greenhouse in a residential backyard from the vantage point of a helicopter located  above the greenhouse constitutes a 'search' for which a warrant is required under the Fourth Amendment and Article I, 12 of the Florida Constitution." — Justice White, quoting the Florida Supreme Court decision
Decision and rationale
The US Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Florida Supreme Court with a four-vote plurality, arguing that the accused did not have a reasonable expectation that the greenhouse was protected from aerial view, and thus that the helicopter surveillance did not constitute a search under the Fourth Amendment. However, the Court stopped short of allowing all aerial inspections of private property, noting that it was "of obvious importance" that a private citizen could have legally flown in the same airspace:
Any member of the public could legally have been flying over Riley's property in a helicopter at the altitude of 400 feet and could have observed Riley's greenhouse.  The police officer did no more.Riley, 488 U.S. at 451.
Also vital to the Court's ruling was the fact that the helicopter did not interfere with the normal use of the property:
As far as this record reveals, no intimate details connected with the use of the home or curtilage were observed, and there was no undue noise, no wind, no dust, or threat of injury. In these circumstances, there was no violation of the Fourth Amendment.Riley, 488 U.S. at 452.
Justice O'Connor's concurrence
Justice O'Connor felt that the plurality focused too much upon FAA regulations, "whose purpose is to promote air safety, not to protect [Fourth Amendment rights]." She deviated from the plurality opinion in arguing that the frequency of public flight in the airspace was a necessary concern, and that the mere legality of such flights was insufficient to determine whether the defendant had a reasonable expectation of privacy:
[I]t is not conclusive to observe, as the plurality does, that "[a]ny member of the public could legally have been flying over Riley's property in a helicopter at the altitude of 400 feet and could have observed Riley's greenhouse." Nor is it conclusive that police helicopters may often fly at 400 feet. If the public rarely, if ever, travels overhead at such altitudes, the observation cannot be said to be from a vantage point generally used by the public and Riley cannot be said to have "knowingly expose[d]" his greenhouse to public view.Riley, 488 U.S. at 454-55 (O'Connor, J., concurring in the judgment).
Nevertheless, O'Connor concurred with the plurality opinion because she thought the defendant still needed to show that public use of the relevant airspace was uncommon. The Justice closed by saying flights less than  in altitude "may be sufficiently rare that police surveillance from such altitudes would violate reasonable expectations of privacy."Riley, 488 U.S. at 455 (O'Connor, J., concurring in the judgment).
Justice Brennan's dissent
Justice Brennan, joined by Marshall and Stevens, strongly believed that the plurality had misstated the issue, agreeing with O'Connor that the frequency of public air travel was a necessary consideration, and that the key issue in the case was whether ordinary citizens were normally in the air above the defendant's home:
The police officer positioned 400 feet above Riley's backyard was not, however, standing on a public road.  The vantage point he enjoyed was not one any citizen could readily share.  His ability to see over Riley’s fence depended on his use of a very expensive and sophisticated piece of machinery to which few ordinary citizens have access.Riley, 488 U.S. at 460 (Brennan, J., dissenting).
However, Brennan disagreed with O'Connor in that he believed the defendant did not necessarily need to show that public flight was rare, but rather that the state needed to show that it was common:
Because the State has greater access to information concerning customary flight patterns and because the coercive power of the State ought not be brought to bear in cases in which it is unclear whether the prosecution is a product of an unconstitutional, warrantless search, the burden of proof properly rests with the State and not with the individual defendant. The State quite clearly has not carried this burden.Riley, 488 U.S. at 465-66 (Brennan, J., dissenting) (internal citations omitted).
Justice Blackmun's dissent
Justice Blackmun recognized that five of the nine justices (O'Connor and the four dissenters) had agreed that "the reasonableness of Riley's expectation [of privacy] depends, in large measure, on the frequency of non-police helicopter flights at an altitude of 450 feet." Like Brennan, Blackmun noticed that the main disagreement among these five justices was whether the government or the defendant had the burden of proof in establishing whether public flights above Riley's home were common or rare. Blackmun thought it was likely that such flights were quite rare, supporting Riley's case, so the government had to show they occurred with some regularity. He wrote that "burdens of proof relevant to Fourth Amendment issues may be based on a judicial estimate of the probabilities involved."Riley, 488 U.S. at 468 (Blackmun, J., dissenting).
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 488
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
Katz v. United States, 
California v. Ciraolo, 
California v. Greenwood, 
Kyllo v. United States, 
Dow Chemical Co. v. United States, 
Open-fields doctrine
Curtilage
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1989 in United States case law
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:Legal history of Florida
Category:Helicopters
"""

From "Florida v. Rodriguez" ==> """
Florida v. Rodriguez, 469 U.S. 1 (1984), was a United States Supreme Court case concerning the Fourth Amendment rights of protection from search and seizure. The case involved defendant Damasco Vincente Rodriguez against the State of Florida. After the Florida State Court and the District Court of Appeal of Florida both judged in favor of the defendant, the State of Florida appealed for a writ of Certiorari.. The Supreme Court sided with the State of Florida, overturning the decision of the Florida state courts.
 Background 
 Facts 
The arrest occurred on September 12, 1978 in the Miami international Airport. The two police officers involved in the arrest were Officer Charles McGee and Detective Facchiano. The two officers were working undercover, specialized in narcotics and were experienced in narcotic surveillance.Coulter, A. (1990). Vanderbilt Law Review Vol. 43 Rev. 1311. Retrieved from www.lexisnexis.com/hottopics/lnacademic The incident started when the two detectives spotted Rodriguez with two companions acting suspiciously.Vile, J. R., & Hudson, D. L. (2013). Florida v. Rodriguez (1984). In Encyclopedia of the Fourth Amendment. (pp. 271-272). Thousand Oaks, California: CQ Press. https://books.google.com/books?id=mF12AwAAQBAJ&pg=PA2173 His two companions were later identified as Blanco and Ramirez from their plane tickets. According to the officers, they first spotted Rodriguez and his two associates at the ticket counter at the airport. After seeing the three whisper to each other, the officers decided to follow them and investigate their suspicious activity. The three cohorts noticed the officers following them on their way up an escalator and were seen exchanging nervous glances and finally saying “Let’s get out of here”. Officer McGee who became the primary witness on this case stated that he saw Rodriguez's legs start “pumping up and down very fast... as if the person were running in place”. Taking this action as an attempt to flee, the two detectives confronted the three suspects. The two undercover narcotics agents then announced to the three that they were police. Upon asking Rodriguez if he had any identification he stated that he did not, however Blanco eventually provided three airplane tickets showing their names. To further add to suspicion of the officers, when Officer McGee asked which one of them was Rodriguez both Rodriguez and Blanco stated they were him. Based on these suspicious actions, Officer McGee asked if he could search the suit bag. Rodriguez was reluctant at first stating that he did not have the key; however, his partner Ramirez told Rodriguez he should let them search the bag. Rodriguez then gave the bag to the officers who upon opening it discovered three bags of cocaine. Rodriguez, Blanco and Ramirez were then detained for possession of cocaine and intention to distribute.
 Florida courts 
Unlike his other two companions, Rodriguez decided to fight his case and claimed that his Fourth Amendment rights had been violated. Upon hearing Officer McGee's testimony, the Florida trial court sided with Rodriguez and suppressed the evidence found on him in May 1979. The court reasoned that the officers did not have sufficient reason to stop Rodriguez and had not informed Rodriguez that he had the right to leave and refuse the search and seizure of his luggage. The case was then brought to the Florida Court of Appeal which in November 15, 1983 affirmed the previous decision. The Florida Attorney General then petitioned a writ of certiorari and appealed the case to the Supreme Court.
 Opinion 
On November 13, 1984, the Supreme Court of the United States decided in favor of the State of Florida in a per curiam opinion. Chief Justice Burger and Justices White, Blackmun, Powell, Rehnquist and O'Connor comprised the majority while dissenting opinions were written by Justices Marhsall and Stevens, the latter joined by Justice Brennan. The majority opinion cited United States v. Mendenhall (1980) and Florida v. Royer (1983), which stated that officers of the law can stop people in airports without probable cause and have the right to search if they received voluntary consent. The two previous trials stated that there was no probable cause, however, officers only need "articulable suspicion" in airports to stop potential suspects. The justices deemed that the two officers did indeed have sufficient suspicion to stop and question the three men. The Court also cited Schneckloth v. Bustamonte (1973), which states that a suspect does not have to be informed that they have the right to leave or deny being searched before officers of the law ask for consent to search their belongings.
 Dissent 
The dissenters believed that the Supreme Court should not be responsible for correcting errors of judges of state tribunals, especially ones involving drug smuggling. In addition, they believed that the original trial court ruling in 1979 was acceptable at the time since two of the cited cases used to justify the majority opinion had not yet been decided. However, they agreed with the majority that the Florida Court of Appeal should have ruled in favor of the prosecution since the verdict was reached in 1983 after all of the cited cases occurred.
 References 
 External links 
 Search and seizure cases
 Florida v. Rodriguez On Petition For Writ of  Ceritiorari to the District Court of Appeal of Florida, Third District
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:1984 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Florida
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Florida v. Royer" ==> """
Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491 (1983), was a U.S. Supreme Court case dealing with issues involving the Fourth Amendment. Specifically, the case establishes a firm line in cases where police conduct search and seizure without a warrant. The court ruled that, while it is legal for authorities to target and approach a person based on their behavior, absent more, they cannot detain or search such individual without a warrant.
Background
In January 1978, two undercover officers approached the plaintiff, Mr. Royer, at the Miami International Airport because he fit a drug courier profile: He was a casually dressed, nervous young man carrying heavy luggage. Also, he paid cash for his ticket and filled out his baggage tag only with a name and destination.
The officers identified themselves and asked if he would speak with them. He consented and, at their request, produced his airline ticket and his driver's license. He became visibly nervous when the officers noted that the ticket and driver's license bore different names, and then they told him they suspected him of transporting narcotics.
Without returning his ticket or license, they asked him to accompany them to a small room off the concourse. He said nothing in response but went with them. Without his consent, they retrieved his luggage and brought it to the room. When asked if he would consent to a search of his suitcases, again he did not speak, but handed the officers a key. When the officers opened the suitcase, they discovered it contained marijuana.
Decision
The Supreme Court held that, although the officers correctly approached Mr. Royer in the airport, they moved him without his consent to the small room and held him there without probable cause. Therefore, his consent to search the suitcase resulted from an illegal custody and the marijuana discovered could not be admitted into evidence. The officers should not have asked the suspect to accompany them from the point of the initial consensual encounter to the small room until they returned his ticket and license. There was nothing to indicate the officers had any concern for their safety, or any legitimate need related to the limited purpose of the initial Terry stop. The court makes its decision about custody/non-custody based on everything police say or do—the totality of circumstances test. The officers also told him they suspected him of transporting narcotics, and then confined him in a small, enclosed room. If that were not enough, they retrieved his luggage without his consent. Thus, the Court held that a reasonable man would believe he was either under arrest, or in a custodial situation functionally equivalent to arrest. Since the officers only had reasonable suspicion, not probable cause to believe he was transporting narcotics until they opened the suitcase and found the marijuana (which they admitted in court), they had no legal right to place Mr. Royer in custody.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 460
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:1983 in United States case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:Legal history of Florida
Category:History of Miami-Dade County, Florida
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Cannabis in Florida
Category:Miami International Airport
"""

From "Florida v. Thomas" ==> """
Florida v. Thomas, 532 U.S. 774 (2001), is a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case brought to the court concerned the extent of the Court's earlier decision in New York v. Belton, concerning whether a person was in custody, a determination central to allowing evidence seized in an automobile search to be presented in trial. However, the Court unanimously dismissed the case because the decision of the Florida state courts was not "final".
Background
In Polk County, Florida, police officers went to Robert Thomas' home, investigating possible marijuana sales at his Florida home. While this was going on, Thomas drove up to his house in his car. An officer asked him for his name and identification. Thomas was arrested thereafter when a search on his license showed an outstanding warrant. One officer proceeded to take him inside the house while another searched his car, finding methamphetamine. He was indicted for possession. At his trial, he moved to suppress the evidence, which was subsequently granted by the trial judge. In reversing, an intermediate appellate court found the search valid under New York v. Belton. In Belton, the U.S. Supreme Court established a "bright-line" rule permitting an officer who has made a lawful custodial arrest of a car's occupant to search the car's passenger compartment as an incident of the arrest. In reversing the intermediate court of appeals, the Florida Supreme Court held Belton did not apply because it is limited to situations where the officer initiates contact with a vehicle's occupant while that person remains in the vehicle. The Supreme Court granted review. It would only be a few months before the ultimate decision, where they would dismiss the case.
Opinion of the Court
In a unanimous opinion authored by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, the Court dismissed the writ of certiorari for want of jurisdiction. Rehnquist wrote that the Florida Supreme Court's decision did not fit any of the categories where the Court "treated state-court judgments as final for jurisdictional purposes although there were further proceedings to take place in the state court." Thus, the Court concluded that the Florida Supreme Court's decision was not final. This was partly based on a doctrine from the Cox decision which decided that certain decisions were not 'final' when the trial proceedings had not been completed.420 U.S. at 478.
See also
 Certiorari
 Jurisdiction issues in American law
 Motor vehicle exception in Fourth Amendment Law
 Probable cause
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 532
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Florida
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States controlled substances case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2001 in Florida
Category:Polk County, Florida
"""

From "Flowers v. Mississippi" ==> """
Flowers v. Mississippi, No. 17–9572, 588 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the use of peremptory challenges to remove black jurors during a series of Mississippi criminal trials for Curtis Flowers, a black man convicted on murder charges. The Supreme Court held in Batson v. Kentucky that the use of peremptory challenges solely on the basis of race is unconstitutional.. This case examined whether the Mississippi Supreme Court erred in how it applied Batson to this case.. The Supreme Court ruled that Flowers' case fell under Batson and that the state inappropriately removed most of the potential black jurors during the trials.
Case background
Curtis Flowers was accused in 1996 of four murders in a furniture store in Winona, Mississippi. Since his arrest, Flowers has seen six separate jury trials. The first three trials ended with overturned convictions from the Mississippi Supreme Court on review, citing prosecutorial misconduct in all three trials, while the fourth and fifth ended in a mistrial. At issue throughout these trials was the prosecution's use of peremptory challenges to eliminate prospective African-Americans from the jury, leaving a solely white jury despite the population distribution near Winona being near 50% white, 50% African-American. Only by the fourth trial did two African-Americans sit on the jury, resulting in a hung jury.
The sixth trial, held in 2010, found Flowers guilty of all four crimes, and he was sentenced to death. The jury here included one African-American juror—the first one questioned by the prosecutor who subsequently used his remaining peremptory challenges to dismiss five additional African-American jurors. Flowers appealed to the Mississippi Supreme Court again arguing on the peremptory challenges. The Mississippi Supreme Court upheld the verdict. Flowers petitioned to the United States Supreme Court, who summarily remanded the case to the Mississippi Supreme Court and told the court to review the peremptory challenge under the Batson challenge established in the case Batson v. Kentucky. On review, the Mississippi Supreme Court still found against Flowers, ruling that the prosecutor was not racially biased in the use of peremptory challenges during Flowers' trial. One aspect that was argued in this retrial was the past behavior in the previous trials that Flowers' defense felt showed a clear racial discrimination pattern by the prosecution to remove African-American jurors from the jury, but which the Mississippi Supreme Court dismissed in their Batson analysis.
Flowers re-petitioned to the US Supreme Court, which granted certiorari to the case in November 2018. The case was limited to the question of whether the Mississippi's oversight of the prosecution's past use of peremptory challenges in Flowers' prior trials was proper within the scope of the Batson challenge. Oral arguments were heard on March 20, 2019.
Opinions
Majority opinion by Brett Kavanaugh
On June 21, 2019, in a 7–2 decision authored by Associate Justice Brett Kavanaugh, the Court held that the Flowers case clearly fell under Batson and the Mississippi Supreme Court erred in upholding the trial court's conviction.  In its history of 6 trials prosecuting Flowers for murder, the previous 5 of which ended in mistrials or vacated convictions, the state struck 41 of the 42 prospective black jurors. Some of the selected white jurors had similar answers to struck black jurors and when the prosecutor was asked for explanations other than race for excluding the jurors, the prosecutor also gave inaccurate or provably false explanations for excluding black jurors.
Concurrence by Samuel Alito
Samuel Alito wrote a concurrence. Alito stated that he believes this was “a highly unusual case” that was likely “one of a kind.” Alito also stated that this was “not an ordinary case, and the jury selection process cannot be analyzed as if it were.”
Dissent by Clarence Thomas
Clarence Thomas wrote the dissenting opinion, which was joined in part by Neil Gorsuch, stating that they would have upheld Flowers’ conviction. Thomas suggested that the prosecution's use of their peremptory challenge was appropriate as most of those dismissed knew of Flowers and his family and thus would be biased on a jury. Thomas’ opinion suggests Batson v. Kentucky (1986), which forbids prosecutors from using race as a factor in making peremptory challenges in jury selection, was wrongly decided and should be overruled. Gorsuch, however, did not join the section of Thomas’ opinion suggesting Batson should be overruled.
Subsequent events
State prosecutors officially dropped the charges against Flowers on September 4, 2020, with the state's attorney general's office stating that it would be nearly impossible to convict Flowers on any charges at this point due to the conflicts with the past court records being considered unusable leaving them with no new living witnesses.
 See also 
 In the Dark (podcast), an American Public Media podcast whose 2nd season examined Flowers' case
 References 
External links
Category:Batson challenge case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:Winona, Mississippi
Category:Brett Kavanaugh
"""

From "Fogerty v. Fantasy, Inc." ==> """
Fogerty v. Fantasy, Inc., 510 U.S. 517 (1994), was a United States Supreme Court case that addressed the standards governing awards of attorneys' fees in copyright cases.  The Copyright Act of 1976 authorizes, but does not require, the court to award attorneys' fees to "the prevailing party" in a copyright action. In Fogerty, the Court held that such attorneys'-fees awards are discretionary, and that the same standards should be applied in the case of a prevailing plaintiff and a prevailing defendant.
Facts
John Fogerty was the lead singer of the popular rock group Creedence Clearwater Revival. In 1970, while part of the group, he wrote the song "Run Through the Jungle." Fantasy Records, the record label to which Creedence Clearwater Revival was signed, eventually acquired the exclusive publishing rights to the song.
Creedence Clearwater Revival disbanded in 1972, and Fogerty began a solo career with another music label. In 1985, Fogerty published the song "The Old Man Down the Road", which he released on Warner Bros. Records.
Fantasy sued Fogerty for copyright infringement, claiming that "The Old Man Down the Road" was essentially the music to "Run Through the Jungle" with new words. The case was litigated through a jury trial, and the jury found in Fogerty's favor, rejecting the claim of infringement. Fogerty then sought attorney's fees as authorized by the Copyright Act. The district court denied Fogerty's request on the grounds that, according to the court, Fantasy had not brought its suit in bad faith and the suit was not frivolous. The Ninth Circuit affirmed, adhering to circuit precedent setting differing standards for successful copyright plaintiffs and successful copyright defendants.
Under the Ninth Circuit standards, prevailing plaintiffs generally obtained attorneys' fees as a matter of course, but prevailing defendants had to show that the underlying suit was frivolous and brought in bad faith in order to recover fees. However, other circuits had different standards, for example, the Third Circuit favored an "evenhanded approach".
Because of a circuit split among the courts of appeals on the standards for awarding attorneys' fees in copyright cases, the Supreme Court agreed to review the Ninth Circuit decision.
Majority opinion
Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote the Court's opinion, joined by all but one of the justices.
Rehnquist observed that the 1976 Copyright Act provides that the district courts may award "a reasonable attorney's fee" to the "prevailing party", but does not set forth the criteria to be used in deciding whether or not to do so. Fantasy pointed out that the Court had interpreted identical language in Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, governing discrimination cases, as authorizing such awards to prevailing plaintiffs as a matter of course, but to prevailing defendants only where the suit was frivolous or brought in bad faith.  But the Court rejected the analogy between fee awards in copyright cases and civil rights cases. The differential standard for fee awards in Title VII, Rehnquist wrote, is based upon Congress's decision to treat civil rights plaintiffs as "private attorneys general" to help enforce the statutory scheme. Furthermore, civil rights plaintiffs would often be unable to afford counsel without the prospect of fee-shifting if they win their case.
By contrast, the legislative history of the Copyright Act does not suggest that Congress intended to afford similar rights to persons whose copyrights have been infringed.  Civil rights plaintiffs are frequently without means, whereas copyright defendants are typically large companies. The primary objective of the Copyright Act is to "encourage the production of original literary, artistic, and musical expression for the good of the public."  Parties who seek to enforce their copyrights "run the gamut from corporate behemoths to starving artists," just as copyright defendants are equally likely to be wealthy or poor.  Thus, the Court found, there is less of a need to provide an economic incentive to individuals in order for there to be adequate enforcement of the copyright law.
Furthermore, preventing infringement is not the sole goal of the copyright law. It is one goal, but it is not the only one, nor even the most important:
For this reason, it is just as important to encourage the litigation of meritorious defenses to copyright as it is to encourage the litigation of infringement cases in the first place.
However, the fact that district courts have discretion to award attorneys' fees in copyright cases does not mean that they should do so automatically or routinely.  In the United States, unlike in the United Kingdom, parties must usually bear their own costs of litigation, regardless of who wins or loses the case. The Copyright Act authorizes an exception to the general rule, but it provides that the prevailing party "may" be awarded attorneys' fees, not that it must be. Thus, the statute confers discretion on district courts whether or not to award attorney's fees based on the facts of the case.  If Congress had intended for attorneys' fees to be virtually mandatory, it would have said so in the statute.
Concurring opinion
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a separate opinion concurring in the Court's judgment but not in the majority opinion. In Thomas's view, it was not possible to reconcile the holding of this case, that the same standard should be used in making discretionary attorneys'-fee awards to prevailing plaintiffs and prevailing defendants in copyright cases, with the Court's previous construction of the same statutory language in the Title VII context. However, Thomas agreed with the outcome of this case because he believed the Court's previous Title VII decision was incorrect and should be overruled.
See also
 Octane Fitness, LLC v. ICON Health & Fitness, Inc.: awarding attorney's fees in a patent case
 Peter v. NantKwest, Inc. (2019): awarding attorney's fees in a patent case
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 510
References
External links
  Information on copyright law, Stanford University
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:Creedence Clearwater Revival
Category:1994 in United States case law
Category:Plagiarism controversies
Category:John Fogerty
Category:Legal costs
"""

From "Follett v. Town of McCormick" ==> """
Follett v. Town of McCormick, 321 U.S. 573 (1944), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that people who earn their living by selling or distributing religious materials should not be required to pay the same licensing fees and taxes as those who sell or distribute non-religious materials..
Follett was convicted of violating an ordinance of the town of McCormick, South Carolina which provided: '... the following license on business, occupation and professions to be paid by the person or persons carrying on or engaged in such business, occupation or professions within the corporate limits of the Town of McCormick, South Carolina: Agents selling books, per day $1.00, per year $15.00.' Follett was a Jehovah's Witness and had been certified by the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society as 'an ordained minister of Jehovah God to preach the gospel of God's kingdom under Christ Jesus.' He is a resident of McCormick, South Carolina, where he went from house to house distributing certain books. He obtained his living from the money received; he had no other source of income. He claimed that he merely offered the books for a 'contribution'. But there was evidence that he 'offered to and did sell the books'. He had no license from the town
Prior history
At his trial, Follett moved for a directed verdict of not guilty at the close of the evidence, claiming that the ordinance restricted freedom of worship in violation of the First Amendment which the Fourteenth Amendment makes applicable to the States. The motion was overruled and appellant was found guilty by the jury in the Mayor's Court. That judgment was affirmed by the Circuit Court of General Sessions for McCormick County and then by the Supreme Court of South Carolina.
The Supreme Court of South Carolina recognized the principles established in Jones v. Opelika and Murdock v. Pennsylvania but had asserted that this case was different from the Murdock and Opelika decisions. It pointed out that Follett was not an itinerant, but was a resident of the town where the canvassing took place, and that the principle of the Murdock decision was applicable only to itinerant preachers. It stated, moreover, that appellant earned his living "by the sale of books," that his "occupation was that of selling books, and not that of colporteur," that "the sales proven were more commercial than religious." It concluded that the "license was required for the selling of books, not for the spreading of religion."
Decision of the court
Majority opinion
Justice Douglas delivered the opinion of the Court.  The decision held that the municipal ordinance was violative of the freedom of worship guaranteed by the First and Fourteenth Amendments when applied to an evangelist or preacher who distributed religious tracts in his hometown and who made his livelihood from such activity.
Concurring opinions
In his concurring opinion, Justice Frank Murphy addressed concerns that had been raised by the dissenting justices that the majority decision would "[open] the door to exemption of wealthy religious institutions, like Trinity Church in New York City, from the payment of taxes on property investments from which support is derived for religious activities."  Murphy rebutted these arguments by stating that "(t)here is an obvious difference between taxing commercial property and investments undertaken for profit, whatever use is made of the income, and laying a tax directly on an activity that is essentially religious in purpose and character or on an exercise of the privilege of free speech and free publication."
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:1944 in United States case law
Category:1944 in religion
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Foman v. Davis" ==> """
Foman v. Davis, 371 U.S. 178 (1962),. was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States interpreted Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a)Fed. R. Civ. P. 15. to require that federal courts grant a party leave to amend a pleading absent special circumstances such as bad faith or prejudice to the opposing party.  It has been recognized by both other courtsSee, e.g., Gardner v. So. Ry. Sys. , 675 F.2d 949 (7th Cir. 1982). and secondary sources6 Wright, Miller & Kane, Federal Practice & Procedure § 1487 (2d ed. 1990). as a leading decision on the interpretation of Rule 15(a).
Background
Foman's father allegedly promised her he would not execute a will in exchange for Foman caring for her mother until her mother's death.  After her mother died, Foman's father married Davis, and, contrary to the alleged promise, executed a will leaving his entire estate to Davis.  Following her father's death, Foman filed suit against Davis in the District of Massachusetts to recover what would have been her intestate share of her father's estate, that is, the amount she would have gotten had he not executed a will, as he allegedly promised.
Davis moved to dismiss the case, arguing that, under Massachusetts law, an oral promise not to execute a will was within the statute of frauds and thus unenforceable.  The district court agreed and dismissed the case.  Foman appealed the judgment to the First Circuit.  Soon after appealing, though, Foman moved the district court for an order vacating the judgment and granting her leave to amend her complaint to assert a new cause of action for quantum meruit.  The district court denied these motions, and Foman appealed this denial to the First Circuit.  On appeal, the First Circuit held that it was unable to consider the merits of the case because Foman moved to vacate the judgment subsequent to her first appeal, meaning the judgment was not "final."  The First Circuit then upheld the district court's denial of Foman's motions to vacate the judgment and amend her complaint.  The Supreme Court agreed to review the case.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Goldberg, writing for the Court, began by holding that the First Circuit was wrong to find that it could not consider the merits of the case because Foman moved to vacate the judgment after filing her initial appeal.  Instead, the First Circuit should have considered the merits at the same time as the motions to vacate and amend.
The Court then turned to the First Circuit's denial of Foman's motion to amend her complaint.  Under Rule 15(a), federal courts "should freely give leave [to amend] when justice so requires."  In the Court's view, this meant that the standard for granting leave to amend was quite liberal:  only in very limited circumstances would a denial of leave to amend be justified.  Specifically, the Court found that undue delay, bad faith or dilatory motive on the part of the movant, repeated failure to cure deficiencies by previous amendment, prejudice to the opposing party, and futility of amendment would support a denial.  Absent such special circumstances, it would be an abuse of discretion for a court to deny leave to amend.  The Court granted Foman's motion to amend her complaint and remanded the case to the First Circuit for proceedings consistent with its opinion.
Concurrence/Dissent
The second Justice Harlan, writing for himself and Justice White, issued a two-sentence opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part.  Harlan agreed that the First Circuit should have considered the merits of Foman's case, but he believed the question of whether Foman should have been allowed to amend her complaint was best left to the lower courts.
Subsequent Developments
On remand, the First Circuit considered the merits of Foman's case, as the Supreme Court had directed. It overturned the district court, ruling that under Massachusetts law, an oral promise not to execute a will was not rendered unenforceable by the statute of frauds.  Accordingly, the First Circuit had no need to consider Foman's quantum meruit argument.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States civil procedure case law
Category:1962 in United States case law
"""

From "Fong Foo v. United States" ==> """
Fong Foo v. United States, 369 U.S. 141 (1962), was a Supreme Court ruling that upheld the protection from double jeopardy by the federal government.  While the protection from double jeopardy did not get incorporated to apply to the state governments until 1969 (see Benton v. Maryland), the Supreme Court ruled that the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution prevented the Federal Government from bringing a defendant to trial twice for the same charge.  In this case, the court ruled that despite the error of the District Judge, the 5th Amendment protected the defendants from facing a second trial for the same charge.
Background of the case
The defendants (a corporation and two of its employees) were brought to trial under an indictment for conspiracy and other subsequent charges.  The trial was in a Federal District Court that had jurisdiction over them and over the subject matter. The District Judge, after hearing part, but not all, of the government's evidence, ordered the jury to acquit the defendants, which the jury did.  The judge's action was based on supposed improper conduct of the United States District Attorney and the supposed lack of credibility of the prosecution's witnesses.  The government filed for a writ of mandamus to the Court of Appeals.  The Court of Appeals granted the petition and held that the defendants could be retried, based on its opinion that the District Judge did not have the power to direct the judgment of the jury, in this case.  The case was then brought before the Supreme Court
Ruling of the Supreme Court
In its opinion, delivered per curiam, the Supreme Court reversed the judgment of the Court of Appeals on the grounds that its decision violated the Fifth Amendment.  The Supreme Court focused on the section of the Amendment that reads "nor shall any person be subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb".  The Court explained that the trial had not terminated before the entry of a judgment, but with a final judgment acquitting the defendants. The Supreme Court recognized the error of the District Judge but ruled that the verdict was final and could not be reviewed without violating rights guaranteed by the 5th Amendment of the Constitution.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 369
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:1962 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Fong Yue Ting v. United States" ==> """
Fong Yue Ting v. United States, 149 U.S. 698 (1893), decided by the United States Supreme Court on May 15, 1893, was a case challenging provisions in Section 6 of the Geary Act of 1892 that extended and amended the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882. The provisions in question required Chinese in the United States to obtain certificates of residency, and allowed for the arrest and deportation of Chinese who had failed to obtain these certificates, even if they had not violated any other laws..  The case involved writs of habeas corpus from Fong Yue Ting and two other Chinese citizens residing in New York City who were arrested and detained for not having certificates. The Supreme Court decision (5 to 3) was in favor of the United States government, upholding the Geary Act and denying the writs of habeas corpus.
 Background 
 Backdrop of laws 
In 1868, the United States and China entered into the Burlingame Treaty, establishing formal friendly relations between the two countries, and granting China most favored nation status. The treaty encouraged immigration from China, and granted some privileges to citizens of either country residing in the other, but withheld the privilege of naturalization for immigrants from China.
On November 17, 1880, the Burlingame Treaty was amended to suspend but not prohibit immigration from China. The amendment was called the Treaty Regulating Immigration from China, and historians refer to it as the Angell Treaty of 1880. The prefix stated: "The United States, because of the constantly increasing immigration of Chinese labourers to the territory of the United States and the embarrassments consequent upon such immigration now desires to negotiate a modification of the existing Treaties which shall not be in direct contravention to their spirit."
In 1882, the Chinese Exclusion Act was passed, forbidding (for ten years) the immigration of skilled and unskilled laborers from China to the United States. The rights of prior immigrants were not significantly amended. An 1884 Amendment to the Chinese Exclusion Act required Chinese citizens to obtain re-entry permits if they wished to return after temporarily leaving the United States. On October 1, 1888, the United States government passed the Scott Act. Authored by William Lawrence Scott of Pennsylvania, the act was signed into law by United States President Grover Cleveland on October 1, 1888. The act forbade re-entry of Chinese immigrants to the United States who would not otherwise be eligible to enter the United States if immigrating for the first time. This went against the privileges that the Burlingame Treaty gave Chinese immigrants to the United States.
 The Geary Act 
In 1892, as the ten-year period for the original Chinese Exclusion Act was scheduled to expire, the exclusion was extended for another 10 years with the Geary Act. The Geary Act, however, included a number of additional provisions affecting the lives of Chinese already living in the United States. One key set of provisions shifted the burden of proof for demonstrating the right to be in the United States on to the Chinese resident.
The chief enforcement mechanism for this change was "certificates of residence". Chinese already in the United States were required to possess "certificates of residence" that served as proof that they had entered the United States legally and had the right to remain in the country. The certificates of residence contained the name, age, local residence, occupation, and photograph of the applicant.
The following requirements for the certificate were relevant:
 The Chinese resident needed two white witnesses to testify to the person's immigration status in order to be issued the certificate.
 All Chinese laborers currently in the United States were required to obtain the certification within a year of the passage of the law, with a duplicate kept in the office of the Collector of Internal Revenue.
The following enforcement penalties gave teeth to the requirement for a certificate:
 Any Chinese laborer within the United States without this certificate of residence was "deemed and adjudged to be unlawfully in the United States", they could be arrested and forced to do hard labor, and be deported after a year.
 Penalties were prescribed for falsification of information on the certificates.
 Chinese were denied bail in habeas corpus proceedings. In particular, this meant that any Chinese detained on account of not having certificates could not be released on bail.
In particular, possession of the certificate itself became a requirement of law, regardless of whether the person had entered unlawfully.
 Other general legislation surrounding immigration 
In addition to the legislation focused specifically on the Chinese, there were some other pieces of legislation addressing migration at large:
 Page Act of 1875 applied broadly to Asian migrants, forbidding the entry of forced laborers, women suspected of intending to engage in prostitution, and people considered to be convicts in their own country.
 Immigration Act of 1882 was the first broad United States federal immigration enforcement law. The law established a head tax on migrants arriving by sea that would finance the costs of immigration enforcement, and also started the process of developing a federal immigration bureaucracy.
 Immigration Act of 1891 amended the Immigration Act of 1882. It centralized immigration enforcement under the executive branch of the Federal Government. It gave the Secretary of the Treasury the authority to set rules governing entry at sea and land borders. It also marked the first step toward regulating the borders with Canada and Mexico.
 Court precedents 
At the time of the case, there were a few important Supreme Court precedents.
 Chew Heong v. United States (1884): This occurred in the aftermath of the 1884 Amendment to the Chinese Exclusion Act that required Chinese in the United States to obtain re-entry permits. Chew Heong, a citizen of China who lived in the United States departed the United States for the Hawaiian Islands in 1881, and returned after it became active. He was denied entry, and sued. In a split decision, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the litigant, since he would have been able to qualify for a re-entry permit had he applied..
 Chae Chan Ping v. United States (1889): This occurred in the aftermath of the Scott Act, that forbade re-entry of Chinese who had previously been residing in the United States. Chae Chan Ping, who had departed prior to the passage of the Act but arrived after it was active, was denied entry and sued. In a unanimous decision, the United States Supreme Court ruled against the litigant. The decision was an important precedent for the Supreme Court's deference to the plenary power of the United States legislative branches in immigration law and in their authority to overturn the terms of international treaties..
 Nishimura Ekiu v. United States (1891, decided 1892): Nishimura Ekiu, a female from Japan, was denied entry to the United States by the officer at the San Francisco port of entry because of suspicion that her story that her husband would meet her in the United States was false, errors in her passport, and concerns that she would not be able to sustain herself in the United States. The denial was based on authority granted as part of the Immigration Act of 1891. The United States Supreme Court sided with the government, agreeing with the government's claim that it had the authority to deny people entry. The court also did not reexamine evidence from the litigant challenging the reasons for denying her entry..
 Case 
The case in question involved petitions by three Chinese citizens residing in the United States, each of whom had not successfully obtained certificates of residence, though with slight differences:
 The first petitioner claimed that he had arrived in the United States from China in or before 1879. For more than a year, he had resided in New York City. He was arrested by the marshal for not having a certificate of residence and had never applied for one.
 The second petitioner's situation was similar to the first, except that the Chinese citizen had been shown to a judge, who had agreed to let the marshal hold him.
 The third petitioner had applied for a certificate of residence but had not been granted one, because all the witnesses he was able to secure were Chinese, and the Geary Act required white witnesses. He was arrested and detained after failing to obtain the certificate.
In all three cases, the petitioner (the Chinese citizen) alleged that his arrest and detention were without due process of law, and that Section 6 of the Geary Act which required a "white witness", that had been used to justify the arrest and detention, was unconstitutional and void.
Decision
 Majority opinion 
The case was decided in favor of the United States government by a margin of 5 to 3, with the majority opinion delivered by Justice Horace Gray. (Justice John Marshall Harlan was abroad at the time and thus was unable to participate.) The opinion discussed similarities and differences with past cases. Some of the cases discussed, and the key points of similarity and difference, are noted below:
 The main cited precedent for the decision was Chae Chan Ping v. United States (1889, also known as the Chinese Exclusion Case), where the Supreme Court unanimously sided with the government. According to the Court's opinion on the Chinese Exclusion Case written by Stephen Johnson Field, the United States federal government had inherent authority to regulate the entry of immigrants as it saw fit. The plurality opinion in Fong Yue Ting v. United States argued that the same power also extended to the authority to deport and set conditions of residence for people who were not citizens.
 Another cited precedent for deferring to the authority of the government on immigration decisions was Nishimura Ekiu v. United States (1891), where a challenge to a decision made under the Immigration Act of 1891 was rejected.
 The similarity with Chy Lung v. Freeman (1875) was dismissed since that case denied states the authority to impose restrictions on immigration beyond what was specified in federal immigration law, whereas the actions of the state of New York in this case were consistent with federal law.
 Key differences were noted from Chew Heong v. United States (1884) and United States v. Jung Ah Lung (1888). In both cases, the decisions were made based on the goal that, unless unavoidably, the acts or amendments in question should not apply retroactively. However, the Geary Act was clear in its statement and intention and provided clear instructions to Chinese citizens regarding how to obtain the certificates of residence, for which they had time after the passage of the Act.
 The similarity with Yick Wo v. Hopkins (1886) and the application of the Fourteenth Amendment was rejected. The Supreme Court opinion clarified that non-citizens who had acquired a domicile in the United States were entitled the equal protection of the law while they were residing legally, but this did not preclude them from being subject to deportation or having to do additional work to obtain certification, as long as these actions were authorized by legislative statutes.
 Brewer's dissent 
Justice David J. Brewer dissented from the plurality opinion. He rested his opinion on three propositions:
 The persons against whom the penalties of section 6 of the Geary Act are directed are persons lawfully residing within the United States.
 They are within the protection of the Constitution, and secured by its guarantees against oppression and wrong.
 Section 6 deprives them of liberty, and imposes punishment without due process of law, and in disregard of constitutional guaranties, especially those found in the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 8th articles of the amendments.
Brewer made a key distinction between this case and previous cases such as Chae Chan Ping v. United States or Nishimura Ekiu v. United States: the United States Constitution applied only within the territory of the United States, and therefore its protections did not apply to aliens seeking admission, but they did apply to aliens who had been admitted. He also noted that the Geary Act was unprecedented in that it applied to Chinese who had already entered the United States and were present in the country for the long term, i.e., as resident aliens rather than temporary travelers. He argued that resident aliens deserved the full measure of constitutional protections.
 Field's dissent 
Stephen Johnson Field dissented from the plurality opinion, siding instead with the petitioners. Unlike the other judges, Field had historically placed more importance on protecting and upholding the rights of Chinese already in the United States, but was also more deferential to stronger restrictions on admission. In particular:
 Field had penned the opinion in the unanimously decided Chae Chan Ping v. United States, that argued based on an inherent authority of the United States federal government to regulate immigration. He had also dissented from the Supreme Court decision in Chew Heong v. United States in favor of the petitioner; he argued that Chew Heong could be denied entry.
 On the other hand, Field had, in the past, as a jurist in California, opined against California laws discriminating against migrants in the state. Most notably, he struck down the Pigtail Ordinance.McCloskey, American Conservatism, pp. 109-111.
In his dissenting opinion in Fong Yue Ting v. United States, Field acknowledged the legitimacy of the United States federal government setting conditions on residence and determining whether people were unlawfully present in order to be able to deport them. However, he held deportation of resident aliens to a higher bar than refusing them entry. In particular, he made the following arguments:
 He argued that deportation was a cruel and unusual punishment for the offense of failing to obtain a certificate, and that the process put in place by the Geary Act was insufficient due process. Instead, the burden of proof when deporting aliens should be on the government to demonstrate that the alien's presence was unlawful.
 He noted that all of the Court cases cited as precedents in the plurality opinion were cases involving refusal to admit aliens, rather than cases of deportation. 
 He acknowledged that there were some precedents from Europe for deportation, but rejected the idea of applying these precedents to the United States, arguing that the United States had a different system of government with limited powers.
 Fuller's dissent 
The Court's Chief Justice, Melville Fuller, dissented from the plurality opinion. Fuller argued that the Geary Act was improper insofar as it directed the performance of a judicial function in a particular way, without all the procedural guarantees of a judicial trial. Fuller also expressed concern that the Geary Act contained within it "the germs of the assertion of an unlimited and arbitrary power, in general, incompatible with the immutable principles of justice, inconsistent with the nature of our Government, and in conflict with the written Constitution by which that Government was created and those principles secured."
 Relation with other court cases 
 Relation with other immigration cases decided at the time 
Fong Yue Ting v. United States is listed as one of the five Chinese Exclusion Cases. The other cases in the list include:
 Chew Heong v. United States (1884): This was the only one of the five cases decided against the government. This dealt with an Amendment to the Chinese Exclusion Act requiring re-entry certificates.
 Chae Chan Ping v. United States (1889), also sometimes referred to as the Chinese Exclusion Case, upheld the Scott Act forbidding the re-entry of Chinese laborers. This was cited as a key precedent for the decision in Fong Yue Ting v. United States.
 Fong Yue Ting v. United States (current page)
 Lem Moon Sing v. United States (1895): This upheld the decision of the United States Congress in the Geary Act of 1892 to exclude foreigners from entry without any habeas corpus relief.
 United States v. Ju Toy (1905): The Supreme Court further allowed Congress to deny the writ of habeas corpus even to persons claiming to be United States citizens.
Another related case decided around the same time was Nishimura Ekiu v. United States. And Turner v. Williams, decided in 1904, cited Fong Yue Ting v. United States in finding that the deportation of an alien, in this case an anarchist, without a trial did not violate due process."Turner v. Williams". Justia. Retrieved May 12, 2017.
 Value as a precedent for later doctrines in immigration law 
In the case and most of the other Chinese Exclusion Cases, the Supreme Court repeatedly sided with the United States government and against aliens, offering the rationale that immigration policy and its enforcement were a matter for the legislative and executive branches. Some commentators argue that this case was an important precedent in establishing the plenary power doctrine that immunizes from judicial review the substantive immigration decisions of the United States Congress and the executive branch of the United States government. Others have disagreed about the significance of these cases for plenary power. The defining case for the plenary power doctrine, Knauff v. Shaughnessy (1950) did not explicitly cite the case.
Among the early court decisions related to regulation of immigration and aliens, this was the first case to uphold broad federal powers to set conditions on residence and deport aliens who had been living lawfully in the United States.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:1893 in United States case law
Category:Deportation from the United States
Category:Chinese-American culture in New York City
Category:Anti-Chinese sentiment in the United States
"""

From "Ford Motor Co. v. Montana Eighth Judicial Dist." ==> """
Ford Motor Co. v. Montana Eighth Judicial Dist., 592 U.S. ___ (2021), was a U.S. Supreme Court case involving personal jurisdiction of a state court in product liability lawsuits. The case, consolidated with Ford Motor Co. v. Bandemer, involved two product liability lawsuits brought against the Ford Motor Company at the state level related to two drivers' injuries in separate accidents involving Ford's vehicles in Montana and Minnesota. Ford challenged the lawsuits as the vehicles in question were manufactured elsewhere so the states did not have personal jurisdiction over that conduct. The Supreme Court ruled in a 8–0 decision that because, under the Due Process Clause, the claims "arise out of or relate to" Ford's business and marketing activities, those activities gave sufficient claim for the states to assert personal jurisdiction over the liability lawsuits.
Background
Two 2015 accidents involving Ford vehicles were at the basis of the case. In Montana, an accident involving a separated tire tread on a Ford Explorer caused the death of the driver, Markkaya Gullett. In Minnesota, Adam Bandemer had rear-ended a snow plot in a Ford Crown Victoria, causing him to end up in a ditch, but the car's air bags failed to deploy, leading to him to suffer a brain injury.
In both cases, the parties (Gullett's estate and Bandemer) filed suit against Ford over defects in their products in their respect state courts. Ford sought a motion to dismiss both cases on the basis that the state courts lacked personal jurisdiction. Ford argued that the cars themselves were designed and manufactured in other states or in Canada, and only by right of sale ended up in those states. Because of that, there was no relevant connection between their activities of designing and manufacturing the car and the accidents in the states for the state courts to have jurisdiction. These motions were rejected by state district courts and through appeals to both the Montana Supreme Court and Minnesota Supreme Court, upholding lower court rulings that Ford's activities include purposeful promotions and sales of vehicles to their states' residents. Under the Due Process Clause, the courts ruled that the plaintiffs' claims "arise out of or relate to" Ford's business activities in states, thus allowing the state courts to hear these cases.
Supreme Court
Ford petitioned the results of their exhausted state appeals to the Supreme Court in 2019, asking the question if the "arise out of or relate to" requirement of the Due Process Clause is met even when none of their state activities caused the claims in the plaintiffs' cases. The Supreme Court certified both cases in January 2020, consolidating them under the Montana petition. Oral arguments were heard on October 7, 2020; this was a case that followed the death of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg but prior to the appointment of Amy Coney Barrett as her replacement, and Barrett did not participate on further deliberations for the case.
The Court issued its 8–0 decision on March 25, 2021, which upheld that the states' courts did have personal jurisdiction over Ford, allowing the cases to move forward. Justice Elena Kagan wrote the majority opinion and was joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, and Brett Kavanaugh. Kagan wrote that "By every means imaginable — among them, billboards, TV and radio spots, print ads and direct mail — Ford urges Montanans and Minnesotans to buy its vehicles, including (at all relevant times) Explorers and Crown Victorias", and among other numerous business activities, Ford "encourage[s] Montanans and Minnesotans to become lifelong Ford drivers." Thus, the states had ample reason to find that the claim made "arise out of or relate to" Ford's activities, as established by the Due Process Clause.
Justice Samuel Alito wrote a concurring opinion, while Justice Neil Gorsuch also wrote a concurring opinion, joined by Justice Clarence Thomas. Both concurrences agreed with the net outcome of the case but stressed that the majority's test on the phrase "arise out of or relate to" may give rise to further complexity in trying to evaluate future liability cases. Gorsuch singled out the court's continued reliance on International Shoe Co. v. Washington as outdated and favoring corporations. Gorsuch wrote that "Nearly 80 years removed from ''International Shoe'', corporations continue to receive special jurisdictional protections in the name of the Constitution. Less clear is why." Gorsuch favored a simpler "But-for" causation test instead, noting that the majority's decision might have a disparate impact on small businesses.
References
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Ford Motor Co. v. NLRB" ==> """
Ford Motor Co. v. NLRB, 305 U.S. 364 (1939), is an 8-to-0 decision by the Supreme Court of the United States which held that an administrative agency of the United States government, seeking enforcement of its orders, cannot withdraw its petition or the transcript of the administrative hearing once these have been submitted to the appropriate court.. Whether the agency should be permitted to withdraw its petition is a decision for the court of appeals, the Supreme Court said.
Facts
After the passage of the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) in 1935, the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) found itself attempting to enforce the law against hundreds of employers, most of whom refused to acknowledge the constitutionality of the NLRA or obey the Board's orders. The Board's practice was to have its Economic Division study the issues and report to the Board; order its attorneys in its Review Division to analyze the case and report to the Board; review the transcripts of the field office trial de novo; receive an oral report about the case from the trial examiner; and have the Chief Counsel's staff prepare a draft decision for Board consideration.Gross, p. 31-32. But in Morgan v. United States, 298 U.S. 468 (1936) and Morgan v. United States, 304 U.S. 1 (1938), the Supreme Court held that parties in quasi-judicial hearings before the government had the right to be presented with the issues the government was considering, present the agency with a statement, review the proposed findings, review any tentative reports, and submit exceptions and argument to the agency before a final determination is made.Gross, p. 30.
The NLRB had ruled against the Ford Motor Company in a case involving strikebreakers. The agency had asked the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit to enforce its order, and had already submitted its trial transcripts and decision to the court.  But now the NLRB worried that it might be found in violation of the Morgan rulings, which had come down after its submission to the court of appeals.  The NLRB attempted to withdraw its transcripts, but the appellate court refused to turn them over.
Judgment
The Supreme Court held, first, that any decision to allow the agency to withdraw its petition was solely up to the discretion of the court.Ford Motor Co. v. NLRB, 305 U.S. at 368. Second, the Court held that even if the court allowed the petition to be withdrawn, the court still was within its rights to retain the transcripts.Ford Motor Co. v. NLRB, 305 U.S. at 370. Third, the Supreme Court held that the court of appeals had properly permitted the NLRB to withdraw its petition for enforcement so that proceedings could be properly conducted under the Morgan rules, but that the court of appeals still retained the authority to rule on any new petition (for enforcement or dismissal).Ford Motor Co. v. NLRB, 305 U.S. at 372. Fourth, the court of appeals correctly held that it did not have to rule on all the aspects of the case, since the petition for enforcement was being withdrawn for further proceedings.Ford Motor Co. v. NLRB, 305 U.S. at 372-375.
See also
US labor law
Notes
References
Gross, James A. The Reshaping of the National Labor Relations Board: National Labor Policy in Transition, 1937-1947. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1981.
External links
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:National Labor Relations Board litigation
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Ford v. Wainwright" ==> """
Ford v. Wainwright, 477 U.S. 399 (1986), was a landmark U.S. Supreme Court case that upheld the common law rule that the insane cannot be executed; therefore the petitioner is entitled to a competency evaluation and to an evidentiary hearing in court on the question of their competency to be executed..
Background
Alvin Bernard Ford was convicted of murder in 1974 and sentenced to death in Florida. In 1982, while on death row, Ford's mental health diminished to a point resembling paranoid schizophrenia. Ford began referring to himself as Pope John Paul III and reported such accomplishments as thwarting a vast Ku Klux Klan conspiracy to bury dead prisoners inside the prison walls, foiling an attempt by prison guards to torture his female relatives inside the prison, and personally appointing nine new justices to the Florida Supreme Court. Ford also claimed he was "free to go whenever [he] wanted" because he theorized that anyone who executed him would, in turn, be executed.
A panel of three psychiatrists was eventually called to examine Ford's behavior, and it concluded that while Ford had psychosis and various mental disorders, he was still capable of understanding the nature of the death penalty and the effect that such a penalty would have on him. Florida Governor Bob Graham acted without further comment on the panel's findings but in accord with a Florida statute in signing a death warrant for Ford in 1984. Ford sued the secretary of the Florida Department of Corrections, Louie L. Wainwright.
Opinion
The Court, in an opinion by Justice Marshall, reviewed the evolving standards of the Eighth Amendment to be those consistent with "the progress of a maturing society", and one not tolerable of acts traditionally branded as "savage and inhumane", as the execution of the mentally insane was considered in early English and American common law  reasoned that executing the insane did not serve any penological goals and that Florida's procedures for determining competency were inadequate. Thus, the Court made a preliminary finding that the Eighth Amendment bars states from inflicting capital punishment upon insane persons.
The Court then further addressed the procedural issues present in making a determination of insanity for Eighth Amendment concerns.  The court found that such a determination could not be left solely to the executive branch, as was done via the Florida Statute allowing then Governor Graham to sign Ford's death warrant solely on recommendation by an appointed committee of psychiatrists.  Rather, the Court held, that a proper judicial hearing, in which full procedural rights would be afforded, including the right to counsel and to cross-examine witnesses, was necessary for such a finding.
In their dissents, Justices O'Connor and White claimed that execution of the insane was not per se unconstitutional.  The Justices further commented, however, that states had a right to create certain protected liberties in state statutes, of which a prohibition on the execution of the insane was a liberty which could be validly created.  Once validly created by a state, that liberty interested required the minimum due process protections afforded to other constitutionally protected liberties, in which sole action by the executive branch, as in this case, would still fail to provide.
Justice Rehnquist, in dissent, stated a belief that in common-law tradition, it was actually the executive branch who was sole  arbiter of decisions involving the sanity of prisoners sentenced to death.  In this respect, Justice Rehnquist felt that the majority had formed its opinion at the "expense of 'our common law heritage'".
The inmate was transferred to Florida State Hospital for treatment after he was reevaluated and found to be  incompetent to be executed.
In 1989, a federal district judge ruled that Ford was sane, but defense lawyers appealed that ruling.
The appeal was pending when Ford died of a respiratory illness on February 6, 1991, at 37.
See also
 Panetti v. Quarterman (2007)
 Penry v. Lynaugh (1989)
 List of criminal competencies 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 477
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:1986 in United States case law
Category:Capital punishment in Florida
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Forest Grove School District v. T. A." ==> """
Forest Grove School District v. T. A., 557 U.S. 230 (2009), is a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) authorizes reimbursement for private special education services when a public school fails to provide a "free appropriate public education" (FAPE) and the private school placement is appropriate, regardless of whether the child previously received special education services through the public school..
 Background 
T.A. attended public school in the Forest Grove School District in Forest Grove, Oregon, from kindergarten through the winter term of his junior year in high school.  In high school T.A. had difficulty with his schoolwork, but the school determined that T.A. did not qualify for special education services. In 2003 T.A. was diagnosed with ADHD and a number of learning disabilities. Subsequently, T.A. was enrolled in a private school that focused on special needs children.
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Stevens held that the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act did not categorically bar reimbursement of private education tuition if a child had not previously received special education and related services through the school. The court remanded the case back to the United States District Court for the District of Oregon to determine if the family at issue was then entitled to reimbursement.
 Dissent 
Justice Souter filed a dissent joined by Justice Scalia and Justice Thomas. Justice Souter argued that School Comm. of Burlington v. Department of Ed. of Mass., 471 U.S. 359 (1985), was controlling and IDEA prohibits reimbursement if the school district has made a free appropriate public education available.
Subsequent history
In December 2009, federal district court judge Michael W. Mosman determined the family was not eligible for reimbursement under the IDEA. The parents in the case had sent their son to Mount Bachelor Academy due to behavioral problems and the use of drugs. Mosman ruled that the special reason for the special education, behavioral issues and drug use, were not disabilities covered under federal law, and the parents had not listed ADHD when applying to the academy. The parents appealed the decision to the Ninth Circuit, which upheld Judge Mosman's ruling.
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 557
References
 External links 
Court Affirms Reimbursement for Special Education (NYT)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:Forest Grove, Oregon
Category:Education in Washington County, Oregon
Category:United States education case law
Category:United States disability case law
"""

From "Forrester v. White" ==> """
Forrester v. White, 484 U.S. 219 (1988), was a case decided on by the United States Supreme Court.. The case restricted judicial immunity in certain instances.
 Facts 
Respondent Howard Lee White served as Circuit Judge of the Seventh Judicial Circuit of the State of Illinois and Presiding Judge of the Circuit Court in Jersey County. Under Illinois law, Judge White had the authority to hire adult probation officers, who were removable in his discretion. In addition, as designee of the Chief Judge of the Seventh Judicial Circuit, Judge White had the authority to appoint juvenile probation officers to serve at his pleasure.
In April 1977, Judge White hired petitioner Cynthia A. Forrester as an adult and juvenile probation officer. In July, 1979, Judge White appointed Forrester as Project Supervisor of the Jersey County Juvenile Court Intake and Referral Services Project, a position that carried increased supervisory responsibilities. Judge White demoted Forrester to a nonsupervisory position in the summer of 1980. He discharged her on October 1, 1980.
Forrester filed this lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Illinois in July, 1982. She alleged violations of various civil rights statutes based on sexual discrimination. A jury found that Judge White had discriminated against Forrester on account of her sex, in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The jury awarded her $81,818.80 in compensatory damages under § 1983..
Judge White moved for summary judgment on the ground that he was entitled to "judicial immunity" from a civil damages suit. This motion was granted. Forrester appealed. The Court of Appeals affirmed the "judicial immunity" holding from the lower court. The Supreme Court then granted certiorari.
 Issue 
Whether a state court judge has absolute immunity from a suit for damages under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 for his decision to dismiss a subordinate court employee. Also, is there a difference in judicial and administrative function when it comes to "judicial immunity."
 Holding 
Judges have been given judicial immunity to preserve their important governmental function. If judges were personally liable for erroneous decisions, the resulting avalanche of suits, most of the frivolous but vexatious, would provide powerful incentives for judges to avoid rendering decisions likely to provoke such suits.  Truly judicial acts, however, must be distinguished from the administrative, legislative, or executive functions that judges may occasionally be assigned by law to perform. Here, the promoting and demoting of aids can be classified as an administrative act, not a judicial one. 
Absolute immunity cannot be extended to judges who perform administrative acts. Justice O'Connor applied a "functional" approach under which the nature of the functions entrusted to particular officials is examined in order to evaluate the effect that exposure to particular forms of liability would likely have on the appropriate exercise of those functions. 
Administrative acts are indistinguishable from those of an executive branch official responsible for making similar personnel decisions, which, no matter how crucial to the efficient operation of public institutions, are not entitled to absolute immunity from liability in damages under § 1983. O'Connor dismissed the Court of Appeals reasoning that the threat of vexatious lawsuits by disgruntled ex-employees could interfere with the quality of a judge's decisions. She argued that it does not serve to distinguish judges from other public officials who hire and fire subordinates. Neither case should afford absolute immunity towards the actor.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1988 in United States case law
Category:United States judiciary case law
"""

From "Forsyth County v. Nationalist Movement" ==> """
Forsyth County, Georgia v. The Nationalist Movement, 505 U.S. 123 (1992), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court limited the ability of local governments to charge fees for the use of public places for private activities.  By a 5–4 vote, the court ruled that an ordinance allowing the local government to set varying fees for different events violated the First Amendment due to the lack of "narrowly drawn, reasonable, and definite standards" governing the amount of the fee..
Background
Prior Supreme Court opinions had held that public officials could charge fees as a pre-condition for activists to assemble in public places or march down public streets.  The rationale was that a fee to recover the costs of police protection, clean-up, and administrative costs did not violate the right to speak and assemble under the First Amendment.  The fees sometimes ranged into the millions of dollars.
On January 17, 1987 a group of ninety demonstrators conducted a "March Against Fear and Intimidation" in Cumming, Forsyth County, Georgia that was met by as many as three hundred counter-protesters including the Forsyth County Defense League (an independent affiliate of the Nationalist Movement, which advocates the expulsion of all non-whites from the United States) and the Ku Klux Klan. According to Forsyth County, Georgia at least eight counter-protesters were arrested on charges of carrying concealed weapons and trespassing. The following weekend, January 24, 1987, there was a civil rights march attended by 20,000 integrationists, including civil rights leaders, U.S. senators and other senior officials. They were met again by about counter-protesters led by The Nationalist Movement.
Sixty-six Nationalists were arrested  on charges of parading without a permit. In the aftermath, all Nationalists were acquitted. In U.S. Federal District Court in Atlanta, Judge William Clark O'Kelley dismissed the case, threatened to charge the Nationalists with perjury, fined them $8,000.00 for bringing a "frivolous" lawsuit and barred Richard Barrett, who also served as the Nationalists' attorney, from his court.  
On appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, Barrett argued that no fees whatsoever could be charged; however, the court ruled for the Nationalists on the grounds that a "nominal" fee could be charged. Although there was a dispute over what was "nominal," O'Kelley was reversed and the fines were vacated.Nationalist Movement v. City of Cumming, Forsyth Cty., Ga., 913 F.2d 885 (11th Cir. 1990), rehearing en banc granted, 921 F.2d 1125 (11th Cir. 1990); panel opinion reinstated on rehearing, 934 F.2d 1482 (11th Cir. 1991). O'Kelley rescinded his ban on the Nationalists' attorney. Forsyth County appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.. Robert S. Stubbs III and Gordon A. Smith, arguing on behalf of Forsyth County, insisted that the Girl Scouts and a local track club had been charged nominal fees, so the Nationalists were being treated equally. The American Civil Liberties Union filed an amicus brief in which they contended that a nominal fee of $100.00 sufficed.
Opinion of the Court
The Supreme Court ruled 5–4 in favor of the Nationalists on the ground that the ordinance unconstitutionally permitted the county to charge differing fees to different groups without any objective standards to prevent the county from basing the fee on the political views that a group sought to express. The court held that the ordinance violated the First Amendment due to the lack of "narrowly drawn, reasonable, and definite standards" governing the amount of the fee.Forsyth County, 505 U.S. at 132-33.
Nothing in the law or its application prevents the official from encouraging some views and discouraging others through the arbitrary application of fees. The First Amendment prohibits the vesting of such unbridled discretion in a government official.Forsyth County, 505 U.S. at 133.
The majority rejected Forsyth County's argument that the ordinance was content-neutral because it was aimed at offsetting the cost of maintaining public order:
The costs to which petitioner refers are those associated with the public's reaction to the speech. Listeners' reaction to speech is not a content-neutral basis for regulation.Forsyth County, 505 U.S. at 134.
Subsequent developments
The holding immediately impacted Simi Valley, California, which had banned the Nationalists on the grounds that they did not comply with regulations mandating a thirty-day waiting-period and that providing police protection was "too costly."  The city immediately rescinded its objections and provided police-protection. 
In 2000, Morris County, New Jersey, sued the Nationalists, alleging that they could not parade and rally because they refused to post a $8 million bond.  The Nationalists removed the case from state court to federal court in Newark, where Judge John W. Bissell held, in Morris County, New Jersey v. The Nationalist Movement, that although the bond was unconstitutional, officials could impose a "hold-harmless" clause, requiring the Nationalists to pay for damages caused by rioters against them.  Bissell, also, refused to award attorney fees.  On appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, Bissell was reversed, all restrictions were struck down and substantial attorney fees awarded to the Nationalists.  The U.S. Park Service immediately removed its requirement for similar fees and bonds, which it had interposed for the Nationalists' rally at the Liberty Bell.  The event then proceeded, without restrictions and with full police protection.  In the end, two Nationalists, Joshua Laub and Mathew McSweeney Sheard, were arrested for knocking over a speaker.
See also
 The Nationalist Movement
 Richard Barrett (lawyer)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 505
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
 First Amendment Library entry on Forsyth County, Georgia v. The Nationalist Movement
Category:Race-related case law in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:Ku Klux Klan
Category:Forsyth County, Georgia
Category:Ku Klux Klan in Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Fortnightly Corp. v. United Artists Television, Inc." ==> """
Fortnightly Corp. v. United Artists Television, Inc., 392 U.S. 390 (1968), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that receiving a television broadcast does not constitute a "performance" of a work.. 
In 1968, the United States Copyright Office called this case "the most important American copyright case of the 1960s."
 References 
External links
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Foster v. Chatman" ==> """
Foster v. Chatman, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the state law doctrine of res judicata does not preclude a Batson challenge against peremptory challenges if new evidence has emerged. The Court held the state courts' Batson analysis was subject to federal jurisdiction because "[w]hen application of a state law bar 'depends on a federal constitutional ruling, the state-law prong of the court’s holding is not independent of federal law, and our jurisdiction is not precluded,'" under Ake v. Oklahoma., slip op. at 7 (2016). 
It held that the petitioner, Timothy Foster, had established purposeful discrimination, and that as a result, the state habeas court and Supreme Court of Georgia had erred in denying his Batson claim that black jurors were struck from his jury pool on the basis of race. In concluding its opinion, the Court noted that "[t]wo peremptory strikes on the basis of race are two more than the Constitution allows."Foster, slip op. at 25 The court frequently cited Snyder v. Louisiana in its decision.
Background
In 1986 Timothy Foster, a black 18-year-old, was accused of killing Queen Madge White, a 79-year-old white woman and retired schoolteacher in Georgia. She had been sexually assaulted and murdered in her home, which was ransacked. A month later, law enforcement officers were called to a domestic disturbance at the home of Lisa Stubbs. She told the officers that her boyfriend, Foster, had killed White and given items stolen from White's house to her and various family members. Foster was arrested, admitted to the crime, and some of the stolen items from White's house were recovered from Foster's residence.Foster, slip op. at 1.Foster, slip op. at 1 (Alito, J., concurring in judgment).
During jury selection, the prosecutors used peremptory strikes to remove all four black prospective jurors from the jury pool, resulting in an all-white jury. Foster challenged these strikes, arguing that they were racially motivated in violation of Batson v. Kentucky. The trial judge dismissed the challenge and empaneled the jury, which convicted Foster of the murder and sentenced him to death. After sentencing, Foster filed a motion for a new trial on the grounds that the jury selection violated the US Supreme Court's Batson decision. The trial court denied the motion, the Georgia Supreme Court affirmed the dismissal, and the U.S. Supreme Court denied certiorari.Foster, slip op. at 3.
Foster raised a habeas corpus challenge in the state court. During the habeas proceedings, Foster submitted a freedom of information request, under the Georgia Open Records Act, to obtain the prosecution's file for his trial. Among the documents produced by the request were numerous documents which the prosecution used during the jury selection process. The prosecutors had made notes on these:
highlighted all the black prospective jurors on the jury list with a key indicating that the highlighting "represents Blacks";
created a list of six "definite NO’s", of which the first five were all of the black prospective jurors;Foster, slip op. at 5.
circled the race of each black prospective juror on their questionnaires;
denoted, in handwritten notes, three of the black prospective jurors with "B#1", "B#2", and "B#3"Foster, slip op. at 4.
and created a handwritten document titled "Church of Christ", which had an annotation stating "NO. No Black Church";
The prosecutors had also drafted an affidavit for the trial judge in response to Foster's motion for a new trial. It contained the statement: "If it comes down to having to pick one of the black jurors, [this one] might be okay. This is solely my opinion .... Upon picking of the jury after listening to all of the jurors we had to pick, if we had to pick a black juror I recommend that [this juror] be one of the jurors." The statement was crossed-out by hand and was omitted in the affidavit filed with the court.
Despite this new evidence, the state court rejected Foster's habeas petition stating that the new evidence did not present "purposeful discrimination" and so did not provide sufficient reason to go against the doctrine of res judicata.Foster, slip op. at 6. The Georgia Supreme Court denied a "Certificate of Probable Cause" necessary, under state law, to appeal the habeas decision, determining that the case had no "arguable merit"Foster, slip op. at 6 (citing Ga. Code Ann. §9–14–52 (2014) and Ga. Sup. Ct. Rule 36 (2014)) The Georgia Supreme Court's decision in its entirety said: "Upon the consideration of the Application for Certificate of Probable Cause to appeal the denial of habeas corpus, it is ordered that it be hereby denied. All the Justices concur, except Benham, J., who dissents." Since the petition for certiorari to the Supreme Court was appealing the Georgia Supreme Court's order, it was unclear whether the order "rests on an adequate and independent state law ground," which would preclude the U.S. Supreme Court's jurisdiction over Foster's federal claim.
Oral arguments
In an unusual turn of events, the US Supreme Court notified the attorneys for both sides that the justices may pose questions regarding the jurisdiction of the Court to hear the case. Advocating for Foster, Stephen B. Bright started his arguments with a criticism of the prosecutors' alleged racial motives coming into jury selection, but he was soon interrupted by Chief Justice Roberts asking for Bright to address the jurisdictional issues. Much of his speaking time was spent answering these procedural questions.
Getting to the merits, Bright argued that the race-neutral reasons for the strikes were contradicted by the prosecution's actions and the documents Foster obtained. In response to a question by Chief Justice Roberts, Bright pointed out that, despite the prosecution claiming they struck the black prospective jurors because they were women, the prosecution accepted other non-black women onto the jury.Transcript of Oral Argument at 17, Foster v. Chatman, 578 U.S. ___ (2016)(No. 14-8349)
Opinion of the Court
In a 7–1 decision authored by Chief Justice Roberts, the Court held that it did have jurisdiction to review the case and held that Foster did indeed show significant purposeful racial discrimination in the jury selection. Justice Alito wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment to describe the state law on the matter, while Justice Thomas dissented. Both Justice Alito's concurrence and Justice Thomas's dissent pointed out that, under Georgia state law, Foster's murder conviction and death sentence may not be nullified by the decision.See Foster, slip op. at 9–10 (Alito, J., concurring in judgment)("On remand, the Georgia Supreme Court is bound to accept [our] evaluation of the federal question [that Batson was violated], but whether that conclusion justifies relief under state res judicata law is a matter for that court to decide.") and Foster, slip op. at 6 (Thomas, J. dissenting)("Nothing in the reported decisions of the Supreme Court of Georgia suggests that federal law figures in how Georgia applies its res judicata procedural bar.[...]But it is for the Supreme Court of Georgia—not this Court—to decide what new facts suffice...")
Majority
As a threshold matter, the U.S. Supreme Court determined that the lower court's habeas decision was not independent of federal issues and therefore does not bar review by the U.S. Supreme Court.Foster, slip op. at 8–9 (citing ). Both parties agreed that Foster brought a prima facie case and that the prosecutors offered race-neutral explanations for striking the black prospective jurors, the first two prongs of the three-prong test in Batson.Foster, slip op. at 9–10 The court examined the reasons for striking two of the black prospective jurors—Garrett and Hood—and found the reasons did not withstand scrutiny,Foster, slip op. at 11–23. concluding that:
Justice Alito's opinion concurring in the judgment
Justice Alito wrote separately "to explain [his] understanding of the role of state law in the proceedings that must be held on remand." Justice Alito explained that the lower court's habeas decision noted that Foster's Batson claim was based on new evidence discovered after Foster's original trial and therefore the order of the Georgia Supreme Court "held ... that Foster's Batson claim, as presented in his state habeas petition, lacked arguable merit." Justice Alito noted that many states do not permit relitigation of previously-argued claims and that "[s]tates are under no obligation to permit collateral attacks on convictions that have become final."Foster, slip op. at 7 (Alito, J., concurring in judgment) Justice Alito concurred that the correct decision in this case was "to decide the question of federal law and then to remand the case to the state court so that it can reassess its decision on the state-law question in light of [the U.S. Supreme Court's] decision on the underlying federal issue."Foster, slip op. at 9 (Alito, J., concurring in judgment). He agreed in the court's finding that the prosecutor's striking of the black prospective jurors was a Batson violation.
Justice Thomas' dissenting opinion
Justice Thomas dissented. Justice Thomas criticized the court's determination of jurisdiction, arguing that "[t]he far more likely explanation for the [Georgia Supreme Court's] denial of habeas relief is that Foster's claim is procedurally barred ...[,] a question of state law that [the U.S. Supreme Court] is powerless to review."Foster, slip op. at 2 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Justice Thomas notes that historically the Supreme Court would vacate and remand for clarification before proceeding to the merits of a case like this and "refuse[d] to presume that the unexplained denial of relief by the Supreme Court of Georgia presents a federal question."Foster, slip op. at 5, 7 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Justice Thomas then proceeded to reject the court's analysis of the Batson claim.Foster, slip op. at 8–15 (Thomas, J., dissenting).
Notes
 References 
External links
 Case file from SCOTUSblog
 Appendix to Foster's certiorari petition, compiling most case history, including the evidence used in Foster's Batson'' claim.
*
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Foster v. Neilson" ==> """
Foster v. Neilson, 27 U.S. 253 (1829) was a decision by the United States Supreme Court that held that certain treaties ratified by the United States, even if otherwise valid and in force, cannot be given effect domestically without a specific act of Congress.Foster v. Neilson, 27 U.S. (2 Pet.) 253, 314–15 (1829). Self-Executing and Non-Self-Executing Treaties | Constitution Annotated | Congress.gov | Library of Congress The ruling articulated a more restrictive interpretation of the Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution, which automatically grants treaties the force of domestic federal law.Treaties as Law of the Land: The Supremacy Clause and the Judicial Enforcement of Treaties, Carlos Manuel Vázquez, Vol. 122, No. 2 (Dec. 2008), p 606, www.jstor.org/stable/40042748. 
The Foster decision was the first to formulate the concept of "self-execution", which distinguishes between treaties that are "self-executing" (meaning domestic courts can enforce them directly upon their ratification) and those that are "non-self-executing" (which are not directly enforceable in U.S. courts unless Congress passes specific implementing legislation). It was also the first time the Court applied the "intent-based doctrine of self-execution", which examines the text of a treaty, as well as its related documents and negotiations, to determine whether the treaty makers intended it to be self-executing.Executing Foster v. Neilson: The Two-Step Approach to Analyzing Self-Executing Treaties, David L. Sloss, Vol. 53, No. 1 (Winter 2012), p. 143
 Decision 
The Court's opinion, authored by Chief Justice John Marshall, recognized that the U.S. Constitution, through the Supremacy Clause, "declares a treaty to be the law of the land" and "consequently to be regarded in courts of justice as equivalent to an act of the legislature[.]"  However, Justice Marshall immediately adds a qualifying statement that a treaty is only the equivalent of a legislative act when the treaty "operates of itself without the aid of any legislative provision"' when the terms of the treaty "import a contract" or suggest that some future legislative act is necessary, "the treaty addresses itself to the political, not the judicial department; and the legislature must execute the contract before it can become a rule for the Court."Foster, 27 U.S. (2 Pet.) at 314. 
Using this test, the Foster Court held that the treaty provision at issue—which stated that certain land grants from the King of Spain "shall be ratified and confirmed"—was non-self-executing because it suggested that Congress would ratify the land grants through a future legislative act.Foster, 27 U.S. (2 Pet.) at 314.
 References 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Supreme Court of the United States
"""

From "Foucha v. Louisiana" ==> """
Foucha v. Louisiana, 504 U.S. 71 (1992), was a U.S. Supreme Court case in which the court addressed the criteria for the continued commitment of an individual who had been found not guilty by reason of insanity. The individual remained involuntarily confined on the justification that he was potentially dangerous even though he no longer suffered from the mental illness that served as a basis for his original commitment.. 
Background
Petitioner Terry Foucha was charged with aggravated burglary and illegal discharge of a firearm. He burglarized a home after the occupants fled and discharged a firearm in the direction of a law enforcement officer. Initially he was evaluated as incompetent to proceed to trial because he was unable to distinguish right from wrong at the time of the offense. When he later was evaluated as competent, he was tried and found not guilty by reason of insanity. He was committed to East Feliciana State Hospital (LA Maximum Secure) on the grounds that he had a mental illness and was dangerous.
Under Louisiana law, a criminal defendant found not guilty by reason of insanity and committed to a psychiatric hospital will remain there until the hospital review committee  recommends that he be released. If the review committee recommends release, then the trial court must hold a hearing to determine whether he is dangerous to himself or others. If he is found to be dangerous, he may be returned to the hospital whether or not he is currently mentally ill. The committee met and stated that it could not guarantee that Foucha would not be a danger to himself or others.
Therefore, the state court ordered petitioner Foucha to return to the mental institution to which he had been committed, ruling that he was dangerous. The decision was  based on a doctor's testimony that, although Foucha had recovered from the drug induced psychosis for which he was committed, he continued to be diagnosed as having an antisocial personality, a condition that is not a mental illness and is not considered treatable. Foucha had been involved in several fights within the facility which doctors felt might indicate he might pose a danger if released. The court stated the burden of proof rested on Foucha to prove that he was not a danger to himself or others.
Appeals
Foucha petitioned the Court for a writ of certiorari. The State Court of Appeals had denied Foucha's appeal and the Louisiana Supreme Court affirmed, holding, among other things, that per Jones v. United States (1983) Foucha's release was not required. The latter ruled that the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment was not violated by the statutory provision permitting confinement of an insanity acquittee based on dangerousness alone, although dangerousness alone in the absence of a mental illness would not satisfy the standards for a  civil commitment.
Opinion of the Court
The Court ruled that potential dangerousness was not a justification to retain a person found not guilty by reason of insanity if no mental illness was present. James P. Manasseh argued the cause for petitioner. With him on the briefs was Martin E. Regan, Jr.504 U.S. 71, 73. An acquittee cannot be confined as a mental patient without some medical justification for doing so. Although the individual may be dangerous, the Court ruled that a person committed on the basis of an insanity defense and who has regained his sanity cannot continue to be confined on the sole justification that he remains dangerous. A (formerly) insane acquittee must remain both ill and dangerous to continue to be involuntarily committed. This ruling also applies to convicted persons. "There is no conceivable basis for distinguishing the commitment of a person who is nearing the end of a penal term from all other commitments."
Therefore, the State of Louisiana was not justified in retaining the petitioner unless it could prove that serious public safety concerns existed to justify the acquittee's continuing classification as dangerous.
Significance
The Court clarified that if the justification for commitment after an insanity acquittal no longer applies, the individual is to be released. To maintain that an insanity acquittee remain  civilly committed to a psychiatric institution until he is no longer a danger to himself or others is unconstitutional. In this case the basis for commitment was that the defendant was both not responsible due to a mental illness and was dangerous. If he no longer suffers from a mental illness, then there is no justification to detain him. States must maintain the same standard for involuntarily committed insanity acquittees as they do for civilly committed individuals. Commitment must be based on standard principles of civil commitment, including proving that the individual is mentally ill. Commitment cannot be an automatic consequence of the acquittal.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 504
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
 Jackson v. Indiana (1972)
 O'Connor v. Donaldson (1975)
 Addington v. Texas (1979)
 Jones v. United States (1983)
References
External links
Release of Insanity Acquittees
 The Effects of Foucha v. Louisiana on SVPA Civil Commitments and Equal Protection
Forensic Managementof Sexual Offenders
Handbook of Psychology
The Paradox of Psychopathy
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States civil commitment case law
Category:Mental health case law in the United States
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Fourth Estate Public Benefit Corp. v. Wall-Street.com" ==> """
Fourth Estate Public Benefit Corp. v. Wall-Street.com, 586 U.S. ___ (2019), is a Supreme Court of the United States case in which the Court unanimously ruled that a copyright infringement suit must wait until the copyright is successfully registered by the United States Copyright Office.
Background
While the Copyright Act of 1976 grants automatic copyright privileges to an author when it is published to the public, the Act also requires "registration" of that copyright with the Copyright Office before bringing an infringement suit if the author is American. There had been a Circuit split about whether this "registration" required the Copyright Office to grant or deny the certificate of registration, or whether applying for the certificate could qualify as registration. Some circuit courts, such as the Eleventh and Tenth, held that is considered registered upon the copyright's approval by the Copyright Office, known as the "registration approach." Others, including the Ninth and Fifth Circuits, held that registration occurs upon the application for registration, with the associated deposit and fee; this was known as the "application approach."
Fourth Estate wrote articles and licensed them for publication by other entities. One of their clients, Wall-Street.com, cancelled their licensing arrangement, and the license required Wall-Street.com to remove the content from their site, which they refused to do. Fourth Estate sued for copyright infringement, after having submitted their application for registration but without having waited for the registration to be approved. The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh CircuitWall-Street.Com and Burden were represented by attorney David A. Geller at the Trial Court and 11th Circuit Court of Appeals. ruled that the infringement suit could not be brought because of that lack of approval.
Supreme Court
The case was granted certiorari by the Supreme Court, with oral arguments heard on January 9, 2019. Fourth Estate was represented at oral arguments by Aaron M. Panner. Peter K. Stris represented Wall-Street and Jerrold Burden.
Fourth Estate contended that the Eleventh Circuit misread the statute, and believed that the requirement of "registration" refers to the action of the copyright holder, and not an action of the Copyright Office. Further, they contended normatively that a copyright holder's rights should not depend upon affirmative government action.
The court ruled on March 4, 2019, that a registration certificate must be provided before a lawsuit can be filed..
Comments on the decision
It has been observed by one commentator that a decision in Fourth Estate's favor would essentially remove the Copyright Office's role in the process of moving copyright infringement cases to litigation, and concerns about the practical implications of litigating prior to the Register's grant or denial of registration were a prominent theme at the oral arguments.Jessica Litman, "Argument analysis: Justices wade deep into the copyright weeds", SCOTUSBlog, Jan. 9, 2019.
Others have observed that the practical effect is minimal, since although the turnaround time for a registration with the Copyright Office can be months at a time, the Office offers an $800 expedited review process for cases with "compelling needs" like upcoming lawsuits, and offers preregistration for categories of works more likely to be infringed. Moreover, plaintiffs can recover for any losses accrued from infringement, even while waiting for the examination to be complete.
The decision applies only to filing copyright litigation, and does not apply to other forms of enforcement, such as sending demand letters or issuing DMCA Section 512 takedown notices.
References
External links
 SCOTUSblog page
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Fowler v. Rhode Island" ==> """
Fowler v. Rhode Island, 345 U.S. 67 (1953), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a municipal ordinance which was used to penalize a minister of Jehovah's Witnesses for preaching at a peaceful religious meeting in a public park, although other religious groups could conduct religious services there with impunity, violated the First and Fourteenth Amendments..
 Facts of the case 
The City of Pawtucket, Rhode Island, had an ordinance which reads as follows:
SEC. 11. No person shall address any political or religious meeting in any public park; but this section shall not be construed to prohibit any political or religious club or society from visiting any public park in a body, provided that no public address shall be made under the auspices of such club or society in such park.
Jehovah's Witnesses assembled in Slater Park of Pawtucket for a meeting which at the trial was conceded to be religious in character. About 400 people attended, 150 being Jehovah's Witnesses. Fowler, a Jehovah's Witness minister, was invited to give a talk before the Pawtucket congregation of Jehovah's Witnesses.  Fowler accepted the invitation and addressed the meeting in the park over two loud-speakers. It was a quiet, orderly meeting with no disturbances or breaches of the peace whatsoever.
Fowler had been talking only a few minutes when he was arrested by the police and charged with violating the ordinance set forth above. He was tried and found guilty over objections that the ordinance as so construed and applied violated the First and the Fourteenth Amendments of the Constitution. He was fined $5.
 Prior history 
Fowler's conviction was affirmed by the Rhode Island Supreme Court. 80 R.I., 91 A. 2d 27. Also see Fowler v. State, 79 R. I. 16, 83 A. 2d 67, an earlier opinion answering certified questions and holding the ordinance valid.
Arguments
Davis v. Massachusetts, decided in 1897, sustained a conviction of a man for making a speech on Boston Common in violation of an ordinance that forbade the making of a public address there without a permit from the mayor. Much of the oral argument and most of the briefs presented in Fowler v. Rhode Island were devoted on the one hand to a defense of the Davis case and on the other hand to an attack on it. Analyses of subsequent decisions were submitted by the State of Rhode Island in an effort either to demonstrate that the Davis case was still valid and applicable to this case.  Other analyses were submitted by Fowler to argue that it had been so qualified as to no longer to have any vitality. Fowler asked the Court to overrule Davis; the State of Rhode Island asked to have it reaffirmed.
It was conceded at the trial that this meeting was a religious one. On oral argument before the Court the Assistant Attorney General further conceded that the ordinance, as construed and applied, did not prohibit church services in the park. Catholics could hold mass in Slater Park and Protestants could conduct their church services there without violating the ordinance. Church services normally entail not only singing, prayer, and other devotionals but preaching as well. Even so, those services would not be barred by the ordinance.
Decision
Justice Douglas delivered the decision of the Court.  In it, he wrote that the Court was putting aside "the problems presented by the Davis case and its offspring" because there was one aspect of the case that undercut all others, requiring the Court to reverse the judgment and rule in favor of Fowler.  Douglas wrote that the concession by the State of Rhode Island that the meeting in question was a religious one and the further concession that the ordinance did not prohibit church services in the park plainly showed that a religious service of Jehovah's Witnesses was treated differently than a religious service of other sects.  In the opinion of the Court, that amounted to the state preferring some religious groups over the Jehovah's Witnesses.
Justice Douglas cited the precedent of Niemotko v. Maryland in which there was similarly "a public park, open to all religious groups, was denied Jehovah's Witnesses because of the dislike which the local officials had of these people and their views."  In that case, the Court had held the prosecution of Niemotko to be a discrimination that was prohibited by the First and Fourteenth Amendments.
Douglas wrote 
it is no business of courts to say that what is a religious practice or activity for one group is not religion under the protection of the First Amendment. Nor is it in the competence of courts under our constitutional scheme to approve, disapprove, classify, regulate, or in any manner control sermons delivered at religious meetings. Sermons are as much a part of a religious service as prayers. They cover a wide range and have as great a diversity as the Bible or other Holy Book from which they commonly take their texts. To call the words which one minister speaks to his congregation a sermon, immune from regulation, and the words of another minister an address, subject to regulation, is merely an indirect way of preferring one religion over another. That would be precisely the effect here if we affirmed this conviction in the face of the concession made during oral argument.
References
External links
Category:1953 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:1953 in religion
"""

From "Fox Film Corp. v. Doyal" ==> """
Fox Film Corp v. Doyal, 286 U.S. 123 (1932), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that states may tax copyright royalties, as they can patent royalties, because even though copyrights & patents are granted by the federal government, they are still private property subject to taxation..
 References 
External links
Category:1932 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
"""

From "Fox Film Corp. v. Knowles" ==> """
Fox Film Corp. v. Knowles, 261 U.S. 326 (1923), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the statute intends that an executor, there being no widow, widower, or child, shall have the same right to renew a copyright for a second term as his testator might have exercised had he continued to survive..
This case was reaffirmed in Miller Music Corp. v. Charles N. Daniels, Inc...
 References 
External links
Category:1923 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
"""

From "Fox Film Corp. v. Muller" ==> """
Fox Film Corp. v. Muller, 296 U.S. 207 (1935), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that it cannot exert certiorari jurisdiction over a case in which there is an adequate and independent state law ground for the state court's final judgment..
Facts
Plaintiff Fox Film Corporation sued defendant Muller in the state trial court of Minnesota, alleging that Muller had breached two contracts to exhibit the company's motion pictures.  Muller's defense was that the contract was invalid under the Sherman Antitrust Act.  The trial court found for Muller, first determining that the contract was invalid under the Sherman Act. The Minnesota Supreme Court affirmed, and the plaintiffs petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court for certiorari.  When it was discovered that the judgment was not final, the writ of certiorari was dismissed as improvidently granted.  The case was then remanded back to the state supreme court, which framed the question on appeal as whether the arbitration clause was severable from the rest of the contract.
The state supreme court followed the judgment of the U.S. Supreme Court in the case of  United States v. Paramount Famous Lasky Corporation, , which held that a similar contract was illegal in its entirety.  The court then determined that the arbitration clause was not severable from the rest of the contract, rendering the entire agreement void.
Decision
The issue on appeal was whether a question of federal law was involved in the Minnesota Supreme Court's decision.  Justice Sutherland, writing for a unanimous court, held that whether a federal question existed was irrelevant, because where there is an independent question of state law which is adequate to support the state court's judgment, the U.S. Supreme Court has no jurisdiction.  The severability of a contractual clause was an issue of state law, and the invalidity of the arbitration clause had already been determined by the U.S. Supreme Court in the Paramount case.  The state court's determination of the non-severability of the unlawful clause was thus adequate to render the contract invalid, and was independent of any question of federal law.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 296
References
External links
Category:1935 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:Adequate and independent state ground
Category:20th Century Fox litigation
"""

From "Fox v. Vice" ==> """
Fox v. Vice, 563 U.S. 826 (2011), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that reasonable fees may be granted to the defendant in a suit that involves both frivolous and non-frivolous claims, but only for costs resulting from the frivolous claims.". When a plaintiff's suit involves both frivolous and non-frivolous claims, a court may grant reasonable fees to the defendant, but only for costs that the defendant would not have incurred but for the frivolous claims." p. 2
 Notes 
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 563
 References 
External links
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Franchise Tax Board of California v. Hyatt" ==> """
Franchise Tax Board of California v. Hyatt (short: Franchise Tax Bd. of Cal. v. Hyatt or Hyatt III), 587 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case that determined that unless they consent, states have sovereign immunity from private suits filed against them in the courts of another state.  The 5–4 decision overturned precedent set in a 1979 Supreme Court case, Nevada v. Hall.  This was the third time that the litigants had presented their case to the Court, as the Court had already ruled on the issue in 2003 and 2016.
The ruling ended a long tax dispute between Gilbert Hyatt and California regarding alleged tax fraud by Hyatt. Hyatt had been challenging the tax fraud penalties that the California Franchise Tax Board (FTB) had ordered him to pay since 1993, both in court and through administrative proceedings. Because of the Supreme Court ruling, Hyatt was required to pay for all legal costs he incurred, without receiving a judgement against the FTB. On this matter, Justice Clarence Thomas wrote: "The consequences for the inventor are that he'll suffer the loss of two decades of litigation expenses and a final judgment against the Board for its egregious conduct. ... Those case-specific costs are not among the reliance interests that would persuade us to adhere to an incorrect resolution of an important constitutional question."
Justice Stephen Breyer, in the dissenting opinion, warned of the willingness of the majority to overrule precedent, saying, "To overrule a sound decision like Hall ... is to cause the public to become increasingly uncertain about which cases the court will overrule and which cases are here to stay", referencing as an example Planned Parenthood v. Casey, a 1992 case that affirmed the landmark abortion rights case Roe v. Wade. As a result of this ruling, Gilbert Hyatt did not receive $100,000 in damages from California. Although he was originally granted $389 million in damages by a Nevada jury, rulings by the Nevada Supreme Court and the U.S. Supreme Court reduced the amount to $100,000.
 Legal background 
The doctrine of sovereign immunity is the right of a government not to be sued in its own courts. The doctrine stems from the English common law principle that "the King can do no wrong". More recently, the principle has been defended for a variety of reasons: the idea that the entire community, i.e. the state, cannot commit wrongdoing; that the state's actions are lawful per se; that an agent of the state, when acting unlawfully, necessarily does so outside of their legal authority; opposition to the use of public funds to compensate private injuries; and that being amenable to suits interferes with the state's operation.
In the United States, sovereign immunity has been part of legal procedures for a long time.. Before the enactment of the Constitution, the Confederation government relied on the states' judiciaries for settling disputes and cases with interstate or international consequences. Congress could only appoint courts dealing with piracy, felonies on international waters and appeals in cases of capture. They could also establish ad hoc tribunals for dealing with disputes between two or more states and disputes with individuals claiming certain land based on different grants of two or more states.Jacobs, at 9. However, various states had accumulated large debts with domestic and foreign creditors, largely due to the American Revolutionary War. The Confederation government's and some states' failure to pay their creditors was seen as an obstacle to harmony and peace. Some feared that the failure to repay foreign governments and its subjects posed an international threat. In addition, because the domestic creditors were largely concentrated in a few states, people feared that states defaulting on their debt would cause interstate tension. The legacy of these concerns can be recognized in Article Three of the United States Constitution, which extended the judicial power of the United States to cases between a state and foreign nationals or citizens of other states.Jacobs, at 8-9.
Chisholm v. Georgia (1793) became the first case in which the U.S. Supreme Court considered the issue of state sovereignty under the Constitution.Jacobs, at 46-47. In this case, the Court held that Article III § 2 of the Constitution abrogated state sovereign immunity and that thus federal courts were authorized to hear cases between states and private individuals. Therefore, Georgia had no immunity from an action of assumpsit by a South Carolina resident.Baude, at 5. Subsequently, the Eleventh Amendment was passed, which was designed to supersede the Chisholm decision.
 Nevada v. Hall 
The issue of interstate sovereign immunity remained unaddressed by the U.S. Supreme Court until Nevada v. Hall (1979). Prior to Nevada v. Hall, courts had generally ruled that the Constitution, at least implicitly, prevented states from being sued in the courts of other states, pursuant to the principle of sovereign immunity. In Nevada v. Hall, the U.S. Supreme Court considered a case where two California residents were severely injured after their car collided with a car that was the property of the State of Nevada on a highway in California. The car was being operated by a University of Nevada employee on official business. The California residents brought suit against the University, the State of Nevada, and the car's administrator in a California Superior Court. The Superior Court rejected Nevada's argument that they were immune from suits against them in sister-state courts without their consent and held that it did have jurisdiction over the case. The Superior Court also rejected Nevada's argument that the Court, in keeping with the Full Faith and Credit Clause, should apply the Nevada statute limiting damages in suits against the state to $25,000 per tort. Instead, the Superior Court awarded the plaintiffs $1,150,000 in damages. The judgement was affirmed by a California Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court of California declined to hear the case.Olenick, at 1495.
Nevada petitioned to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari. The opinion of the Court was authored by Justice John Paul Stevens, in which the Court held that the Constitution, specifically Article III and the Eleventh Amendment, did not prevent states from being sued in the courts of sister-states. It also held that California was not required to apply the Nevada statute limiting damages in suits against its state, because California had a substantial interest in allowing persons injured while driving on their highways to receive full compensation when they sued the responsible  in their courts. In addition, Stevens noted that this interest was also furthered by the fact that California had waived its own immunity and allowed for full compensation in cases where the State of California was the defendant. Thus, applying the Nevada tort limit "would be obnoxious to its statutorily based policies of jurisdiction over nonresident motorists and full recovery."Olenick, at 1495-96.. In his dissenting opinion, Justice Harry Blackmun argued that interstate sovereign immunity was found "not in an express provision of the Constitution but in a guarantee that is implied as an essential component of federalism." He also argued that this decision would cause states to refuse to recognize each others' immunity in retaliation, and that states would move assets out of other states, in an attempt to safeguard itself from liability, which would damage the federal system.Olenick, at 1496-97.
 Background 
When Gilbert P. Hyatt started earning large sums of money from his microprocessor patent, he sold his California house and started renting an apartment in Nevada, a state with no income tax. On both his 1991 and 1992 tax returns, Hyatt claimed Nevada as his primary residence. The California Franchise Tax Board completed an audit in 1993 of Hyatt's tax returns, and determined that Hyatt's primary residence was actually California in 1991 and 1992; the FTB assessed Hyatt $13.3 million in back taxes and fraud penalties.
Hyatt filed a protest but after 11 years of administrative proceedings, it was upheld. , an appeal is still pending. Hyatt also sued the FTB in Nevada, alleging that he was harassed by the FTB and became subject to unconstitutional invasions of privacy. California's lawyers argued that in accordance with the Full Faith and Credit Clause, Nevada state courts could not hold California tax collectors liable because California law immunizes tax collectors from liability. The Nevada Supreme Court rejected this argument, citing Nevada v. Hall; the judgment was affirmed in 2003 by the U.S. Supreme Court in Hyatt I.
Hyatt was then awarded $389 million in damages by a Nevada jury for fraud, invasion of privacy, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and in punitive damages. The Nevada trial court added more than $104.5 million in costs and prejudgment interest, for a total judgment exceeding $490 million, which was reduced over the course of several appeals. The dispute—Hyatt II—came before the U.S. Supreme Court a second time in 2016. The Court split 4–4 on the question of whether Nevada v. Hall should be overturned, effectively upholding it, but a majority did rule that because Nevada law limits the liability of its state agencies to $50,000 per tort, Nevada state courts could not award Hyatt more than that amount per tort, in keeping with the Full Faith and Credit Clause. Consequently, the Nevada Supreme Court deemed a new trial unnecessary, and simply reduced the damages granted to Hyatt to the permitted maximum. Because an earlier ruling by the Nevada Supreme Court in 2014 had limited FTB's liability to fraud and intentional infliction of emotional distress (two torts), the maximum award was set at $100,000.
 Supreme Court 
On March 12, 2018, California lawyers filed a petition for a writ of certiorari, presenting the question: "Whether Nevada v. Hall, 440 U.S. 410 (1979), which permits a sovereign State to be hauled into another State's courts without its consent, should be overruled". In their petition, the lawyers argued that the Court should have an option to reconsider overruling Hall, because it split 4–4 on the question whether to overrule Hall in Hyatt II. They went on to argue that the "case remains an ideal vehicle to reconsider Hall". According to the petitioner, Hall continuing viability is questionable' in light of more recent decisions of the Supreme Court, including Federal Maritime Commission, Alden, and Seminole Tribe." On April 9, Hyatt waived his right to respond to the petition, but the Court, on May 1, requested a response from him regardless. In his response, Hyatt argued that "Petitioner and its amici offer no such compelling justification for overruling Nevada v. Hall. The decision is almost 30 years old and yet Petitioner and its amici point to only a relatively small number of cases against state governments in the courts of other states and document little burden on state governments from such litigation." After the petitioner filed a reply to Hyatt's brief on June 6, the Court granted certiorari on June 28.
 Oral arguments 
thumb|Seth P. Waxman for petitioner during oral arguments
The Court heard arguments in the case on January 9, 2019. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg was absent from the bench as she was recovering from a lung surgery, but did participate in the trial by reading briefs as well as the transcript of the oral arguments. Seth P. Waxman began by arguing for the petitioner, the FTB. Waxman started by arguing that states, prior to the enactment of the Constitution, enjoyed sovereign immunity under international law, because they were seen as separate sovereigns, with states having the "raw power" to engage in retaliation if their sovereignty was not recognized. The Constitution then created a "more perfect Union", according to Waxman, where states no longer had to rely on the "wild west of international law" for their sovereign immunity to be recognized in the courts of sister-states. Instead, the Constitution guaranteed this protection.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor questioned this idea by asking Waxman what text of the Constitution supported his analysis. She was followed by Justice Samuel Alito, who repeated the question later on, saying—possibly sarcastically—"we are all always very vigilant not to read things into the Constitution that can't be found in the text". On this question, Justice Brett Kavanaugh questioned why, if states considered their interstate sovereign immunity to be so important, they had not expressed that in the Constitution. Waxman addressed this question by arguing that the sovereignty was not found in the text of the Constitution, but its structure.
The only justice to mention the amicus curiae brief filed by professors William Baude and Stephen Sachs was Justice Elena Kagan, who mentioned it multiple times. Baude and Sachs argued that Hall was correctly decided insofar that states are not immune to suit in the courts of sister states. However, Baude and Sachs argued that: "the original Constitution did not force state or federal courts to respect the judgment of a court which lacked power over the defendant under traditional jurisdictional principles. Sister-state immunity was just such a principle. Thus, a State which tries to abrogate that immunity may find its judgments without effect in other American courts." Kagan asked what evidence Waxman had that supported his historical narrative over the narrative put forward over Baude and Sachs.
thumb|Erwin Chemerinsky for respondent during oral arguments
After Waxman, Erwin Chemerinsky began his arguments for the respondent. Chemerinsky argued that historically, states had been protected from suits in the courts of other states by interstate comity and that this still can protect states. Justice Sotomayor questioned whether comity was enough of a protection. Chermerinsky also pointed to the courts ruling in Hyatt II—where it held that states were required to extend the same immunities to sister states as it had themselves—which also provided protection to states. Justice Stephen Breyer also noted that if a state allowed abusive lawsuits against other states to take place in its own courts, the other states could sue the abusive state, whose "attitude would change".
Justice Alito challenged Chemerinsky by asking whether it was "plausible that there would be great concern about a state's being sued in a federal court, which is a more neutral tribunal, but no concern about a state being sued in ... the courts of another state?" Chemerinsky argued in response that the Framers were particularly concerned about abuse by the new federal government and that states did not want to relinquish its own power. Chemerinsky also argued, on the question of a textual basis for interstate sovereign immunity, that in the instances where the Constitution sought to "limit state power, it did so explicitly", as indicated by the Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Chemerinsky further argued that the Court, in keeping with stare decisis, should only overturn Hall if circumstances had changed since its ruling in Hall. Justice Kavanaugh disagreed with this argument, noting that many prior overrulings would have been impossible under this standard. Instead, he argued, the Court could overturn past rulings if they are "egregiously wrong and the prior decision has severe practical consequences and there's no real reliance interest at stake".
During oral arguments, counsel for both parties discussed the amicus curiae filed in favour of petitioner by Indiana, joined by 44 other states. Justice Sotomayor asked Waxman why the states which joined Indiana's brief did not propose an amendment to the Constitution similar to how the Eleventh Amendment was passed after the Chisholm v. Georgia decision. Waxman noted that the "Constitution is not amended lightly" and that the Court previously overturned its decisions even when states could have amended the Constitution, too. Chemerinsky later suggested that "you can[not] equate a brief filed by state attorney generals with the position of state governments". Chief Justice John Roberts attacked this suggestion, saying "It's a pretty remarkable assertion that we shouldn't understand representations of the states' attorneys general to represent the views of the state".
Besides Justice Ginsburg, who was not present, Justices Clarence Thomas and Neil Gorsuch did not ask any questions during oral arguments.
 Majority opinion 
Justice Clarence Thomas wrote the majority opinion, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts, and Justices Samuel Alito, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh. The opinion starts with a discussion on the history of state sovereign immunity. The first point made is that the Constitution's use of the word "State" reflects certain immunities and that the Founding Fathers supported absolute state immunity. Thomas also stated that, after the Supreme Court restricted state sovereignty in its Chisholm v. Georgia ruling, there was backlash causing the Eleventh Amendment to be passed. Thomas concluded that it would make "little sense" if sovereign immunity was not extended to state courts, and that "stare decisis does not compel continued adherence to this erroneous precedent". Thomas realized the results this ruling had on Hyatt, saying: "The consequences for the inventor are that he'll suffer the loss of two decades of litigation expenses and a final judgment against the Board for its egregious conduct. ... Those case-specific costs are not among the reliance interests that would persuade us to adhere to an incorrect resolution of an important constitutional question." Jay Michaelson criticized the opinion, saying "it's an imposition of Justice Thomas' specific, historically oriented 'originalism' philosophy."
 Dissenting opinion 
Justice Stephen Breyer wrote the dissenting opinion, joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan. In the dissenting opinion, Breyer disputed the history of state sovereign immunity presented in the majority opinion. He said that the record only showed states granted each other sovereign immunity as a matter of custom, not because it was required by the Constitution. He argued the decision was not grounded in the text of the Constitution, since the 11th Amendment only applies to federal courts not state courts; rather, he argued, it was grounded in vague concepts like the 'constitutional design'.  He also addressed the importance of precedent, saying that "To overrule a sound decision like Hall is to encourage litigants to seek to overrule other cases; it is to make it more difficult for lawyers to refrain from challenging settled law; and it is to cause the public to become increasingly uncertain about which cases the court will overrule and which cases are here to stay." In the opinion, Breyer named Planned Parenthood v. Casey, a 1992 case that narrowly affirmed the landmark abortion rights case Roe v. Wade, as an example of the importance of upholding precedent, especially under pressure from the Court's present conservative majority.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 587
 Hans v. Louisiana, a decision which re-affirmed state immunity in federal courts
 Janus v. AFSCME (2018), a case in which the liberal minority of the Supreme Court questioned the willingness of the conservative majority of the Supreme Court to ignore long-standing precedent and to overturn past rulings/to overrule precedent
 Knick v. Township of Scott, Pennsylvania (2019), another case in which the liberal minority of the Supreme Court questioned the willingness of the conservative majority of the Supreme Court to ignore long-standing precedent and to overturn past rulings/to overrule precedents
 Notes 
 References 
 Further reading 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States state sovereign immunity case law
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
"""

From "Franchise Tax Board of California v. Hyatt (2003)" ==> """
Franchise Tax Board of California v. Hyatt (short: Hyatt I), 538 U.S. 488 (2003), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court unanimously held that the Full Faith and Credit Clause does not require Nevada state courts to give full faith and credit to California statutes that immunize its tax agencies from suit. It was followed by Hyatt II in 2016 and Hyatt III in 2019, ultimately overturning precedent set by the 1979 Supreme Court case, Nevada v. Hall.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2003 in United States case law
"""

From "Franchise Tax Board of California v. Hyatt (2016)" ==> """
Franchise Tax Board of California v. Hyatt (short: Hyatt II), 578 U.S. ___ (2016), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Nevada rule that does not extend the same immunities to agencies of other states as it does to its own is effectively a "policy of hostility", which is unconstitutional under the Full Faith and Credit Clause. The Court split equally on the question whether Nevada v. Hall should be overruled, effectively upholding it.
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
"""

From "Francis v. Franklin" ==> """
Francis v. Franklin, 471 U.S. 307 (1985), is a United States Supreme Court decision reaffirming due process principles elucidated in Sandstrom v. Montana, that the prosecution bears the burden of proof of establishing the mental element of intent.Criminal Law - Cases and Materials, 7th ed. 2012, Wolters Kluwer Law & Business; John Kaplan, Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder, ,  Justice Brennan wrote that under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, a jury instruction saying that "a person of sound mind is presumed to intend the natural and probable consequences of his acts, but the presumption may be rebutted" is unconstitutional, because it shifted the burden of proof is shifted from the prosecution to the defense.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Due Process Clause
"""

From "Frank Lyon Co. v. United States" ==> """
Frank Lyon Company v. United States, 435 U.S. 561 (1978), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the title owner that acquired depreciable real estate as if the owner were a mere conduit or agent was indeed the owner and, for Federal income tax purposes, had the legal right to take tax deductions associated with depreciation on the building.
 Background 
According to the text of the syllabus preceding the Court's opinion:
A state bank, which was a member of the Federal Reserve System, upon realizing that it was not feasible, because of various state and federal regulations, for it to finance by conventional mortgage and other financing a building under construction for its headquarters and principal banking facility, entered into sale-and-leaseback agreements by which petitioner took title to the building and leased it back to the bank for long-term use, petitioner obtaining both a construction loan and permanent mortgage financing. The bank is obligated to pay rent equal to the principal and interest payments on petitioner's mortgage and has an option to repurchase the building at various times at prices equal to the then unpaid balance of petitioner's mortgage and initial $500,000 investment. On its federal income tax return for the year in which the building was completed and the bank took possession, petitioner accrued rent from the bank and claimed as deductions depreciation on the building, interest on its construction loan and mortgage, and other expenses related to the sale-and-leaseback transaction.
The bank was Worthen Bank in Little Rock and the Frank Lyon Corporation engaged in the distribution of home furnishings, primarily Whirlpool and RCA electrical products. The bank bought the land and started construction of the subject building before it found a buyer. The Frank Lyon Company won the bidding to buy the building from the bank by providing $500,000 of the $7.6 million purchase price.  The rest of the money came from New York Life. The mortgage loan's payments to the lender and the rent payments were engineered to be exactly equal.  The title owner, Frank Lyon, never actually received the rent payments from the Worthen Bank because the three party deal specifically required that Worthen pay New York Life directly.  The lease was triple net (i.e. any increase in expenses are paid not by the owner, but by the tenant).
Another fact which leads a reasonable man to conclude that Worthen Bank was the real party in a two party deal and that the Frank Lyon company was a mere agent, is that the tenant, Worthen Bank, had a 25-year lease with options to either buy the building or extend the lease for 65 years when it could still buy the building. The option's strike price was set so that Frank Lyon would be repaid exactly its $500,000 plus 6% interest.
Economic owners of an asset would be expected to bear the benefits and burdens of any change in market value of the thing owned. In this case, Worthen Bank, the tenant, bore the benefits and the burdens, rather than the title owner. The transaction was a classic sale leaseback.
 Holding 
The court held that the Government should honor the allocation of rights and duties effectuated by the parties where there is a genuine multiple-party transaction with economic substance which is compelled or encouraged by business or regulatory realities, imbued with tax-independent considerations, and not simply shaped by tax-avoidance features with meaningless labels attached. As long as the lessor retains significant and genuine attributes of the traditional lessor status, the form of the transaction adopted by the parties governs for tax purposes. As such, a sale-and-leaseback does not necessarily operate to deny a taxpayer's claim for deductions. 
 Subsequent developments 
The result of this case was modified by the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which disallowed this tax feature. The Rose Law Firm represented the taxpayer.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Frank v. Gaos" ==> """
Frank v. Gaos, 586 U.S. ___ (2019), was a per curiam decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in a case concerning the practice of cy pres settlements in class action lawsuits. Following oral argument, the court asked the parties to submit supplemental briefs addressing whether the parties had Article III standing to pursue the case in federal courts. Supplemental briefing was completed on December 21, 2018. On March 20, 2019, the court remanded the case to the Ninth Circuit to address the plaintiffs’ standing in light of Spokeo, Inc. v. Robins., 139 S. Ct. 1041 (2019) (citing , 136 S. Ct. 1540 (2016)).
Background and lower court decisions
In 2010, several individuals, including lead plaintiff Paloma Gaos, brought a class action against Google for allegedly leaking, in violation of privacy laws, information about their search terms to third parties by including search terms in the referrer header. After four days of negotiations, both sides agreed to a settlement, which requires approval by the presiding judge in the case to determine whether, per Rule 23(e)(2) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, it is "fair, reasonable, and adequate". In exchange for settlement funds, all class members, even if they were unaware of the settlement, relinquish their claim against the defendant.
Under the proposed settlement terms, the three lawyers in the case would receive over $2 million (an hourly rate of $1000/hour) and the named plaintiffs would receive $5,000 apiece, while an additional $6 million would be given to several privacy groups under the cy-près doctrine in lieu of compensation to then remaining unnamed class action members, due to the cost of administering the payout to those estimated 129 million individuals and the low amount of compensation (an estimated four cents). The privacy groups that would receive some of the money included each of the three lawyers' alma maters and several groups that Google has supported. The district court judge in the case, Judge Edward Davlia, noted "the elephant in the room is that many of them are law schools that you attended. ... I’m disappointed that the usual suspects are still usual." Bloomberg News stated that Judge Davlia remarked that the lack of transparency in selecting the recipients of the money "raises a red flag" and "doesn’t pass the smell test", although it was nonetheless approved.See 5:10-cv-04809, Tr. of Proceedings on Aug. 23, 2013, Docket Item No. 57.
In response to the settlement, Ted Frank and Melissa Holyoak of the Competitive Enterprise Institute, two of the 129 million unnamed members of the class being represented in the case, intervened to challenge the settlement on the grounds that it violated a procedural rule that such cy-pres settlements be "fair, reasonable and adequate." Google labeled Frank as a "professional objector". The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the use of cy-pres in this case, noting that otherwise the estimated 129 million web users that could theoretically receive damages from the suit would receive "a paltry 4 cents in recovery."
As Brian Miller of the Center for Individual Rights, in an opinion piece for Forbes, summarized the problem:
Supreme Court appeal
Frank filed a petition of certiorari in the U.S. Supreme Court. The Center for Constitutional Jurisprudence, Cato Institute, Center for Individual Rights, and Attorney General of Arizona, in a brief joined by 15 other states, filed amicus curiae briefs urging the court to grant certiorari.
The court granted certiorari on April 30, 2018. The Court gives the following as the question presented in this case:
The Solicitor General filed an amicus brief in support of neither party arguing that, before reaching the merits on the question presented, there is "considerable doubt whether the Court has Article III jurisdiction to address that question, because plaintiffs’ standing in the district court depended on a theory of injury that this Court subsequently rejected in Spokeo, Inc. v. Robins, 136 S. Ct. 1540 (2016)" and that the court may wish to vacate and remand the case to address the issue of standing.Brief for the United States as amicus curiae in support of neither party, p. 10., Frank v. Gaos, No. 17-961 (2018)
Oral arguments were heard on October 31, 2018, with Frank having been one of the few Supreme Court attorneys ever to argue his own case. The justices were divided along partisan lines based on observers' opinions, with the liberal justices supporting the cy pres approach used, while the conservative members felt the cy pres decision denied the class members their restitution and were critical of how much of the settlement went to legal fees. Writing for SCOTUSblog, Ronald Mann noted that at oral argument "all seemed to agree that the district court’s reasoning could not withstand scrutiny under Spokeo. The point of disagreement seemed to be whether there was any prospect that the plaintiffs could identify some new argument that would satisfy Spokeo at this late date."
The following week, the court ordered the parties and the Solicitor General "to file supplemental briefs addressing whether any named plaintiff has standing such that the federal courts have Article III jurisdiction over this dispute." Briefing will be completed by December 21.
The Court issued a per curiam decision on March 20, 2019, vacating the Ninth Circuit's decision and requesting continued review based on the Spokeo decision which had been brought up in the briefing stage of the case, in which questioned whether there was proper standing in this case. As the Spokeo question was not considered at the Ninth Circuit, the Supreme Court could not be the first court to consider that matter, and thus returned the case to the Ninth Circuit, expressing no view on the matter otherwise.Rapazzini, Mark, "Trends in Class Action Settlements: Developments in the Application of the Cy Pres Doctrine" Kroll Business Services, May 7, 2021.
Notes
References
External links
Case page at SCOTUSblog
Motion of plaintiffs in the district court to settle the case
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States class action case law
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Google litigation
Category:Competitive Enterprise Institute
Category:United States privacy case law
"""

From "Frank v. Maryland" ==> """
Frank v. Maryland, 359 U.S. 360 (1959), was a United States Supreme Court case interpreting the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Frank refused to allow the health inspectors into his home citing the Fourth Amendment. Inspectors were trying to perform an administrative search for code violations, specifically a rat infestation, not a criminal investigation, so they did not believe they were violating the Fourth Amendment. The Court, in an opinion written by Felix Frankfurter, decided in favor of the inspectors claiming that the search would benefit the public more than Frank's interests in privacy.Frank v. Maryland, .
The Supreme Court would reverse this decision eight years later in Camara v. Municipal Court of City and County of San Francisco, , ruling that the City of San Francisco could not prosecute a person for refusing to consent to a search of their home by a city inspector, and the inspector may only search either by having consent, or must have a search warrant issued based on probable cause of a violation of law.Camara v. Municipal Court of City and County of San Francisco, .
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 360
Wolf v. Colorado, 
References
External links
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1959 in United States case law
"""

From "Franklin v. Gwinnett County Public Schools" ==> """
Franklin v. Gwinnett County Public Schools, 503 U.S. 60 (1992), is a United States Supreme Court Case in which the Court decided, in a unanimous vote, that monetary relief is available under Title IX of the Federal Education Amendments of 1972.
 Case background 
The case arose when Christine Franklin, a sophomore at North Gwinnett High School in Georgia’s Gwinnett County Public School District claimed to be sexually abused by Andrew Hill, her teacher and a coach at the school. She also claimed that he had assaulted other students in her high school. The school district administrators became aware of the situation but decided not to take action and even encouraged Franklin to not proceed in pressing charges. However, Franklin persisted and the Gwinnett County Public Schools District eventually began to investigate the situation. Once investigations began, Andrew Hill resigned from his position at the school and the school board stopped its investigations. In result, Franklin decided to sue the Gwinnett School Board for violating the sexual harassment clause of Title IX for the goal of obtaining monetary relief and legal remedy. 
While Title IX is most commonly associated with requiring equality among male and female sports, a major component of it describes how schools must deal with sexual harassment complaints. Title IX claims that, “discrimination on the basis of sex can include sexual harassment or sexual violence, such as rape, sexual assault, sexual battery, and sexual coercion.” When a student goes to a school with a sexual harassment complaint, title IX requires the school to respond “promptly and efficiently” and take “immediate action”. Franklin believed the school board did not follow these guidelines so she decided to sue in the attempt of getting money in return. Because the school board was on Hill’s side, they appealed and argued that one can not get monetary relief from Title IX. 
In a unanimous 9—0 decision, the court ruled Franklin could get money because any and all types of relief, in appropriation, are available, in order to fix a violation of a federal right. After the ruling of the Supreme Court, the money was settled in an out-of-court settlement, of which the results were never disclosed.
 Court of Appeals 
Franklin’s argument and the reason she pressed charges was that she believed the Gwinnett school board violated the rights established in Title IX, and she should thus be compensated for damages. The counter argument came from Hill and the entire Gwinnett school board. Their reasoning was that Title IX did not authorize monetary awards for damages which the district court and United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit confirmed. Eventually, the case made its way to the Supreme Court on December 11, 1991. 79 days later, on February 26, 1992, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously in favor of Franklin where she was rewarded monetary benefits.
 Decision 
A previous case Cannon v. University of Chicago (1979), established that Title IX was enforceable through an implied right of action, so the question became whether or not monetary awards were available for damages in a private action brought to enforce Title IX.
The court’s decision, written by Justice Byron R. White, stated that monetary relief was available under Title IX because it is presumed that violating a federal right calls for the use of appropriate relief as a remedy. The court also found that the harassment against Franklin was an example of discrimination based on sex. Since the court judged that because the sexual harassment against Franklin was a clear violation of Title IX, had the court not provided remedies for Franklin, Title IX would then be a law that would not award any remedies.  
While the judges voted unanimously in favor of Franklin, three justices held a concurring opinion written by judge Antonin Scalia. Scalia believed that there should be limitations on the use of remedies because the causes of action were implied. The justices held this opinion under the belief that the application of remedies to expand private rights could lead to problems. Yet, despite this, they still voted in favor of Franklin.
 Significance 
While this case confirmed that someone could receive monetary relief from Title IX, the reasoning behind the decision has a much wider application. They reasoned that since Title IX was a civil rights issue that all types of relief were available. Thus, they reaffirmed that all types of civil rights cases will allow and be open to all types of relief. 
 References 
External links
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Women's rights in the United States
Category:Sexual harassment in the United States
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:Harassment case law
Category:History of women in Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Franklin v. Massachusetts" ==> """
Franklin v. Massachusetts, 505 U.S. 788 (1992), was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the 1990 Census that is most notable in U.S. administrative law for its holding that the Administrative Procedure Act does not authorize challenges to actions of the President of the United States, unless the challenge is to the constitutionality of those actions.
 allows judicial review of "final agency action," but the Court held that the President does not count as an agency as defined in sections  and , which do not explicitly mention the President.
 See Also 
 Dalton v. Specter (1994)
 References 
External links
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Franklin v. South Carolina" ==> """
Franklin v. South Carolina, 218 U.S. 161 (1910), was the trial of Pink Franklin for the murder of South Carolina Constable Henry H. Valentine in 1907. Franklin was a sharecropper who wished to leave his employer although his employer had advanced Franklin wages under a contract based on the so-called "peonage laws". A warrant was obtained and when Valentine came to the house, a shootout occurred, killing Valentine and injuring Franklin, his wife Patsy, and another constable who was there. The defense included claims that Franklin acted in self-defense and that the peonage laws were unjust. In appeal, the defense claimed that the make-up of the jury, all white based on the requirement that the jury be based on those who were eligible to vote, was based on unconstitutional racism in election laws stemming from the 1895 South Carolina constitution. Franklin's conviction was upheld in all appeals, including the appeal before the United States Supreme Court heard in April 1910.
The case was the second time black South Carolina lawyers had appeared before the Supreme Court,Burke, William Lewis. Matthew J. Perry: The Man, His Times, and His Legacy. Univ of South Carolina Press, 2004, p23 and became famous for the issues involved. After the conviction was upheld, many figures associated both with Booker T. Washington and with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) pressured and petitioned successive governors of South Carolina for clemency. Franklin's death penalty was commuted in 1910, and in 1919 his prison sentence was commuted and he was paroled. The case was one of the first times the nascent NAACP became involved in legal proceedings. It also was an example of the power of Washington's political influence.
Events of the case
In 1907, African-American Pink Franklin was working as a contract farm laborer on the farm of Jake Thomas.Hine, William C. Pink Franklin: NAACP’s first legal case, The Times and Democrat, Orangeburg, SC, May 18, 2014 Thomas had given Franklin some of his wages in advance, but Franklin was unhappy with his contract and left the farm. Thomas asked the local police to intervene, and on July 29, 1907, at 3:00 AM, Constable Henry H. Valentine and Constable Carter came to Franklin's house.Annual Report of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Issue 10 Front Cover National Association for the Advancement of Colored People N.A.A.C.P., 1920 A neighbor of Franklin's, Charles Spires, sometimes worked with Thomas and was on hand.Franklin v South Carolina 218 US 161 1910 accessed on https://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/218/161 Upon the Constables' instruction, Spires asked Franklin to plow his field, possibly through a closed front door. Franklin said that he would not, and that he might later in the day.Kim, Rose M. Violence and Trauma as Constitutive Elements in Racial Identity Formation, PhD in Sociology dissertation, CUNY, 2007 Valentine broke into the house and was shot and killed by Franklin. Franklin, his wife, Patsy, and Constable Carter were also shot in the melee, all surviving.Kluger, Richard. Simple Justice: The History of Brown v. Board of Education and Black America's Struggle for Equality. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, Aug 24, 2011, p 101 Franklin's young son was also home.
The Franklins fled, afraid for their lives that they might be lynched. They took refuge with ex-state Senator Stanwix Mayfield, and with his help turned themselves in to Orangeburg Sheriff John H. Dukes. Franklin's initial trial took place on September 9, 1907. P. T. Hildebrand and three other lawyers were the prosecution and Patsy was found not guilty, while Pink was found guilty in the one-day trial heard by judge J. C. Klugh. Franklin's defense was Jacob Moorer from Orangeburg and John Adams from Columbia. The type of agricultural contract Franklin worked under was then and later called, "peonage laws". Franklin claimed that the constables broke into his house and did not identify themselves, and that he was acting in self-defense. The prosecution claimed that the doors were open and that the constables did announce their presence and identify themselves. Franklin's leaving the Thomas farm was legal, otherwise his contract would have, indeed, been illegal peonage, but the landowner had convinced officials to write a warrant for his arrest. Franklin was sentenced to hang after the initial trial, a sentence that was confirmed in a resentencing in early September 1910, with a date set in December to give chance for further appeal – Moorer and Adams stated they would appeal.Pink Franklin to Hang He is Resentenced by Judge Sease and Date Fixed for December. State (Columbia, South Carolina). Wednesday, September 7, 1910, Page: 1 The jury was all white and Moorer and Adams felt this was due to unconstitutional discrimination against blacks seeking to register to vote (and thus to be eligible for juries). It was reported that even trial judge Klugh believed that Franklin would not have been convicted if he were white.
Appeal to the Supreme Court
The appeal was unsuccessful in South Carolina, and the case was appealed to the United States Supreme Court. Ex Attorney General Charles Bonaparte became interested in the case and wrote a brief to the court. Bonaparte had broad popular support for joining the case, but Adams and Moorer were determined to show that black lawyers could argue the case.Smith, Jr, J. Clay. Emancipation: The Making of the Black Lawyer, 1844-1944. University of Pennsylvania Press, Jan 1, 1999 p 261 Adams said that Bonaparte's submission of a brief in Franklin's appeal to the Supreme Court is, "The work of a few hot-headed negroes of Philadelphia, who have absolutely no authority to take such a step in the case".Adams on Franklin Case. Charleston News and Courier (Charleston, South Carolina). Thursday, April 7, 1910, Page: 1 Adams and Moorer may have been willing to include Bonaparte as an equal and refused his aide when Bonaparte wanted to take charge of the case.Why Bonaparte Planned Butt-in Sought to Make Party Capital of Franklin Matter. Argument in Case. State (Columbia, South Carolina). Thursday, April 21, 1910 Issue: 6768 Page: 1 Without Bonaparte in the chambers, Moorer and Adams argued their case April 20 and 21, 1910. The appeal was based in part on rules in South Carolina at that time that only people who could vote could serve on a jury. The lawyers argued that racist qualifications for voters in the Constitution of 1895 resulted in a jury of unjust make-up. However, the court found that black men of good moral character were equally eligible to serve on the jury and that there was no denial of rights on this account, issuing their decision on May 31, 1910 with the opinion of the court written by Justice Day and no concurring or dissenting opinion offered.
Sentence commuted
After the trial, Moorer and Adams were joined by many others in seeking other means to save Franklin. Moorer and Adams petitioned June 25, 1910 to commute Franklin's sentence from death to life in prison.Franklin Lawyers Trying to Save Him Will Ask Jurors Who Convicted Negro to Sign Petition. State (Columbia, South Carolina). Sunday, June 26, 1910. Issue: 6833 Section: Part I Page: 1 Boneparte felt that Adams and Moorer were wrong to remove him from the case. Journalist and early supporter of the NAACP, Oswald Garrison Villard wrote to Booker T. Washington, agreeing with Bonaparte and a similar view stated by Albert E. Pillsbury that Franklin was not well defended due to the "stupidity and conceit" of his counsel and asked Washington for his help.Washington, Booker T. Harland, Louis R. The Booker T. Washington Papers, Volume 10. University of Illinois Press, 1981, p362-365 WashingtonTischauser, Leslie Vincent. Jim Crow Laws. ABC-CLIO, 2012, p 54 and another NAACP activist, Joel Elias Spingarn, became involved. Washington contacted Taft, black legislator Thomas E. Miller, NAACP secretary Francis Blascoer,Sullivan, Patricia. Lift Every Voice: The NAACP and the Making of the Civil Rights Movement. The New Press, Jul 29, 2009 and others became involved and two white attorneys, Bernard Hagood and Claude Sawyer were hired to convince then South Carolina governor Martin Frederick Ansel to commute the decision.
Franklin's death sentence was commuted to life on December 30, 1910 coming into effect January 6, 1911,DuBois, William Edward Burghardt. The Crisis, Volumes 17 Crisis Publishing Company, 1917, p231 but Ansel's successor, Cole Blease, was not considered receptive to calls to repudiate injustice towards blacks. Eventually Franklin's sentence was commuted to 99 years on a chain gang and finally he was paroled after nine years. He was released in January 1919 on parole "during good behavior", his sentence commuted by then South Carolina Governor Richard I. Manning.
Aftermath
After his release, Franklin changed his name to Mack Rockingham and lived in Blackville, South Carolina with Patsy and two sons. He died in 1949.
Pointing to the key role that Washington and his contacts played in the case, some point to the affair as a failure by W. E. B. DuBois and the NAACP. The inability of NAACP leaders to help Franklin has been compared with the case of Steve Greene in 1910 (shortly after the Franklin case). Greene fled with a bullet wound in his shoulder to Chicago after killing an Arkansas farmer who tried to indenture or enslave Franklin on his farm. Greene was extradited to Arkansas, and was threatened with lynching. Ida B. Wells-Barnett's Negro Fellowship League raised money to organize a defense committee and safely bring Greene to Canada. Further, Washington was skeptical of legal solutions for Franklin in favor of political ones, a view that was ultimately validated.James, Joy. Transcending the Talented Tenth: Black Leaders and American Intellectuals. Routledge, Jan 21, 2014, p 51. On the other hand, the NAACP saw Franklin's ultimate release as a success of their organization, and continues to claim that the case was their first case.
Peonage laws returned to the Supreme Court in 1911 when Alabama's peonage laws were overturned in Bailey v. Alabama.
See also
Burke, Lewis W. Pink Franklin v. South Carolina: The NAACP's First Case July, 2014 American Journal of Legal History 54 Am. J. Legal Hist. 265
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1910 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:Debt bondage
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
Category:Orangeburg County, South Carolina
Category:1910 in South Carolina
Category:Agriculture in South Carolina
"""

From "Franks v. Delaware" ==> """
Franks v. Delaware, 438 U.S. 154 (1978), is a United States Supreme Court case dealing with defendants' rights to challenge evidence collected on the basis of a warrant granted on the basis of a false statement. The court held that where a warrant affidavit contains a statement, necessary to the finding of probable cause, that is demonstrated to be both false and included by an affiant knowingly and intentionally, or with reckless disregard for the truth, the warrant is not valid.
Facts
On Friday, March 5, 1976, Mrs. Cynthia Bailey told police in Dover, Delaware, that she had been confronted in her home earlier that morning by a man with a knife, and that he had sexually assaulted her. She described her assailant's age, race, height, build, and facial hair, and gave a detailed description of his clothing as consisting of a white thermal undershirt, black pants with a silver or gold buckle, a brown leather three-quarter-length coat, and a dark knit cap that he wore pulled down around his eyes.
That same day, petitioner Jerome Franks coincidentally was taken into custody for an assault involving a 15-year-old girl, Brenda, six days earlier. After his formal arrest, and while awaiting a bail hearing in Family Court, petitioner allegedly stated to Robert McClements, the youth officer accompanying him, that he was surprised the bail hearing was "about Brenda B. I know her. I thought you said Bailey. I don't know her."
Detective Brooks and Detective Larry D. Gray then submitted a sworn affidavit to a Justice of the Peace in Dover, in support of a warrant to search petitioner's apartment. In paragraph 8 of the affidavit's "probable cause page," mention was made of petitioner's statement to McClements. In paragraph 10, it was noted that the description of the assailant given to the police by Mrs. Bailey included the above-mentioned clothing. Finally, the affidavit also described the attempt made by police to confirm that petitioner's typical outfit matched that of the assailant. Paragraph 15 recited: "On Tuesday, 3/9/76, your affiant contacted Mr. James Williams and Mr. Wesley Lucas of the Delaware Youth Center where Jerome Franks is employed and did have personal conversation with both these people.". 
Paragraphs 16 and 17 respectively stated: "Mr. James Williams revealed to your affiant that the normal dress of Jerome Franks does consist of a white knit thermal undershirt and a brown leather jacket," and "Mr. Wesley Lucas revealed to your affiant that in addition to the thermal undershirt and jacket, Jerome Franks often wears a dark green knit hat."
A warrant was then issued on the basis of this affidavit. Pursuant to the warrant, police searched Frank's apartment and found a white thermal undershirt, a knit hat, dark pants, and a leather jacket, and, on petitioner's kitchen table, a single-blade knife. All these ultimately were introduced in evidence at trial.
Prior to the trial, however, Frank's counsel filed a written motion to suppress the clothing and the knife found in the search; this motion alleged that the warrant, on its face, did not show probable cause, and that the search and seizure were in violation of the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments. At the hearing on the motion to suppress, defense counsel orally amended the challenge to include an attack on the veracity of the warrant affidavit; he also specifically requested the right to call as witnesses Detective Brooks, Wesley Lucas of the Youth Center, and James D. Morrison, formerly of the Youth Center.Counsel asserted that Lucas and Morrison would testify that neither had been personally interviewed by the warrant affiants, and that, although they might have talked to another police officer, any information given by them to that officer was "somewhat different" from what was recited in the affidavit. Defense counsel charged that the misstatements were included in the affidavit not inadvertently, but in "bad faith." Counsel also sought permission to call Officer McClements and petitioner as witnesses, to seek to establish that petitioner's courthouse statement to police had been obtained in violation of petitioner's Miranda rights, and that the search warrant was thereby tainted as the fruit of an illegally obtained confession. Id. at 17, 27.
In rebuttal, the State's attorney argued in detail, App. 124, (a) that Del. Code Ann., Tit. 11, §§ 2306, 2307 (1974), contemplated that any challenge to a search warrant was to be limited to questions of sufficiency based on the face of the affidavit; (b) that, purportedly, a majority of the States whose practice was not dictated by statute observed such a rule; and (c) that federal cases on the issue were to be distinguished because of Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 41(e). He also noted that the Supreme Court of the United States had reserved the general issue of subfacial challenge to veracity in Rendorf v. United States, when it disposed of that case on the ground that, even if a veracity challenge were permitted, the alleged factual inaccuracies in that case's affidavit "were of only peripheral relevancy to the showing of probable cause, and, not being within the personal knowledge of the affiant, did not go to the integrity of the affidavit.". The State objected to petitioner's "going behind [the warrant affidavit] in any way," and argued that the court must decide petitioner's motion "on the four corners" of the affidavit.
The trial court sustained the State's objection to petitioner's proposed evidence. The motion to suppress was denied, and the clothing and knife were admitted as evidence at the ensuing trial. Tr.192–196. Petitioner was convicted. In a written motion for judgment of acquittal and/or new trial, Franks repeated his objection to the admission of the evidence, stating that he "should have been allowed to impeach the Affidavit used in the Search Warrant to show purposeful misrepresentation of information contained therein.", and affirmed Franks' conviction. The motion was denied, and Franks was sentenced to two consecutive terms of 25 years each and an additional consecutive life sentence.
On appeal, the Delaware Supreme Court affirmed, but its decision was reviewed and reversed by the Supreme Court in the here entitled case. After remanding the case back to the Delaware Supreme Court, the latter then reevaluated the legitimacy of the warrant and considered the ramifications of the false statements contained therein. It concluded that, "[e]xcised of the alleged false paragraphs[,] the warrant affidavit contains sufficient uncontested allegations to establish probable cause", and therefore affirmed Franks' conviction.
As of 2018, Franks is still serving his sentence at James T. Vaughn Correctional Center.
Opinion
The Supreme Court of the United States held that "Where the defendant makes a substantial preliminary showing that a false statement knowingly and intentionally, or with reckless disregard for the truth, was included by the affiant in the warrant affidavit, and if the allegedly false statement is necessary to the finding of probable cause, the Fourth Amendment, as incorporated in the Fourteenth Amendment, requires that a hearing be held at the defendant's request. The trial court here therefore erred in refusing to examine the adequacy of petitioner's proffer of misrepresentation in the warrant affidavit."
See also
Exclusionary rule
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 438
References
External links
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1978 in United States case law
Category:Dover, Delaware
"""

From "Frazier v. Cupp" ==> """
Frazier v. Cupp, 394 U.S. 731 (1969), was a United States Supreme Court case that affirmed the legality of deceptive interrogation tactics by the police..
Background
Acting on a tip, police picked up and interrogated Martin E. Frazier, a 20-year-old U.S. Marine, about his possible involvement in the murder of Russell Anton Marleau. Frazier, along with his cousin, Jerry Lee Rawls, were seen at a bar with the victim before the murder. 
During the interrogation, police falsely informed Frazier that Rawls had already confessed and implicated him in the murder. Frazier denied any involvement in the crime and suggested speaking with an attorney, but police continued to question him. Police elicited a confession, which was used against him at trial.
Frazier was convicted of the murder of Russell Anton Marleau. Rawls pleaded guilty to the same offense.
Arguments during appeal
Frazier appealed his conviction to the United States Supreme Court on three main points.
 The defense argued Frazier was denied his Sixth Amendment right to cross-examine the prosecution's witness, Rawls, because Rawls refused to answer questions after the prosecution referenced elements from his prior statements to police.
 The defense claimed, under Escobedo v. Illinois and Miranda v. Arizona, Frazier was denied his right to counsel during his interrogation because questioning continued after he suggested speaking with an attorney. The defense also claimed Frazier's confession was involuntary and should have been suppressed.
 The defense argued evidence used against Frazier was obtained during an illegal search of a gym bag used jointly by Frazier and Rawls.
Decision
 The Court stated the trial judge followed necessary protocol by instructing the jury to disregard the references to Rawls's statements. The Court agreed the prosecution did not emphasize Rawls's statements over other evidence and the statements alone were not "touted to the jury as a crucial part of the prosecution's case".
 The Court ruled Frazier did not formally request an attorney, as required for Escobedo v. Illinois to apply, and Miranda v. Arizona did not apply because the original trial took place in 1965, one year before Miranda. The Court also ruled that the statement, on its own, did not render the confession involuntary based on a "totality of the circumstances" view.
 The Court dismissed the illegal search argument, citing consent was legally obtained from Rawls and his mother. The Court ruled Rawls, a co-owner of the gym bag, was authorized to give consent to search the bag, even though items in certain compartments of the bag belonged to Frazier.
The Court stated:
The fact that the police misrepresented the statements that Rawls had made is, while relevant, insufficient, in our view, to make this otherwise voluntary confession inadmissible.
Subsequent history
Later case law has interpreted Frazier v. Cupp as the case permitting police deception during interrogations. The language of the ruling did not specifically state which forms of police deception were acceptable, but the ruling provided a precedent for a confession being voluntary even though deceptive tactics were used.
 References 
Further reading
External links
Category:1969 in United States case law
Category:Confrontation Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Deception
"""

From "Fred Fisher Music Co. v. M. Witmark & Sons" ==> """
Fred Fisher Music Co. v. M. Witmark & Sons, 318 U.S. 643 (1943), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the renewal of copyright for the second term is not an opportunity for an author to renegotiate terms made during the first term that extended beyond the first term's length..
Justices Black, Douglas, and Murphy dissented from the decision, citing the lower court judge's opinion rather than composing their own.
The Copyright Act of 1976 abrogated this decision and assigned the decision of whether or not to renew to the original copyright holder. (specifically 304a)
 References 
External links
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:Abrogated United States Supreme Court decisions
"""

From "Free Enterprise Fund v. Public Company Accounting Oversight Board" ==> """
Free Enterprise Fund v. Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, 561 U.S. 477 (2010), was a 5–4 decision by the U.S. Supreme Court in which the Court ruled that laws enabling inferior officers of the United States to be insulated from the Presidential removal authority with two levels of "for cause" removal violated Article Two of the United States Constitution..
Under the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, PCAOB officers could be removed only "for good cause shown" by officers of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Officers of the SEC could only be removed by the President for "inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office." Thus, although the President could remove high-ranking members of the SEC, he could not govern and execute power to the board, thus providing a "dual layer" of protection. The Court found this "dual layer" of protection "contrary to Article II's vesting of the executive power in the President."
 Background 
 Facts 
The Public Company Accounting Oversight Board was created as part of a series of accounting reforms in the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002. It is composed of five members appointed to five-year staggered terms by the Securities and Exchange Commission.Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, at 3. Because the Board was created as a private nonprofit organization, "Board members and employees are not considered government 'officer[s] or employee[s]' for statutory purposes." Every accounting firm that audits public companies under the securities laws must register with the Board, pay it an annual fee, and comply with its rules and oversight, among other things.
In February 2006, the Free Enterprise Fund and Beckstead and Watts, LLP (a small Nevada-based accounting firm) filed a lawsuit in federal court challenging the constitutionality of the PCAOB under the Appointments Clause of the U.S. Constitution and the vesting clauses establishing the separation of powers. On August 22, 2008, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit upheld the PCAOB as constitutional. Then-Judge Brett Kavanaugh dissented from that opinion.Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, at 7.
Decision
Opinion of the Court
On June 28, 2010, in a five-justice majority opinion written by Chief Justice John G. Roberts, the Supreme Court found the appointment provisions of the Act to be constitutional, but struck down the for-cause removal provision. Roberts first cited the Decision of 1789 as demonstrating the First Congress overwhelmingly believed that "the executive power included a power to oversee executive officers through removal."Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, at 11. He then effectively revived Myers v. United States as precedent by citing it as an reaffirmation of "the principle that Article II confers on the President 'the general administrative control of those executing the laws." 
Roberts distinguished the case at hand from Humphrey's Executor v. United States (1935) because Humphrey's dealt with principal officers.Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, at 13. He then distinguished the case from Morrison v. Olson (1988) because "Morrison did not . . . address the consequences of more than one level of good-cause tenure" which "makes a difference."Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, at 14. Because two levels of good-cause protection altered how the President could hold the Board accountable, the structure "was contrary to Article II's vesting of the executive power in the President."Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, at 15. 
After finding the "for cause" provision to be unconstitutional, the Court held that the PCAOB board members were inferior officers because the SEC could remove them at will.Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, at 29–30. Further, it held that because "the Commission is a freestanding component of the Executive Branch, not subordinate to or contained within any other such component, it constitutes a 'Departmen[t]' for the purposes of the Appointments Clause", settling a question raised in Freytag v. Commissioner.Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, at 30.
The Court did not accept petitioners' argument that the constitutional infirmity made all of the Board's prior activity unconstitutional; rather, it simply severed the for-cause removal clause from the rest of Sarbanes-Oxley, leaving the Board itself intact.
Breyer's Dissent
Justice Breyer wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by justices Stevens, Ginsburg  and Sotomayor. The dissent opened with a general description of the clashing constitutional interests, matching the court's discussion of presidential duty in supervising the executive branch, with its own expansion on congress’ responsibility in creating government ‘offices’ in a manner befitting the times. While nodding to the general premise that the president has authority to appoint and at times dismiss officials, the dissent argued that the authority isn’t absolute. The dissent cited Humphrey’s Executor as precedent backing their assertion, and characterized it as a ‘partial overruling’ of the court’s cornerstone Myers. The dissent emphasized the absence of presidential removal power in the constitution and narrated some of the historical controversy regarding the issue. Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, (Breyer, J., dissenting) Part I A. 
Next the dissent argued for adopting a functional framework for deciding the question. The constitution, according to the dissent, was written in a broad manner in order to be read and applied in face of unforeseeable exigencies and necessary expansions of the federal government. Therefore the exact power or extent of authority of any branch should not be based “on isolated clauses or even single Articles torn from context”. Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, (Breyer, J., dissenting) Part I B. 
According to the dissent, the functional consequences of the 'for-cause' provision don’t amount to a significant contravention of the president's ability to supervise the executive branch. Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, (Breyer, J., dissenting) Part II A.  The dissent drew forth a few arguments to back its assertion. First, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act was passed virtually unanimously in congress, and was not critiqued by the president on grounds of separation of powers concerns. That should suggest that neither the president nor the legislator, the more expert branches in administrative knowledge, perceived the act to contain an insult to constitutional principles. Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, (Breyer, J., dissenting) at 10.  Next, as a practical matter, removal authority is only one of many ways by which a president can exert supervision over the executive, and a rarely used one in actual fact. Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, (Breyer, J., dissenting) at 11-12.  Next again, in view of the fact that the commissioner himself is protected by a ‘for cause’ requirement, the president isn’t left any worse off by the ‘for-cause’ provision than he was pre-enactment. The scenario the court comes up with to the contrary, namely, that the commissioner and president agree that a board member need be removed, but don’t agree on the presence of ‘good-cause’, the dissent deemed very unlikely. Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, (Breyer, J., dissenting) at 12-14.  And lastly, even if removal is limited only ‘for-cause’, the SEC still controls the functioning of the board in many other ways, and so by the court’s logic, so does the president. Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, (Breyer, J., dissenting) at 14-17. 
Weighing against the constitutional indifference to the ‘for-cause’ provision, the dissent argued for good reason for the provision’s enactment. That is, protecting the independence of officers who partake in adjudication and the need for technical expertise in matters of accounting. Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, (Breyer, J., dissenting) Part II B.  The dissent pointed to previous cases of the supreme court that, in the dissent’s framing, support upholding ‘for-cause’ removal provisions when they are unlikely to significantly restrict presidential power. The only case striking down a ‘for-cause’ provision, Myers, was distinguished on separation-of-power grounds: there congress was drawing power to itself, here congress wasn’t. Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, (Breyer, J., dissenting) Part II C. 
With regards to the consequences of the ruling, the dissent warned that the scope of the decision is alarmingly wide, especially when taking into account the indefiniteness of the term “inferior officer”. The dissent turned to listing some of the affected positions and overall found “no way to avoid sweeping hundreds, perhaps thousands of high level government officials within the scope of the Court’s holding, putting their job security and their administrative actions and decisions constitutionally at risk.” Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, (Breyer, J., dissenting) Part II D. 
Finally, the dissent criticized the court for simply assuming a ‘for-cause’ prerequisite for removing the Commissioner, and then building on that assumption to strike down a statute. According to the dissent, the absence of a ‘for-cause’ requirement in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and the time-period within which it was enacted, suggest that no such provision was intended. Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. ____, (Breyer, J., dissenting) Part III. 
See also
Bowsher v. Synar
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 561
Myers v. United States
Morrison v. Olson
Seila Law LLC v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
The Decision of 1789
References
External links
Category:2010 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:Sarbanes–Oxley Act
"""

From "Freedman v. Maryland" ==> """
Freedman v. Maryland, 380 U.S. 51 (1965), was a United States Supreme Court case that ended government-operated rating boards with a decision that a rating board could only approve a film and had no power to ban a film. The ruling also concluded that a rating board must either approve a film within a reasonable time, or go to court to stop a film from being shown in theatres. Other court cases determined that television stations are federally licensed, so local rating boards have no jurisdiction over films shown on television. When the movie industry set up its own rating system—the Motion Picture Association of America—most state and local boards ceased operating.
 Background 
Ronald Freedman challenged the law of Maryland that films must be submitted to the Maryland State Board of Censors before being shown in theaters, claiming it unconstitutional; violating freedom of expression granted by the First Amendment.
 Opinion of the Court 
In a unanimous opinion by Justice Brennan, the Court held that a rating board could only approve a film and had no power to ban a film.
See also
 Film censorship in the United States
 Production Code
 Joseph Burstyn, Inc v. Wilson
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:1965 in United States case law
Category:Film censorship in the United States
Category:Legal history of Maryland
"""

From "Freytag v. Commissioner" ==> """
Freytag v. Commissioner of Internal Revenue, 501 U.S. 868 (1991), is a United States federal court case in which the Supreme Court of the United States decided the characteristics of inferior officers of the United States for the purposes of the Appointments Clause..
The case concerned the appointment method of special trial judges of the United States Tax Court. The Court was unanimous in its conclusion that special trial judges were inferior officers under the Appointments Clause, rather than mere employees, because of the characteristics of their office and that their appointment was constitutional. Positions constitute inferior officers when the position (1) is  established by law and (2) exercises significant authority (3) involving significant discretion.
The division between the majority, led by Justice Harry Blackmun, and the concurrence, led by Justice Antonin Scalia, centered on the status of the Tax Court itself. Under the Appointments Clause, inferior officers may only be appointed by the President, Heads of Departments, or the Courts of Law. The majority determined the Tax Court, which exercises power as an Article I court was a "Court of Law" for the purpose of the Appointments Clause and was thus constitutional. The concurrence, however, would have held "Courts of Law" are limited to traditional Article III courts. Instead, the concurrence would have permitted the appointments under the view that the Tax Court is a "Head of a Department".
Facts
Under the Tax Reform Act of 1969, the United States Congress established the United States Tax Court as an Article I court and charged it with adjudicating disputes over federal income tax. The judges of the Tax Court were to be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to serve a term of 15 years. By amendments in 1984, Congress authorized the Chief Judge of the Tax Court to appoint and assign special trial judges to hear such cases as the Chief Judge may designate.
Thomas Freytag and several other defendants were charged by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue with using a tax shelter scheme to avoid paying approximately $1.5 billion in taxes. The defendants petitioned to the Tax Court to review the Commissioner's determination. Their case was assigned by the Chief Judge of the Tax Court to a special trial judge with the consent of the defendants. The special trial judge upheld the Commissioner's decision and the Chief Judge subsequently adopted the opinion as that of the Tax Court itself.
The defendants appeals the decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, arguing the appointment of a special trial judge violated the Appointments Clause found in Article II of the United States Constitution, which provides that inferior officers of the United States may be appointed by the "Courts of Law". The defendants asserted the Courts of Law referenced in the Appointments Clause includes only Article III judges, such as federal district judges, and not the Article I judges like the Chief Judge of the Tax Court.
The Fifth Circuit rejected the defendant's arguments and affirmed the Tax Court's decision, ruling the statute authorized the appointment. Further, the defendants had waived any constitutional challenge to the appointment by consent to the assignment.
Opinion of the Court
Blackmun Majority
thumb|Justice Harry Blackmun delivered the opinion of the Court.|right|160px
Justice Harry Blackmun determined the appointment of the special trial judge did not violate the Appointments Clause. Under the clause, Congress may invest the power to appoint inferior officers of the United States in the President, Heads of Departments, or the Courts of Law. As a preliminary issue, the Court was forced to determine if the special trial judges were "inferior officers" who are subject to the Clause as the defendants argued or if they were merely "lessor functionary", that is, employees of the federal government, who are not as the Commissioner argued. On this point, Blackmun agreed with the defendants, noting the special trial judges did far more than aid the regular judges of the Tax Court, instead exercising "significant authority" under the law. That the decisions of the special trial judge were not final until adopted by the Chief Judge did not reduce their officer status. The office of special trial judge was established by law, with their duties also specified by law. Further, the special trial judges performed more than mere ministerial tasks, instead exercising "significant discretion" in the performance of their duties.
While agreeing with the defendants that the special trial judge was an officer of the United States who must be appointed in conformity with the Clause's requirements, Blackmun rejected the notation that their appointment by the Chief Judge of the Tax Court did not comply with the Clause. Reviewing the historical rationale behind the Appointments Clause, Blackmun noted the Clause's principal purpose was to limit who could exercise the power to appoint federal officers, thereby ensuring those who wielded the power were accountable to the American people. While the Chief Judge was not a head of a department – which the Court had previously limited only to members of the United States Cabinet such as the United States Secretary of State or the United States Secretary of the Treasury – the Tax Court he presided over did qualify as a Court of Law. Blackmun held that the term "Courts of Law" was not limited to Article III courts but also included Article I courts.
Scalia Concurrence
Aftermath
References
External links
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:Appointments Clause case law
Category:United States administrative case law
Category:United States separation of powers case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
"""

From "Friedrichs v. California Teachers Association" ==> """
Friedrichs v. California Teachers Association, 578 U.S. ___ (2016), is a United States labor law case that came before the Supreme Court of the United States. At issue in the case was whether Abood v. Detroit Board of Education. (1977) should be overruled, with public-sector "agency shop" arrangements invalidated under the First Amendment, and whether it violates the First Amendment to require that public employees affirmatively object to subsidizing nonchargeable speech by public-sector unions, rather than requiring employees to consent affirmatively to subsidizing such speech. Specifically, the case concerned public sector collective bargaining by the California Teachers Association, an affiliate of the National Education Association.
Justice Antonin Scalia died shortly after the case was argued in front of the Supreme Court, leaving only eight members to decide the case. In the end, the result was a non-precedential per curiam opinion affirming the lower-court decision by an equally-divided Supreme Court.. On June 28, 2016, the rehearing petition submitted by the Center for Individual Rights (CIR) was denied, letting the Ninth Circuit's decision stand as its final judgment.https://www.supremecourt.gov/orders/courtorders/062816zr_29m1.pdf 
In 2017, after regaining a ninth Justice, the Supreme Court agreed to hear a substantially similar case, Janus v. AFSCME.
Background
In the 1977 case Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, the Supreme Court upheld the maintaining of a union shop in a public workplace. Public school teachers in Detroit had sought to overturn the requirement that they pay fees equivalent to union dues on the grounds that they opposed public sector collective bargaining and objected to the ideological activities of the union. The court affirmed that the union shop, which is legal in the private sector, is also legal in the public sector. They found that non-members may be assessed dues for "collective bargaining, contract administration, and grievance adjustment purposes", but that objectors to union membership or policy may not have their dues used for other ideological or political purposes.
Initial lawsuit
The Center for Individual Rights (CIR), a conservative law firm which brought the Friedrichs case with funding from the Bradley Foundation, initiated contact with the plaintiffs, ten public school teachers who had paid agency fees. The lead plaintiff, Orange County elementary teacher Rebecca Friedrichs, had previously served on her local union's executive committee.
Death of Antonin Scalia
Many legal commentators speculated that the death of Justice Antonin Scalia would make the Court either divide evenly on the case, letting the Ninth Circuit's ruling stand against the plaintiffs but not setting a precedent, or call for reargument once Scalia's vacancy has been filled.
Decision
On March 29, 2016, the Supreme Court issued a one-line per curiam opinion affirming the Ninth Circuit; as a decision made by an equally-divided court, the case is not considered to set a legal precedent.  The Center for Individual Rights (CIR) said it plans to ask the Supreme Court to reevaluate the case once a ninth justice has been appointed to replace Scalia. CIR's rehearing petition was ultimately denied on June 28, 2016.
However, in 2017, after regaining a ninth Justice, the Supreme Court agreed to hear a substantially similar case, Janus v. AFSCME.
In July 2020, Friedrichs was a guest on Laura Ingraham's Fox News program. Friedrichs, after saying how warmed she was by Ingraham’s support of her anti-union verve, claimed that the pushback by unions over reopening classrooms is a "smokescreen" for "using our schools to sexualize our children and to train them in anti-American ideology." She also claimed that teachers' unions "are teaching our children to sext, to view pornography, [unions] are hooking them up with online sex experts. So what they are doing is grooming our children for sexual predators to use them."
Legacy
Rebecca Friedrichs, the plaintiff, was a speaker at the 2020 Republican National Convention.
 See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
 References 
External links
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Education in California
Category:United States labor case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Tie votes of the United States Supreme Court
Category:National Education Association
"""

From "Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Environmental Services, Inc." ==> """
Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Environmental Services, Inc., 528 U.S. 167 (2000), was a United States Supreme Court case that addressed the law regarding standing to sue and mootness.
The Court held that the plaintiff residents in the area of South Carolina's North Tyger River had standing to sue an industrial polluter, against whom various deterrent civil penalties were being pursued.. Standing was properly based on the fact that the residents alleged that they would have used the river for recreational purposes, but could not because of the pollution.
The defendant polluter also claimed that the case was moot because it had ceased polluting, and had closed the factory responsible for the pollution complained of. The Court noted that the polluter still retained its license to operate such a factory, and could reopen similar operations elsewhere if not deterred by the fine sought. Therefore, the case was held not to be moot.
The Supreme Court's majority in Friends ruled that plaintiffs did not need to prove an actual (particular) harm to residents. Writing for the majority, Ruth Bader Ginsburg held that injury to the plaintiff came from lessening the "aesthetic and recreational values of the area" for residents and users of the river because of their knowledge of Laidlaw's repeated violations of its clean water permit.
In addition, the case held that a civil penalty could be enforced against an entity even though the interests protected were private.  The court agreed with Congress in holding that civil penalties in the Clean Water Act cases "do more than promote immediate compliance by limiting the defendant's economic incentive to delay its attainment of permit limits; they also deter future violations."
The 7–2 decision was written by Justice Ginsburg, and joined by Justices Rehnquist, Stevens, O'Connor, Kennedy, Souter, and Breyer. Stevens and Kennedy each filed a concurring opinion. Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justice Thomas.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 528
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 Friends of the Earth (US)
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article Three case law
Category:United States standing case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States environmental case law
Category:2000 in the environment
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:Friends of the Earth
"""

From "Frisbie v. Collins" ==> """
Frisbie v. Collins, 342 U.S. 519 (1952), is a decision by the United States Supreme Court, holding that kidnapping of a defendant by State authorities for the purpose of taking a suspect from one jurisdiction to another for criminal trial, is constitutional.. The defendant was tried in Michigan after being abducted by Michigan authorities in Chicago, Illinois. The case relied upon Ker v. Illinois (1886)., and clarified that The Federal Kidnapping Act had not modified the applicability of the Ker holding. The Ker–Frisbie doctrine, continues to be used to uphold convictions based on illegal arrests.
 Background 
 Ker v. Illinois 
Ker v. Illinois, decided in 1886, was the first case to consider whether authorities are allowed to abduct criminal suspects in other countries in order to face trial in the United States. Frederick M. Ker, a U.S. citizen living in Peru, sought to avoid the charges of larceny and embezzlement. US president, President Chester Arthur, sent an agent to negotiate extradition with Peruvian authorities to bring Ker back to the US. Instead, the agent forcibly abducted Ker before the extradition was processed. Although Peru did not raise claims under its extradition treaty, Ker argued that the US had committed extraterritorial abduction. The Supreme Court ruled, "such forcible abduction is no sufficient reason why the party should not answer when brought within the jurisdiction of the court which has the right to try him for such an offense and presents no valid objection to his trial in such court”.
 Facts of the Case 
Shirley Collins filed a Habeas corpus case in a United States District Court seeking release from a Michigan state prison where he was serving a life sentence for murder. He was forcibly taken to Michigan to stand trial. Collins sought to nullify his conviction under these circumstances, claiming that trial and conviction under such circumstances is in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and the Federal Kidnaping Act.
 Lower Court Decisions  
The District Court denied the writ of Habeas corpus without a hearing on the ground that the state court has power to try a defendant, "regardless of how presence was procured." The Court of Appeals reversed and remanded the decision of the lower court, with one judge dissenting. It held that the Federal Kidnaping Act had changed the rule that a state could constitutionally try and convict a defendant who had been forcibly brought to its jurisdiction. 
 Federal Kidnapping Act 
The Federal Kidnapping Act, was enacted in 1932 and made it a felony to transport any person across state lines. Persons who have violated it can be imprisoned for a term of years or for life; under some circumstances violators can be given the death sentence. The Court of Appeals thought that to continue to allow forcible removal across state lines after the passage of the Kidnaping Act "would in practical effect lend encouragement to the commission of criminal acts by those sworn to enforce the law." 
 Opinion of the Court 
Justice Hugo Black delivered the opinion of the court, reaffirming the Ker v. Illinois ruling that forcible abduction into a jurisdiction does not impair the power of a court to try a person for a crime. In rejecting the Appeals Court holding, the Supreme Court found that the severity of the sanctions under the Kidnapping Act made it unlikely that Congress had intended for them to apply to law enforcement officers and a state's ability to try a person wrongfully brought to its jurisdiction.
Relevance today
Frisbie v. Collins has been cited 13 times by the US Supreme Court, often regarding federal/state jurisdictional issues. On substantive grounds, it has been consistently used in support of a general proposition that an illegal arrest does not void a subsequent conviction. 
Notably, Frisbie was relied upon in the 1980 case United States v. Crews, 445 U.S. 463 (1980), in both the opinion written by William J. Brennan Jr. and the two concurring opinions upholding the decision of the lower court. In this case, the defendant had been illegally arrested and a photograph was taken. The victim of an assault was shown the photo and subsequently identified the defendant in both a lineup and in court. The trial court determined that the initial arrest was illegal and therefore excluded the photo and lineup identification from a subsequent trial. However, it also concluded that the courtroom identification was the product of independent recollection. The concurring opinion by Justice Byron White, with whom Chief Justice Warren E. Burger and Justice William Rehnquist joined, directly addressed the question of whether a face could ever be excluded as the fruit of an illegal arrest. This issue had been left open in the main opinion. White's position was that "The fact that respondent was present at trial and therefore capable of being identified by the victim is merely the inevitable result of the trial being held, which is permissible under Frisbie, despite respondent's unlawful arrest." 
Frisbie was most recently cited in 1992 in deciding United States v. Alvarez-Machain. That case involved the abduction of a Mexican citizen by US officials and a violation of the territorial integrity of Mexico country. The court acknowledged the validity of the Ker-Frisbie doctrine and considered whether it would apply when the illegal abduction was done in the context of violating the clear terms of an extradition treaty. The court held that a defendant has no rights under international law or an extradition treaty. Justice Stevens wrote the minority opinion, joined by justices Harry Blackmun and Sandra Day O'Connor, writing: “It is clear that Mexico's demand must be honored if this official abduction violated the 1978 Extradition Treaty between the United States and Mexico.”
See also 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 342
Ker v. Illinois, 
United States v. Alvarez-Machain, 
 References 
Further reading
External links
Category:United States criminal investigation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:1952 in United States case law
"""

From "Frisby v. Schultz" ==> """
Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U.S. 474 (1988), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States upheld the ordinance by the town of Brookfield, Wisconsin, preventing protest outside of a residential home. In a 6–3 decision, the Court ruled that the First Amendment rights to freedom of assembly and speech was not facially violated.. The majority opinion, written by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, concluded that the ordinance was constitutionally valid because it was narrowly tailored to meet a "substantial and justifiable" interest in the state; left open "ample alternative channels of communication"; and was content-neutral.
Factual background
In the Milwaukee, Wisconsin suburb of Brookfield, Sandra C. Schultz and Robert C. Braun protested abortion by picketing outside the home of a doctor who performed abortions. The pair picketed on at least six occasions in April and May 1985, for between 60 and 90 minutes each time, with a group of protesters that ranged in size from 11 to more than 40. The picketing was "generally orderly and peaceful"—the town did not invoke ordinances on street obstructions, loud noises, or disorderly conduct—but "generated substantial controversy and numerous complaints."
In response, Brookfield Town Board enacted an ordinance restricting picketing in residential neighborhoods, except for labor picketing. The town later realized the Supreme Court had struck down a similar ordinance in Carey v. Brown, 447 U.S. 455 (1980), as a violation of the Equal Protection Clause, of the Fourteenth Amendment since it "makes an impermissible distinction between peaceful labor picketing and other peaceful picketing.". As a result, the town repealed its ordinance and passed a new ordinance banning all residential picketing: "It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before or about the residence or dwelling of any individual in the Town of Brookfield." The ordinance stated that its main purpose was to protect and preserve the home and assure "that members of the community enjoy in their homes and dwellings a feeling of well-being, tranquility, and privacy." The Town Board also found that "the practice of picketing before or about residences and dwellings causes emotional disturbance and distress to the occupants ... [and] has as its object the harassing of such occupants."
Procedural history
Schultz and Braun ceased protesting after the law was set to be enforced beginning on May 21, 1985. They filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin claiming that the town ordinance infringed on their First Amendment rights. The district court granted the motion for a preliminary injunction, concluding "that the ordinance was not narrowly tailored enough to restrict protected speech in a public forum." The Town appealed. In a divided decision, a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit affirmed the decision of the district court. The Seventh Circuit later vacated that decision and ordered a rehearing en banc. After rehearing, the Seventh Circuit, in an equally divided vote, affirmed the district court's judgment.
Supreme Court
Opinion of the Court
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote the majority opinion in the 6–3 decision. Chief Justice William Rehnquist, and Justices Harry Blackmun, Antonin Scalia, and Anthony Kennedy joined in the majority opinion.
The majority held that public streets are a "traditional public forum" for purposes of forum analysis, despite the fact that the residential streets specifically at issue here were physically narrow. The Court thus acknowledged that "the antipicketing ordinance operates at the core of the First Amendment." Nevertheless, the majority held that the ordinance prohibiting the protest of residential houses did not violate the First Amendment because it is "content neutral," "leaves open ample alternative channels of communication," and serves a "significant government interest." With respect to alternative channels of communication, the Court noted that the Brookfield ordinance did not prohibit protestors from entering residential neighborhoods, marching, canvassing, leafleting, or telephoning.
The Court also found that the government had a significant interest in "the protection of residential privacy." Citing cases such as Rowan v. United States Post Office Department, FCC v. Pacifica Foundation, and Kovacs v. Cooper, the Court found that "a special benefit of the privacy all citizens enjoy within their own walls, which the State may legislate to protect, is an ability to avoid intrusions." The Court distinguished its prior decisions invalidating "complete bans on expressive activity" in residential areas, such as Schneider v. New Jersey and Martin v. City of Struthers, stating that in these cases, "we have been careful to acknowledge that unwilling listeners may be protected when within their own homes." The Court also found that the ordinance was narrowly tailored at the specific problem it intended to address: situations in which "[t]he resident is figuratively, and perhaps literally, trapped within the home, and, because of the unique and subtle impact of such picketing, is left with no ready means of avoiding the unwanted speech."
Concurring opinion
Justice White wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment. White wrote that in his view, an ordinance banning picketing of a single residence "would not be unconstitutional on its face [and therefore, free of conflict with the First Amendment.]"Frisby, 487 U.S. at 488-89 (White, J., concurring). Acknowledging the loosely worded ordinance, White opposed the potential condition of the legislation, which, if interpreted as such, would place a limitation on picketing in front of any residence where passers-by or anyone else would receive a message from a protest. He agreed with the notion that the law should be interpreted to ban single-residence picketing, to maintain Constitutionality and conform with the standards set in the right of assembly and the right to protest, outlined in the First Amendment.
Dissenting opinion of Brennan and Marshall
Justice William J. Brennan, Jr., joined by Justice Thurgood Marshall, agreed with most of the Court's analysis, but dissent because they believed the ordinance was not narrowly tailored—i.e., it banned "significantly more speech than is necessary to achieve the government's substantial and legitimate goal."Frisby, 487 U.S. at 492 (Brennan, J., dissenting). Brennan argued that the ordinance failed the test of City Council of Los Angeles v. Taxpayers for Vincent because "the intrusive and unduly coercive elements of residential picketing can be eliminated without simultaneously eliminating residential picketing." As an example, Brennan wrote that the government's ability to constitutionally impose "time, place, and manner" restrictions, such as limits on the number of residential picketers, "the hours during which a residential picket may take place, or the noise level of such a picket" meant that a total prohibition on residential picketing was not narrowly tailored.
Dissenting opinion of Stevens
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a separate dissent. Stevens wrote that:
Nevertheless, Stevens would have invalidated the ordinance as facially overbroad, finding "that it prohibits some communication that is protected by the First Amendment. Stevens wrote that the ordinance could prohibit a fifth grader from carrying a sign saying "GET WELL CHARLIE — OUR TEAM NEEDS YOU" outside the home of a sick friend.
Stevens acknowledged that "the town will probably not enforce its ban against friendly, innocuous, or even brief unfriendly picketing, and that the Court may be right in concluding that its legitimate sweep makes its overbreadth insubstantial," but dissented because (1) "The scope of the ordinance gives the town officials far too much discretion in making enforcement decisions" and (2) "it is a simple matter for the town to amend its ordinance and to limit the ban to conduct that unreasonably interferes with the privacy of the home and does not serve a reasonable communicative purpose."
See also
 Madsen v. Women's Health Center, Inc., a 1994 decision which allowed protesting outside residential homes.
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 487
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States abortion case law
Category:History of women's rights in the United States
Category:United States substantive due process case law
Category:United States privacy case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:Waukesha County, Wisconsin
Category:1988 in United States case law
"""

From "Frohwerk v. United States" ==> """
Frohwerk v. United States, 249 U.S. 204 (1919), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld the conviction of a newspaperman for violating the Espionage Act of 1917 in connection with criticism of U.S. involvement in foreign wars.
In a unanimous decision written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, the Court found that this criticism constituted the "willful obstruction" of America's recruitment efforts and was not protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
As in Schenck v. United States, also decided in 1919, the speech might have been protected were the country not at war.
External links
Category:1919 in United States case law
Category:United States First Amendment case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States home front during World War I
"""

From "Frontiero v. Richardson" ==> """
__NOTOC__
Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677 (1973), was a landmark United States Supreme Court caseTechnically, the case was decided under the Fifth Amendment's Due Process Clause, not under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, since the latter applies not to the federal government but to the states. However, because Bolling v. Sharpe, through the doctrine of reverse incorporation, made the standards of the Equal Protection Clause applicable to the federal government, it was for practical purposes an addition not to due process, but rather to equal protection jurisprudence. which decided that benefits given by the United States military to the family of service members cannot be given out differently because of sex.  Frontiero is an important decision in several respects, including the fact that it informed the military establishment that in terms of pay, allowances and general treatment, women must be considered on an equal plane as men.  However, the Court did not issue a broad decision requiring the military to prove in the courts its reasons for excluding women from combat positions.Joshua E. Kastenberg, Shaping U.S. Military Law: Governing a Constitutional Military. (London: Ashgate Press, 2014), 151-2
Background
Sharron Frontiero, a lieutenant in the United States Air Force, applied for housing and medical benefits for her husband, Joseph, whom she claimed as a "dependent." While servicemen could claim their wives as dependents and get benefits for them automatically, servicewomen had to prove that their husbands were dependent on them for more than half their support. Joseph did not qualify under this rule, and therefore could not get benefits. Sharron sued, and the case was appealed up to the Supreme Court. Lt. Frontiero was represented by Joseph J. Levin, Jr., of the Southern Poverty Law Center, who argued the case before the Court on her behalf.  Future Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, representing the ACLU as amicus curiae, was also permitted by the Court to argue in favor of Frontiero. It was her first time giving an oral argument in front of the court. At the time Ginsburg was only a legal advocate on behalf of women's rights. While prepping for the 1972 appeal in the case, the SPLC faction had reached out to Ginsburg for aid, with recognition to her partial victory in the Reed v. Reed case of only a year prior, 1971. Ginsburg argued for the "strict scrutiny" classification to be upheld when looking at any case that was involved in gender discrimination. Her appearance before the court lasted in a 10 minute argument. Nearing the end, she said, “Asking the Court to declare sex a suspect criterion, amicus urges a position forcibly stated in 1837 by Sarah Grimké, noted abolitionist and advocate of equal rights for men and women,” Ginsburg stated. “She spoke not elegantly, but with unmistakable clarity. She said, ‘I ask no favor for my sex. All I ask of our brethren is that they take their feet off our necks.’” 
Opinion of the Court
A plurality of the Court (Justices Douglas, White, Marshall and Brennan, who wrote the plurality's opinion) found the military's benefit policy unconstitutional, because there was no reason why military wives needed benefits any more than similarly situated military husbands. The Air Force argued that the policy was intended to save administrative costs by not forcing the military bureaucracy to determine that every wife was in fact a dependent. Justice Brennan dismissed this argument, saying that, although as an empirical matter more wives than husbands are dependent for support on their spouses, still, by automatically granting benefits to wives who might not truly be dependents, the Air Force might actually be losing money because of this policy—and the Air Force had not presented evidence to the contrary.
More importantly, the plurality argued for a strict standard of judicial scrutiny for those laws and regulations that classified on the basis of sex, instead of mere rational basis review. (See the appropriate section of the Equal Protection Clause article for more information on the different levels of Equal Protection scrutiny.) A heightened standard of review, the plurality argued, was needed due to America's "long and unfortunate history of sex discrimination":
[T]he sex characteristic frequently bears no relation to ability to perform or contribute to society. As a result, statutory distinctions between the sexes often have the effect of invidiously relegating the entire class of females to inferior legal status without regard to the actual capabilities of its individual members. [Citations omitted.]
The plurality's application of "strict scrutiny" was not adopted in subsequent cases for evaluating gender discrimination claims; instead, so-called "intermediate scrutiny" was adopted in Craig v. Boren (1976).
Concurring and dissenting opinions
Justices Blackmun and Powell, and Chief Justice Burger concurred in the result, but, in an opinion written by Justice Powell, declined to decide whether discrimination on the basis of sex should attract strict scrutiny.  Justice Powell gave two reasons for leaving this question open.  First, that determination was not necessary to decide the case at bar, as the result was "abundantly" supported by the Court's earlier decision in Reed v. Reed. Second, Justice Powell wrote that "deferring" on this question was supported by the ongoing debate about over the Equal Rights Amendment which, if adopted, would resolve the question precisely and "represent the will of the people accomplished in the manner prescribed by the Constitution."  Justice Stewart also concurred in the result, but said nothing about the Equal Rights Amendment; instead, he stated only that he agreed that the statutes in question "work an invidious discrimination in violation of the Constitution." Justice Rehnquist dissented. Thus, Frontiero won her case by an 8 to 1 vote.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 411
Notes
Further reading
External links
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Women in the United States military
Category:Ruth Bader Ginsburg
Category:United States men's rights case law
Category:United States Air Force
"""

From "Fry v. Napoleon Community Schools" ==> """
Fry v. Napoleon Community Schools, 580 U.S. 154 (2017), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the Handicapped Children's Protection Act of 1986 does not command exhaustion of state-level administrative remedies codified in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) when the gravamen of the plaintiff's lawsuit is not related to the denial of free appropriate public education (FAPE).
 Background 
Minor Ehlena Fry was born with spastic quadriplegic cerebral palsy, which significantly impairs her motor skills and mobility. Ehlena Fry, originally in an orphanage in Calcutta, India, was adopted by Stacy and Brent Fry. In 2008, Fry's pediatrician prescribed a service dog for Ehlena; the community ran a fundraiser so that the Fry family could purchase a service dog for their adopted daughter. The service dog Wonder would help Ehlena Fry, amongst other things, open doors, turn on lights, pick up dropped items, help her remove her coat, and help her balance while she transferred from her walker onto a chair or the toilet. The administration of Ezra Eby Elementary School (one of the Napoleon Community Schools), however, denied permission to bring her service dog to school for the 2009–2010 school year. Under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, schools are obligated to provide disabled children the Individualized Education Program (IEP) in order to provide them free appropriate public education (FAPE). The school district argued that a human aide can provide all the necessary help so that Ehlena Fry can get free and appropriate public education. The school's decision to prohibit Wonder was upheld in the meeting held in January 2010 related to Fry's IEP. The Fry family maintained that the service dog, which had time to bond with Ehlena, is necessary as a bridge to her independence, and that the right to bring her service dog is covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
Once the American Civil Liberties Union intervened to represent the Frys, the school allowed Ehlena Fry to bring Wonder for the "trial period" (from April 2010 until the end of the school year); however, Wonder was not allowed to accompany Ehlena Fry during lunch time, in library, in computer labs, during recess, and during any other school activities. Wonder also had to sit at the back of the classroom whenever a class was in session. After the trial period, the school informed the Frys that Ehlena would not be allowed to bring Wonder to school during the 2010–2011 school year. The Frys homeschooled their daughter for the 2010–2011 school year. During that time, the Frys filed a complaint to the Office of Civil Rights of the United States Department of Education, which issued a determination letter that the school violated Ehlena Fry's rights protected by the Americans with Disabilities Act "by failing to modify their policies, practices, or procedures to permit the student's service animal to accompany her to and assist her at school, thus denying and/or significantly limiting the student's ability to access the district's programs and activities with as much independence as possible". The school, without accepting the OCR's determinations, eventually allowed the Frys to bring her service dog, starting from the 2012–2013 school year; but feeling that Ehlena and Wonder were still not welcomed by the administration, the family transferred to a school in a neighbouring county which allowed Fry to bring her service dog. The Fry family sued the Napoleon Community Schools, the principal of Ezra Eby Elementary School, and the school district under the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Rehabilitation Act, for damages for the 2009–2010, 2010–2011, and 2011-2012 school years for the following: the denial of equal access; the denial of the use of Wonder; interference to form bonds with other kids; denial of an opportunity to interact with other children; and emotional distress and pain, embarrassment, mental anguish, inconvenience, and loss of enjoyment. The Napoleon Community Schools moved to dismiss the lawsuit for failing to exhaust the IDEA administrative remedies. The Frys countered that since they seek for the declaratory judgement that the school violated the ADA and money damages for emotional distress, both of which are not the type of remedies available under the IDEA. They also argued that they do not accuse the school of not providing free and appropriate public education. For these reasons, they argued that the administrative remedy exhaustion requirement does not apply.
 Legislative background 
The Education for All Handicapped Children Act (EHA or EAHCA) was enacted in 1975, to require all public schools accepting public funds to provide equal access to education to children with disabilities via a personalized education plan with parents' input. The EHA's name was changed to the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) in 1990. Besides the IDEA, there are other federal statutes covering the rights of people with disabilities, including, but not limited to, Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 42 U.S.C. §12131 et seq., and §504 of the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. §794. Title II of the ADA mandates public facilities to make "reasonable modifications" to avoid discriminating against people with disabilities. Similarly, the Rehabilitation Act demands certain modifications to existing practices to accommodate people with disabilities. Both statutes allow individuals to bring suits for relief or damages to have their grievances addressed.
The interaction between these three laws was addressed by the Supreme Court of the United States in Smith v. Robinson . In Smith, the plaintiffs brought their claims not just under the EHA, but also the virtually identical claims under the Rehabilitation Act and the Equal Protection Clause. The Supreme Court ruled that any claims brought under the Rehabilitation Act and the Equal Protection Clause are preempted by the EHA, as the EHA, with its "comprehensive" and "carefully tailored" provisions, was intended to be the exclusive means for the parents to challenge the adequacy of the school's accommodation for their disabled child. Congress was quick to overrule Smith by enacting the Handicapped Children's Protection Act of 1986. It also added a carefully defined administrative remedy exhaustion requirement, codified at 20 U.S.C. §1415(l). The text of this statute is read as follows:
The issue in this case was how the scope of this exhaustion requirement should be interpreted, the question which caused a circuit split.
 Ruling by the lower courts 
Judge Lawrence Paul Zatkoff of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan agreed with the schools and dismissed the lawsuit because the claims necessarily implicated the IDEA, which required plaintiffs to exhaust all administrative remedies before suing under the ADA and Rehabilitation Act. The Frys appealed and argued that the exhaustion requirement did not apply because they were seeking damages, which is not the sort of relief the IDEA provided.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed the district court's dismissal in a 2-1 ruling, with Judges John M. Rogers and Bernice B. Donald forming the majority. The majority of the Sixth Circuit held that the Frys’ claims were essentially educational—particularly, they noted that "developing a bond with Wonder that allows E.F. to function more independently outside the classroom is an educational goal". Therefore, this is precisely the sort of claims the IDEA was meant to address, and therefore the exhaustion requirement applied.
Judge Martha Craig Daughtrey dissented. Judge Daughtrey wrote that since Frys' request to bring Wonder to school was not related to Ehlena's academic program – hence not educational in nature – there is no reason for the administrative remedy exhaustion requirement to apply. Particularly, she observed that "[the Frys'] request could be honored simply by modifying the school policy allowing guide dogs to include service dogs" (emphasis original).
 Supreme Court of the United States 
The Frys applied to the Supreme Court of the United States. The federal government also filed a brief recommending that the Supreme Court grant the writ of certiorari, arguing that the Sixth Circuit incorrectly decided the case in favour of the respondents. The Supreme Court granted certiorari on June 28, 2016. Amicus briefs in support of the Fry family were filed by National Disability Rights Network, Council of Parent Attorneys and Advocates, Psychiatric Service Dog Partners, and Autism Speaks. Former Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., who was actively involved in drafting many disability rights laws including the ones in this issue (Handicapped Children's Protection Act, Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, Americans with Disabilities Act), also filed an amicus brief supporting the petitioners arguing that the Sixth Circuit's ruling runs contrary to the Congress's intent. The National School Boards Association filed a brief supporting the respondents, urging the nation's highest court to uphold the process meant to encourage that the parent and the school work together for the child's special education needs. The oral argument took place on October 31, 2016; the Supreme Court released its opinion on February 22, 2017.
 Supreme Court Opinion 
The Supreme Court of the United States announced the opinion on February 22, 2017. The opinion of the Court was written by Justice Elena Kagan, joined by the Chief Justice, Justices Anthony Kennedy, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, and Sonia Sotomayor. Justice Samuel Alito filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment, joined by Justice Clarence Thomas.
 Opinion of the Court 
 Part I 
The Court reviews the history of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, the law at issue in this case, and also reviews the facts of this case.
 Part II 
On the merits, the Court held the following.
 The IDEA's remedy exhaustion requirement does not apply when a lawsuit seeks relief unrelated to the denial of a free appropriate public education (FAPE).
 To determine if a lawsuit seeks relief for the denial of a FAPE or not, a court should examine the gravamen – equivalently, the substance – of the plaintiff's complaint.
To reach the first conclusion, the Court focused on the language of the relevant section (specifically, 20 U.S.C. §1415(l), which covers the administrative exhaustion requirement), which "requires that a plaintiff exhaust IDEA's procedures before filing an action under ADA, the Rehabilitation Act, or similar laws when (but only when) her suit 'seek[s] relief that is also available' under the IDEA". The opinion, quoting Black's Law Dictionary, noted that the "relief" for lawsuits means the "redress or benefit" that can be conferred upon a favourable judgement. Further, the opinion noted that a relief is "available" when it is "accessible or may be obtained", this time quoting Ross v. Blake. Thus, in the Court's view, analyzing when the IDEA enables a person to obtain relief is paramount to determining the scope of the exhaustion requirement. The court's opinion noted that the Congress declared the IDEA is "to ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education" (quoting §1400(d)(1)(A)). Therefore, the IDEA's administrative remedies are meant to test whether a school completed their obligation to provide a child meaningful access to a free appropriate public education – in other words, "a FAPE denial is the sine qua non". If a type of accommodation will fulfill the IDEA's requirement, then the administrative officer orders such relief. However, even though another law besides the IDEA may require an accommodation on alternative grounds, the officer nonetheless cannot order such relief if it does not touch on a FAPE denial. In the Court's view, this is precisely the line that the law dictates. For example, in the case of Smith, which compelled the Congress to amend the relevant law, the petitioner would not be able to evade the exhaustion requirement by bringing a lawsuit under a different law because her lawsuit concerned the denial of a FAPE. However, if a lawsuit is brought under a different law such as the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Rehabilitation Act and does not concern the denial of a FAPE, then the IDEA administrative officer cannot grant the parents any relief. Therefore, the exhaustion is not required in this case. Since it is possible for a school's refusal to allow certain accommodation to injure a child in a way that is unrelated to a FAPE, in such circumstances the administrative remedy exhaustion does not apply. The Court again emphasized that "the only 'relief' the IDEA makes 'available' is relief for the denial of a FAPE".
Then the Court laid out a test that lower courts should use to decide whether a plaintiff seeks relief for the denial of a FAPE or not. Noting that the IDEA asks whether a lawsuit "seeks" relief available under the IDEA, the Court wrote that the court should look at the gravamen – or the substance – of a plaintiff's complaint. This way, the lower courts can set aside any attempts of artful pleading made to circumvent the exhaustion requirement by using certain labels. If the gravamen covers the denial of a FAPE, then the exhaustion requirement applies; otherwise, it does not. However, this is not to say that three laws in question (the IDEA, the ADA, the Rehabilitation Act) do not overlap in coverage. Yet, there are some important differences: the IDEA only covers children and adolescents and covers their schooling only; on the other hand, the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act are intended to root out any disability-based discriminations, and cover people with disabilities of all ages. After noting the key differences between the three laws, the Court laid out the three-prong test to determine whether the gravamen of a complaint concerns the denial of a FAPE rather than disability-based discrimination, in the form of questions, two of which are hypothetical in nature:
 The first prong: could the plaintiff have brought essentially the same claim if the conduct had occurred at a public facility other than a school, such as a public theatre or a public library?
 The second prong: could an adult, not a child, conceivably have brought the essentially identical lawsuit?
 The third prong: does the history of the proceedings indicate that the gravamen is related to the denial of a FAPE?
Thus, if the answer to the first two questions is yes, then it is likely that the lawsuit does not concern the denial of a FAPE. Then the Court provided a hypothetical situation where this is the case. Suppose that the family of a wheelchair-using child sues her school for discrimination under the ADA without touching on the denial of a FAPE due to the school's lack of access ramps. One may argue that this may be related to the denial of a FAPE: after all, if a child has difficulty accessing the school building, then she cannot receive education; besides, if someone has to carry her over, then the child may not achieve independence needed for her academic success. Yet, it is possible for the child to file the essentially identical lawsuit against a public library lacking such access ramps. Furthermore, it is possible for a visitor to the school to file the essentially identical complaint against the school. Therefore, this lawsuit most likely is concerned with equality of access to facilities, which is in the domain of disability-based discrimination rather than the adequacy of the school's FAPE-related accommodations.
On the other hand, if the answer to the first two questions is no, then such lawsuit cannot avoid the exhaustion requirement. For instance, suppose that a student with a learning disability sues his school under the ADA for failing to provide additional tutoring in mathematics. This could be considered disability-based discrimination; however, such lawsuit fails under the test devised by the Court, even though the complaint does not mention the denial of a FAPE anywhere. First, it is unlikely that this student can press the identical lawsuit against a public library. Second, it is inconceivable that an adult visitor or an adult employee of the school will press such lawsuit. Hence, the substance of the student's complaint is related to the denial of a FAPE, so this student must exhaust the administrative procedures first.
The third prong touches on the history of the proceedings, which might suggest that the lawsuit is related to the denial of a FAPE. If a plaintiff formally invoked the IDEA's administrative procedures before switching the course, that can possibly suggest that the gravamen of the complaint is related to a FAPE denial. While it is possible for a plaintiff to realize in the middle of the procedure that the school completed their obligations and that their complaints are unrelated to a FAPE, such formal invocation of the IDEA procedures may serve as evidence that the gravamen of the plaintiff's claim concerns the FAPE denial.
 Part III 
In the last part of the opinion, the Court revisited the Frys' claims and attempted to apply the test it laid out to Frys' claims. The Court noted that the Frys' complaint only discusses disability-based discrimination, such as the school district's "refusal to allow Wonder to act as a service dog discriminated against [E.F.] as a person with disabilities ... by denying her equal access" to public facilities. Not only did it not state that Wonder enhances E.F.'s educational opportunities, but the Frys agreed with the school district's assertion that E.F.'s educational needs were satisfied by a one-on-one human aide. The Frys' instead focused on the infringement of E.F.'s right to equal access, as the Office of Civil Rights found.
The Court also concluded that nothing in the Frys' suit suggests any focus on the educational needs. It noted that the Frys' claims will probably pass the first prong, as the Frys could have filed the same lawsuit if a public library refused to allow Wonder to enter the building. The claims will likely pass the second prong as well because a disabled adult could have levelled the essentially same charges if the adult's service dog was refused access to public facilities such as a school, for not adhering to the equal access requirements as codified in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Based on the information before the Court, it concludes that the Frys' claims are the type of claims that focus on disability-based discrimination rather than the denial of a free appropriate public education. However, the Court declined to undertake the analysis for the third prong, as neither parties addressed the history of the Frys' proceedings. The Court thus vacated the Sixth Circuit's judgment and remanded the case so that the Sixth Circuit can determine whether, for example, the Frys pursued the IDEA's formal procedures before filing the case. If the Frys started from that road, then the lower court should determine whether such actions reveal that the substance of the Frys' complains is related to the denial of a FAPE.
 Alito's partial concurrence 
Justice Samuel Alito, joined by Justice Clarence Thomas, joined Part I and the parts of Part II regarding the Court's first conclusion on the merits. Alito wrote that he (along with Justice Thomas) declined to join the later part of the Court's opinion where the court laid out the test for the lower courts to use when examining the gravamen of the plaintiff's complaint. Specifically, Alito wrote that the court's test would work well only if there is no overlap between the relief available under the IDEA and the relief provided by other federal laws (including the Rehabilitation Act, Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), the United States Constitution, inter alia), yet the court admitted that there may be instances when there is such overlap. Alito also disagreed with the third prong of the court's test, which in part stated that the lower court should examine whether (and to what extent) the parents pursued but later abandoned the IDEA's formal procedures before filing a formal lawsuit under the ADA or the Rehabilitation Act. Alito criticized the court for failing to take into other factors that may have led the plaintiff to pursue the IDEA's formal procedure first, such as being advised by their attorney to pursue the IDEA procedure before abandoning it, or the parents amending their complaints to give up parts of the relief available under the IDEA and turn to another federal statute in the course of their lawsuit. Calling them "misleading clues", Alito concluded that the test laid out by the court will invite more confusion and lead the lower courts astray.
 Reactions 
Michael Steinberg, the legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union in Michigan, which has represented Fry throughout her legal proceedings, praised the ruling, stating that "[w]e're thrilled that the Supreme Court has torn down unfair barriers faced by students who seek to vindicate their rights under the Americans with Disabilities Act". Stacy Fry, Ehlena's mother, also praised the ruling in her statement: "[w]e are thankful that the Supreme Court has clarified that schools cannot treat children with disabilities differently or stand in the way of their desired independence." She also added that "We feel that this really is a victory for our family and all the families with children of differing abilities. For us, it really means that we did the right thing. It was not in vain. We had a bigger purpose". The National School Boards Association expressed concerns, stating that the court's ruling may lead lower courts astray as the lower courts try to apply the law. Naomi Gittins, the managing director of legal advocacy for the NSBA, stated that "[g]oing right to court is never a good approach when you're talking about educational issues[.] It could result in court cases that run up bills rather than a parent talking about this with the school". Writing for SCOTUSblog, Amy Howe wrote that the Court's ruling is "a significant win – not only for [Ehlena Fry] and her family, but also for children with disabilities nationwide".
 Subsequent development 
Upon remand, on 25 September 2019, the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan directed that the case be set a trial by jury. The case was ultimately settled on 14 November 2019, under undisclosed terms.
On March 21, 2023, the Supreme Court issued a unanimous ruling in Luna Perez v. Sturgis Public Schools,  598 U.S. ___ (2023) which highlighted that the IDEA administrative exhaustion requirements did not apply to claims that are not covered under the IDEA relief/remedy. 
 See also 
 Americans with Disabilities Act
 Rehabilitation Act
 Education for All Handicapped Children Act
 Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
 Free appropriate public education (FAPE)
 Individualized Education Program (IEP)
 Board of Education of the Hendrick Hudson Central School District v. Rowley
References
External links
 SCOTUSblog coverage
 Service Dog Center Stage in Major Special Education Case
 Ehlena and Wonder's Supreme Court Case: The Right and Wrong Way to Treat Students with Disabilities
 NSBA urges Supreme Court to uphold long-standing processes that encourage parent-school collaboration in special education
 Supreme Court Backs Family in Case on Denial of Service Dog in School
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:2016 in United States case law
Category:United States disability case law
Category:Assistance dogs
Category:Special education in the United States
Category:Education in Jackson County, Michigan
"""

From "FTC v. Actavis, Inc." ==> """
FTC v. Actavis, Inc., 570 U.S. 136 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court decision in which the Court held that the FTC could make an antitrust challenge under the rule of reason against a so-called pay-for-delay agreement, also referred to as a reverse payment patent settlement. Such an agreement is one in which a drug patentee pays another company, ordinarily a generic drug manufacturer, to stay out of the market, thus avoiding generic competition and a challenge to patent validity. The FTC sought to establish a rule that such agreements were presumptively illegal, but the Court ruled only that the FTC could bring a case under more general antitrust principles permitting a defendant to assert justifications for its actions under the rule of reason.. 
 Background 
Hatch-Waxman
Under the "paragraph IV route" of the Hatch-Waxman Act, a generic drug manufacturer can assure the U.S. Food and Drug Commission (FDA) that it would not infringe upon the patent of a brand-name drug by proving that the patent was invalid or that the sale of the generic drugs will not violate the brand-name's patent. This would constitute a challenge to the patent, and usually lead to litigation between the brand-name and generic manufacturers. The FDA then must withhold approving the generic drugs for a 30-month period while the courts resolve the dispute. If the dispute does not resolve within that period, the FDA could then approve the generic for the market.133 S. Ct. at 2228.
Androgel and generic versions
Respondent Solvay Pharmaceuticals filed a New Drug Application in 1999 and received a patent in 2003 for its brand-name drug, Androgel, used for treating low testosterone levels in men. Two generic-drug companies, Actavis and Paddock filed patents for generic drugs that were modeled after Androgel later that year. Solvay then sued Actavis for patent infringement under "paragraph IV" litigation, but the FDA eventually approved Actavis's generic drug for the market after the dispute over the validity of Solvay's patent had continued for three years.133 S. Ct. at 2229.
Rather than bringing its generic drug to the market, Actavis instead entered into a reverse payment settlement agreement with Solvay in 2006. Under the terms of the agreement, Actavis would keep its generic drug off the market for a "specified number of years" and also agree "to promote Androgel to doctors."
FTC sues
The Federal Trade Commission filed suit, alleging that Actavis had unlawfully abandoned its patent challenge by agreeing to share in the "monopoly profits" of Solvay, and withdrawing its generic drug from the market. Solvay was simultaneously accused of attempting to extend its monopoly rights further than what its patent would have conferred if otherwise left as valid.133 S. Ct. at 2229-30.
Rulings of lower courts
Both the district court and Eleventh Circuit dismissed the plaintiff's claims.  The district court ruled that the settlements did not provide unreasonable restraints outside the scope of the patents. The Eleventh Circuit ruled that the FTC had not shown that the reverse payment settlement excluded competition any more than the patent would have, stating that "although a patent holder may be able to escape the jaws of competition by sharing monopoly profits with the first one or two generic challengers, those profits will be eaten away as more and more generic companies enter the waters." Furthermore, the appeals court ruled, courts cannot require parties to litigate further in order to avoid antitrust liability.
Opinion of the Court
The Court reversed the rulings of the lower courts. Justice Stephen Breyer delivered the opinion of a 5-3 Court. Chief Justice John Roberts dissented, joined by Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas. Justice Samuel Alito took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.
Majority opinion
thumb|right|150px|Stephen Breyer delivered the majority opinion
The majority opinion reversed the Eleventh Circuit's ruling that antitrust laws do not apply to patent holders so long as the anticompetitive effects of their reverse payment settlements fall within the scope  their patent monopoly. Instead, the majority decided that the antitrust question cannot be answered only by measuring the anticompetitive effects against patent law policy, but also by measuring against "procompetitive" antitrust law policies. Therefore, if Solvay's reverse payment settlement falls within the exclusionary scope of its patent, that by itself does not "immunize the agreement from antitrust attack."133 S. Ct. at 2230. Instead, the Court insisted, "patent and antitrust policies are both relevant in determining the 'scope of the patent monopoly'—and consequently antitrust law immunity—that is conferred by a patent."133 S. Ct. at 2231.
In addition, the majority pointed out the uniqueness of reverse payment settlements in which "the party with no claim on damages" is the one that pays the other party for the sake of staying out of the patentee's market contrasts with how a settlement would normally proceed, in which the patentee demands an amount as reparation for the damages done by the patent infringer. Noting this unusual distinction, the majority argued that reverse payments are not a normal form of settlement in patent suits, and thus cannot be scrutinized solely under the lens of patent law when there seems to be an anticompetitive purpose. Past precedent, such as United States v. Singer Mfg. Co.. and United States v. New Wrinkle, Inc.,. shows that patent litigation settlements can be used for anticompetive purposes, so they must be considered in light of antitrust policy, as the Court did in such cases, in order to determine whether "patent law policy offsets the antitrust law policy strongly favoring competition."133 S. Ct. at 2233. Furthermore, patent policy by itself is concerned lest agreements shield invalid patents from scrutiny; the Court has held such agreements unlawful "so the public will not continually be required to pay tribute to would-be monopolists without need or justification.'"133 S. Ct. at 2232 (quoting ).
To be sure, there is a general legal policy favoring settlements. But "this patent-related factor should not determine the result here."133 S. Ct. at 2234. The Court gave five reasons why it should not:
 Reverse payment settlements have "the potential for genuine adverse effects on competition." By paying a settlement that keeps its generic competitors out of the market, the patentee can set a price that's above the market level with its monopoly. With the profit it obtains from this monopoly, the patentee splits it with its original challenger and the consumer loses out in the form of higher drug prices due to a non-competitive market. In addition, under the Hatch-Waxman Act, only the first generic filer gains the coveted 180-day exclusive right to sell the generic brand of a drug. All subsequent filers do not get this right and must also be subjected to the same 30-month waiting period before FDA approval in paragraph IV litigation. As a result, a reverse payment settlement gets rid of the first and presumably most motivated competitor from the patentee's market.
 The anticompetitive consequences of reverse payment settlements will at least sometimes be unjustifiable. The majority recognized that there are situations in which settlements are justified in a patent dispute (e.g. saving litigation expenses, exchanging of services, etc.), but this does not warrant dismissing the FTC's complaint. If the settlement has legitimate reasons, then the antitrust defendant can prove it in court.
 When a reverse payment will likely bring about anticompetitive harm, the patentee likely has the power to bring about that harm. A brand-name manufacturer that can afford to pay large sums to its challengers to keep them out of the market likely has the power to continue to charge prices higher than the competitive level.
 Antitrust suits are more "administratively feasible" than what the Eleventh Circuit believed. Antitrust questions usually do not require litigation of patent validity. A large unexplained payment already suggests that a patentee has doubts about its patent's survival, and as such, would rather settle and split the monopoly profits rather than face the lower payoff of a competitive market. There is no need for a detailed examination of a patent's validity.
 A reverse payment settlement is not the only way to settle a lawsuit. Although a reverse payment risks antitrust liability, it does not necessarily reduce the possibility of settlement because there are other ways to settle, e.g. the patentee could allow the challenger entrance into the market prior to the patent's expiration, without payment. Reverse payments are still possible as a form of settlement, but it cannot be for the sake of sharing monopoly profits.133 S. Ct. at 2234-37.
Due to the many factors and complexities that determine whether a reverse payment settlement causes anticompetitive harm ("its size, its scale in relation to the payor's anticipated future litigation costs, its independence from other services for which it might represent payment, and the lack of any other convincing justification"), the Court held, the FTC must still "prove its case as in other rule-of-reason cases" and thus ruled that reverse payments are neither presumptively legal nor presumptively illegal.133 S. Ct. at 2238. The Court refused to be more specific about how the lower court should resolve the case on remand and what factors should be weighed against one another in the analysis. It said:
As in other areas of law, trial courts can structure antitrust litigation so as to avoid, on the one hand, the use of antitrust theories too abbreviated to permit proper analysis, and, on the other, consideration of every possible fact or theory irrespective of the minimal light it may shed on the basic question—that of the presence of significant unjustified anticompetitive consequences. We therefore leave to the lower courts the structuring of the present rule-of-reason antitrust litigation.
Dissent
thumb|right|150px|Chief Justice Roberts dissented
In contrast to the majority, the dissent rejected the application of antitrust law that the majority used for this case, arguing that it was a "novel approach" and "without any support in statute." Pointing out that a "patent carves out an exception to the applicability of antitrust laws," the dissenting opinion argued that it is only when a patent holder acts beyond the scope of its granted monopoly does scrutiny under antitrust law become applicable. Otherwise, the patent holder is operating within his rights to be excepted from antitrust liability. As a result, the dissent believed that the real question was whether the reverse payment settlement "gives Solvay monopoly power beyond what the patent already gave it."133 S. Ct. at 2237.
The dissent concluded:
The majority today departs from the settled approach separating patent and antitrust law, weakens the protections afforded to innovators by patents, frustrates the public policy in favor of settling, and likely undermines the very policy it seeks to promote by forcing generics who step into the litigation ring to do so without the prospect of cash settlements. I would keep things as they were and not subject basic questions of patent law to an unbounded inquiry under antitrust law, with its treble damages and famously burdensome discovery.133 S. Ct. at 2247.
What constitutes a reverse payment?
Since the Actavis decision, a controversy has arisen over what constitutes a reverse payment agreement that is subject to antitrust scrutiny pursuant to Actavis. Suppose non-monetary consideration is paid—is that a reverse payment? The controversy largely centers on so-called No-AG agreements. A no-AG agreement (a no-authorized generic agreement) is an agreement by which a brand name drug firm agrees not to launch an authorized generic (a generic version of the brand name company's brand name drug, which it advertises as "authorized") in exchange for the generic manufacturer's promise not to market its generic product for a specified time.See Note: Rebalancing Pay-For-Delay: Why No-Authorized Generic Agreements Should Be Subject To Higher Antitrust Scrutiny, 32  L.J. 683, 685 (2014).
Commentary
Both sides declared victory after the opinion issued, and lauded the majority opinion. FTC Chairwoman Edith Ramirez issued a press release that praised the decision as having "made it clear that pay-for-delay agreements between brand and generic drug companies are subject to antitrust scrutiny, and it has rejected the attempt by branded and generic companies to effectively immunize these agreements from the antitrust laws."Statement of FTC Chairwoman Edith Ramirez on the U.S. Supreme Court's Decision in FTC v. Actavis, Inc." (June 17, 2013).
Defendant Actavis's President and CEO Paul Bisaro stated:
We are pleased that the Court rejected the FTC's proposed 'quick look' test, and did not rule that settlement agreements are presumptively unlawful. Rather, the Court has established that the 'rule of reason' be applied, and left it to the lower courts to determine if the benefits of the settlement outweigh harm to consumers.U.S. Supreme Court Reverses U.S. Court of Appeals Decision in FTC v. Actavis (June 17, 2013).
Lyle Dennison, in the SCOTUS Blog, opined that the decision presented a challenge to what has been the prominent practice of "pay-for-delay" settlements in the drug industry. With this ruling, he said, patent owners no longer maintain immunity from the "rule of reason" scrutiny of antitrust laws when making reverse payment settlements, even if the settlements are only for the terms of the patents. In effect, this limits patent owners' scope of power in holding their monopolies.  In addition, as a result, using reverse–payment settlements to resolve patent disputes now carries a greater risk of coming under litigation, and being ruled as infringing of antitrust laws.Lyle Denniston, Opinion Recap: Pay to Delay in Deep Trouble  (June 17, 2013). Retrieved 20 October 2013.
Alan Morrison, in the SCOTUS Blog, considers how one should litigate a reverse-payments case, based on the Court's opinion. Since not all reverse payments are anticompetitive, Morrison says, "A company with a very solid patent, but with the knowledge that there is always a chance it may be struck down and with the realization that even winning a patent case costs lots of money, may be willing to make a modest payment to gain several years of peace and profits." so the problem is "separating the wheat from the chaff." The Supreme Court in Actavis says "the antitrust laws forbid only those payments that are "large and unjustified.' " But what does that mean, Morrison asks, and tries to answer:
First, what is the baseline or even the universe against which large is to be measured?  Annual gross revenues or net profits of the pioneer and/or the generic would be convenient yardsticks.  But most companies have many products, with different sales and profit ratios, and so the company-wide figures are likely to be an inappropriate measure of what is too large. Moreover, in all these deals, the non-compete lasts only so long, and so the open period has to be somehow taken into account.
Even harder to decide is whether the payment is justified. How does one factor in probability of establishing liability? How does one determine what damages would probably be? "In short, the Court may have created a theoretically beautiful lawsuit model that cannot work in practice." Morrison proposes a court's determination that the public interest is served by the settlement and an antitrust immunity if the court approves it. He concludes, "While a court-approval procedure would not be without difficulty, it seems like a much more sensible approach than the kind of open-ended litigation over whether a prior settlement was too large and not justified, which is what the Court in Actavis created."Alan Morrison, Commentary: Subjecting reverse payments in patent cases to antitrust scrutiny: Sounds like a good idea, but can it work?,  (July 2013).
Bloomberg Law writers thought that the implications of the decision could impact the effect of antitrust laws on general intellectual property cases, outside of the drug industry.  Specifically, the outcome could be applied to general cases regarding "patent pools, cross-licensing arrangements, and more routine patent licensing decisions."Mark Botti & Jessica Hoke, Redefining the Border Between Intellectual Property and Antitrust: Implications of FTC v. Actavis, . Retrieved 9 November 2013.
Jason S. Oliver, in Lexology, argued that the case will reduce the number of settlements with respect to patent litigation.  However, the Court "did not set forth a clear structure for reviewing settlement agreements and left this job to the district courts," which still leaves the full effect of this case to be determined, even with respect to generic drug manufacturers.Jason S. Oliver, Federal Trade Commission v. Actavis, Inc. et al. – Supreme Court holds reverse payment settlement agreements to be analyzed under "rule of reason" approach,  (June 21, 2013). Retrieved 9 November 2013.
See also
 Patent infringement
 United States antitrust law
 Rule of reason
References
External links
 Federal Trade Commission Case List
 Health Affairs Legal Blog on Implications
 Statement by FTC Commissioner
 Patent Legal Blog
 Listing of Statements in Support of Petitioners and Respondents
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States intellectual property case law
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Federal Trade Commission litigation
Category:Pharmaceutical industry in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "FTC v. Colgate-Palmolive Co." ==> """
Federal Trade Commission v. Colgate-Palmolive Company, 380 U.S. 374 (1965), was a United States Supreme Court case.
 Background 
A Colgate-Palmolive advertisement claimed that its Palmolive Rapid Shave shaving cream was so good it could be used to shave sandpaper. The commercial showed sandpaper applied with shaving cream and then shaved.
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) complained that the ad was deceptive and a material misrepresentation because it was not sandpaper but rather sand sprinkled on glass. Colgate-Palmolive argued that the product really could shave sandpaper if left on long enough. Colgate-Palmolive sued arguing that the FTC had overstepped its authority. 
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court agreed with the FTC that the commercial was a material misrepresentation. The ruling forced advertisers to remain truthful in their product presentations. As a result, commercials often feature "dramatization" notifications.
References 
 External links 
 The Sandpaper Test, Museum of Hoaxes
Category:Colgate-Palmolive
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:1965 in United States case law
Colgate
"""

From "FTC v. Dean Foods Co." ==> """
FTC v. Dean Foods Co., 384 U.S. 597 (1966), is a 1966 decision of the United States Supreme Court holding that the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) may sue in federal court to obtain a preliminary injunction to maintain the status quo against the consummation of a merger that the agency persuasively contends violates the antitrust laws..
More broadly, the Dean Foods case stands for the proposition that a federal agency may, by invoking the "All Writs Act," seek equitable relief in federal court against a person's threatened action that will substantially interfere with the agency's performance of its statutory duty and thus adversely affect the relevant court's ability to review the agency's ultimate order with respect to the threatened action.
Facts
Dean Foods and Bowman Dairy, two substantial competitors in the sale of milk in the Chicago area, agreed to a merger. Dean was the second largest firm and Bowman the third or fourth, and together they accounted for 23% of milk sales in the area.See 384 U.S. at 602 ("[A]t the time of the merger, Dean was the third or fourth largest distributor of packaged milk in the Chicago area; Bowman was at least the second largest in that market, and together they enjoyed approximately 23% of the sales of packaged milk in the same area, while the four largest dairy companies had a 43% share thereof."). The FTC filed an administrative complaint to prevent the merger and sought to maintain the status quo pending completion of administrative hearings by filing a petition with the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit for a temporary restraining order and preliminary injunction under the All Writs Act.. The All Writs Act, part of the first Judiciary Act of 1789 and essentially unchanged since then, empowers the federal courts to "issue all writs necessary or appropriate in aid of their respective jurisdictions and agreeable to the usages and principles of law."
Ruling of Seventh Circuit
The FTC argued that preliminary injunctive relief was needed pending completion of the administrative process in the FTC. According to the agency, otherwise, Dean would eliminate Bowman as a competitive entity by selling off its milk routes, its plants, and its equipment. This would prevent restoration of Dean as an effective competitor if the agency later found the merger unlawful. The FTC maintained that such preemptive action by Dean would effectively deprive the court of appeals of its appellate jurisdiction to review the FTC's final order, because any order would be meaningless as a practical matter. On that basis, the FTC maintained, the All Writs Act supplied the court of appeals for the area in which the companies operated with jurisdiction to issue preliminary injunctive relief so that a meaningful appeal could later occur.See 384 U.S. at 600.
The Seventh Circuit dismissed the petition on the ground that the FTC lacked authority to seek such relief (that is, it had no standing to sue), since Congress had not passed any statute giving the FTC specific authority to seek a preliminary injunction. At that point Dean immediately began closing Bowman down and eliminating it as a business.See 384 U.S. at 599 n.1 ("Since consummation of the merger, all assets of Bowman, with the exception of cash and marketable securities which were exempted from the purchase agreement, have been transferred to Dean. Bowman has ceased dairy operations, and now acts as an investment fund, having received and invested the proceeds of the sale.").
Ruling of Supreme Court
thumb|150px|right|Justice Clark
The Supreme Court (5-4), in an opinion by Justice Tom C. Clark. recognized that the FTC had several times, without success, asked Congress to pass a law authorizing it to obtain preliminary injunctions in merger cases. The Court said that this did not matter: "Congress neither enacted nor rejected these proposals; it simply did not act on them." In any case, the Court added, nothing has limited the courts' historic powers under the All Writs Act. "We thus hold that the Commission has standing to seek preliminary relief from the Court of Appeals under the circumstances alleged."
thumb|150px|right|Justice Fortas
Justice Abe Fortas wrote a strong dissent, saying that such awesome power to interfere with mergers should not be entrusted to the FTC without a specific authorization from Congress. Fortas had been legal advisor to Federated Department Stores, Inc, at the time of its four-month fight with the chairman and co-founder of Bullock's, Inc., which had involved an intra-family proxy fight in which such an injunction had been threatened. Federated eventually acquired Bullock's, but it was forced to compromise with the FTC in a consent decree in which Federated agreed to make no more acquisitions until 1970.Laura Kalman,  157-58, 163-64 (1990).Bullock's Merger Into Federated Is Taking Shape, N.Y.  (Aug. 21, 1964); ,  103 (2015).Company-Histories.com, Federated Department Stores, Inc..
Significance and aftermath
The reasoning of the Court is not limited to the FTC and by its terms would apply with equal force to any other federal agency in similar circumstances.
However, the principle may be limited to situations of great urgency. In FTC v. PepsiCo, Inc., the FTC sought a preliminary injunction against a merger and the Second Circuit denied it. The court said that, under Dean Foods, an injunction can issue only if the Commission can show that "an effective remedial order, once the merger was implemented, would otherwise be virtually impossible, thus rendering the enforcement of any final decree of divestiture futile." The Second Circuit thought that the merger probably violated the antitrust laws but did not believe that effective relief would be “virtually impossible.”
In Sampson v. Murray,. the Supreme Court held Dean Foods inapplicable to a stay of a GSA dismissal, stating: "In direct contrast to the claim of the FTC in Dean Foods that its jurisdiction would be effectively defeated by denial of relief, the Commission here has argued that judicial action interferes with the normal agency processes. And we see nothing in the record to suggest that any judicial review available under the doctrine of Service v. Dulles would be defeated in the same manner as review in Dean Foods."
In the wake of similar decisions, in 1973 Congress passed specific legislation granting the FTC authority to bring suits in district courts to obtain preliminary injunctions to prevent consummation of mergers pending action before the FTC, under a legal standard requiring likelihoods of success on the merits rather than a defeat of the agency proceeding.. In addition, Congress passed the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act, which also created administrative clearance procedures having the effect of delaying consummation of mergers while agency evaluation of the competitive impact took place.
In 1984, the D.C. Circuit relied on Dean Foods as authority for issuance of an order to compel the FCC to act on a petition that it had allegedly delayed unreasonably in acting upon. The delay was almost 5 years. Id. at 28.
See also
US antitrust law
Notes
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:1966 in United States case law
Category:Dean Foods brands
Dean
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States standing case law
Category:Legal doctrines and principles
"""

From "FTC v. Motion Picture Advertising Service Co." ==> """
FTC v. Motion Picture Advertising Service Co., 344 U.S. 392 (1953), (the MPAS case), reversing 194 F.2d 633 (5th Cir. 1952), affirming 47 F.T.C. 378 (1950). was a 1953 decision of the United States Supreme Court in which the Court held that, where exclusive output contracts used by one company "and the three other major companies have foreclosed to competitors 75 percent of all available outlets for this business throughout the United States" the practice is "a device which has sewed up a market so tightly for the benefit of a few [that it] falls within the prohibitions of the Sherman Act, and is therefore an 'unfair method of competition' " under § 5 of the FTC Act.344 U.S. at 395. In so ruling, the Court extended the analysis under § 3 of the Clayton Act of requirements contracts that it made in the Standard Stations case to output contracts brought under the Sherman or FTC Acts.See Friedrich Kessler and Richard H. Stern, Competition, Contract, and Vertical Integration, 69  L.J. 1, 59-60 (1959), which argues that the MPAS and Standard Stations cases indicate a coalescence between the standards of unlawfulness under the Sherman and Clayton Acts and for forward and backward (downstream and upstream) integration by contractual exclusive dealing arrangements.
Background
The FTC brought an administrative proceeding against Motion Picture Advertising Service, asserting that its extensive exclusive dealing arrangements (of duration of from one to five years) with motion picture theaters foreclosed others from dealing with those theaters, and was therefore an unfair method of competition in violation of § 5 of the FTC Act. (The FTC could not have brought the case under § 3 of the Clayton Act, as the Standard Stations case had been brought, because of the narrow and specific language of the Clayton Act.First, sale of theater advertising time involves a service, not a commodity, to restrictive sales of which § 3 of the Clayton Act is limited. Second, there was no sale on condition that the buyer (here, MPAS) was not to deal in the goods of other sellers, as required for violations of § 3; rather, there was a purchase on a condition of not selling to others. Kessler, 69  L.J. at 53.)
MPAS's business is to enter into contracts with sellers of goods and services to produce short advertising motion picture films (so-called trailer ads) which depict and describe commodities offered for sale by these companies and then screen the films in the theaters with which it has contracts. (MPAS pays the theaters to make their customers watch the advertisements.A dissenting FTC Commissioner said that "the privilege of boring the public for pay is a theatre owner's inalienable right, provided he doesn't carry the thing too far." See )  MPAS and three other companies in the same business (against which the FTC also brought proceedingsThe FTC sued and entered similar orders against the other three companies. See Matter of Reid H. Ray Film Industries, 47 F.T.C. 326 (1950); Matter of Alexander Film Co., 47 F.T.C. 345 (1950); Matter of United Film Ad Service, Inc., 47 F.T.C. 362 (1950). See also 344 U.S. at 394.) together had exclusive arrangements for advertising films with approximately three-fourths of the total number of theaters in the United States which display advertising films for compensation.344 U.S. at 393.
The FTC found that MPAS's exclusive contracts limited the outlets for films of competitors and forced some competitors out of business because of their inability to obtain outlets for their advertising films. The FTC then entered a cease and desist order prohibiting MPAS from entering into or continuing in effect any such contract that grants an exclusive privilege for more than a year.344 U.S. at 394. The FTC found that an exclusive contract of a year or less "is not an undue restraint upon competition." Id. n.2.
MPAS appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, which reversed the FTC's order. It said that "we . . . have decided the case on its merits" and held that the challenged practice "was not unfair or unreasonable, but was rendered desirable and necessary by good-business acumen and ordinarily prudent management."Motion Picture Advertising Service Co., 194 F.2d at 637.
Ruling of the Supreme Court
In a 7–2 decision written for the Court by Justice Douglas, the judgment of the Fifth Circuit was reversed and the order of the FTC was reinstated.
Majority opinion
thumb|150px|Justice Douglas
The Court began by pointing to Congress's intent to leave the concept of unfair competition "flexible" and "to be defined [by the FTC] with particularity by the myriad of cases from the field of business," and thus to let the FTC " supplement and bolster" the antitrust laws. Here, the FTC found that MPAS's "exclusive contracts unreasonably restrain competition and tend to monopoly." The market, as seen by the FTC, supported by substantial evidence, was highly constrained:
This is not a situation where, by the nature of the market, there is room for newcomers, irrespective of the existing restrictive practices. The number of outlets for the films is quite limited. And, due to the exclusive contracts, respondent and the three other major companies have foreclosed to competitors 75 percent of all available outlets for this business throughout the United States. It is, we think, plain from the Commission's findings that a device which has sewed up a market so tightly for the benefit of a few falls within the prohibitions of the Sherman Act, and is therefore an "unfair method of competition" within the meaning of § 5.344 U.S. at 395. The Court's reference to "the prohibitions of the Sherman Act" does not specify whether the prohibition is that of § 1 or § 2. The individual 40% market share of MPAS is insufficient for a monopolization under § 2 and even an attempted monopolization is doubtful. Perhaps the Court contemplates that the combination of different output contracts constitutes a restraint of trade under § 1. See Joseph J. Simons, Fixing Price With Your Victim: Efficiency and Collusion with Competitor-Based Formula Pricing Clauses, 17  599, 632-33 (1989) (stating that MPAS found § 5 violation based on violation of § 1 because "Court, in finding illegality, relied on the existence of similar contracts which foreclosed an additional thirty-five percent of the market). See also United States v. Parke, Davis & Co, 362 U.S. 29, 44 (1960) ("put together a combination in violation [of § 1] of the Sherman Act").
The Court rejected the Fifth Circuit's determination to "decide[] the case on its merits." It said: "The precise impact of a particular practice on the trade is for the Commission, not the courts, to determine." The Court concluded that it could not say "that the Commission exceeded the limits of its allowable judgment."344 U.S. at 396.
Dissent
150px|thumb|right|Justice Felix Frankfurter
Justice Frankfurter, joined by Justice Burton, dissented. He faulted the conclusory and insufficiently explanatory FTC order:
My primary concern is that the Commission has not related its analysis of this industry to the standards of illegality in § 5 with sufficient clarity to enable this Court to review the order. Although we are told that respondent and three other companies have exclusive exhibition contracts with three-quarters of the theaters in the country that accept advertising, there are no findings indicating how many of these contracts extend beyond the one-year period which the Commission finds not unduly restrictive. We do have an indication from the record that more than half of respondent's exclusive contracts run for only one year; if that is so, that part of respondent's hold on the market found unreasonable by the Commission boils down to exclusion of other competitors from something like 1,250 theaters, or about 6%, of the some 20,000 theaters in the country. The hold is on about 10% of the theaters that accept advertising. . . . [T]he Commission merely states a dogmatic conclusion that the use of these contracts constitutes an "unreasonable restraint and restriction of competition."344 U.S. at 398-99.
He recognized that the other major companies had similar exclusive output contracts and that a total of "75% of the market is shut off." He recognized also that "the existence of the other exclusive contracts is, of course, not irrelevant in a market analysis," citing to the Standard Stations case (in which Justice Frankfurter wrote the opinion for the Court and Justice Douglas dissented).Standard Oil Co. v. United States (Standard Stations), 337 U.S. 293 (1949. But that case was brought under § 3 of the Clayton Act, not under a Sherman Act legal theory, as here, he said, and "this Court has never decided that they [the other contracts] may, in the absence of conspiracy, be aggregated to support a charge of Sherman Law violation."344 U.S. at 399-400.
As for the fact that the FTC acted here under § 5 of the FTC Act, concededly § 5 "comprehends more than violations of the Sherman Law" and was intended "to nip in the bud practices which, when full blown, would violate the Sherman or Clayton Act." But the FTC and its record below do not "explain to us how these practices, if full blown, would violate one of those Acts." Moreover, the FTC has not shown to the Supreme Court "that the exclusive feature here should be considered the economic equivalent of that in" the Standard Stations case. Finally, as for defining "the content of the prohibition of 'unfair methods of competition,' to be applied to widely diverse business practices," Congress did "not entrust[ it] to the Commission for ad hoc determination within the interstices of individualized records, but . . . left [it] for ascertainment by this Court."344 U.S. at 400-05.
Subsequent developments
du Pont-GM case
In United States v. E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., 353 U.S. 586 (1957), the Court found that du Pont's acquisition of stock in GM had become unlawful because of its resulting control by du Pont of GM's automotive finish and fabric purchases (about half of the automobile industry's requirements)—with the consequence "that du Pont purposely employed its stock to pry open the General Motors market to entrench itself as the primary supplier of General Motors' requirements for automotive finishes and fabrics. In deciding whether a violation was shown, the Court instructed that
"in order to establish a violation of § 7, the Government must prove a likelihood that competition may be 'foreclosed in a substantial share of'&#8239" the relevant market. That GM represented about half of that market satisfied the Standard Stations case's test of likelihood of competitive harm, and therefore there was sufficient market foreclosure to allow the inference of injury to competition. While this opinion does not address the MPAS case directly, it has nonetheless been argued that its use of the Standard Stations case in the same way that MPAS uses that case's approach suggests a "coalescence" of legal standards for judging antitrust legality of different vertical integration arrangements.See Kessler, 69  L.J. at 68-70, arguing that the Court's approach in this case shows its tendency to coalesce the legal standards under various antitrust laws when analyzing legality of different types of vertical integration.
Philadelphia Bank case
In United States v. Philadelphia Nat'l Bank, 374 U.S. 321 (1963), the Court explained what it considered the holding in the MPAS case. It explained that in both the MPAS and Standard Stations cases the Court based its finding of unlawfulness on the collective, total market foreclosure resulting from the charged company's plus its major competitors' market shares, which it found comparable to the market shares of the case before it:
In Federal Trade Comm'n v. Motion Picture Adv. Serv. Co., 344 U. S. 392, we held unlawful, under § 1 of the Sherman Act and § 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act, rather than under § 3 of the Clayton Act, exclusive arrangements whereby the four major firms in the industry had foreclosed 75% of the relevant market; the respondent's market share, evidently, was 20%. Kessler and Stern, Competition, Contract, and Vertical Integration, 69  L. J. 1, 53 n. 231 (1959). In the instant case, by way of comparison, the four largest banks after the merger will foreclose 78% of the relevant market. . . . Doubtless these cases turned to some extent upon whether "by the nature of the market there is room for newcomers." Federal Trade Comm'n v. Motion Picture Adv. Serv. Co., supra, at 395.Philadelphia Bank, 374 U.S. at 366.
FTC v. Brown Shoe Co.
In FTC v. Brown Shoe Co.,. the Court expanded on dicta in the MPAS case. In MPAS the FTC found a violation of its organic statute, § 5 of the FTC Act, because there was a violation of § 1 of the Sherman Act. The FTC is not statutorily authorized to enforce the Sherman Act, but it can do that indirectly because the courts hold that § 5 of the FTC Act registers violations of the Sherman Act, as well as "incipient" violations of the Sherman and Clayton Acts and conduct that violates the "spirit" of the antitrust laws..
In MPAS the government argued that even if there were no Sherman Act violation there was still an FTC Act violation: it said in its brief, "Whether or not these agreements are prohibited by either of these acts it is clearly competent for the Commission to conclude that their effect in the situation here disclosed was unreasonably to restrain competition and to tend to monopoly and that they should, therefore, be prohibited as unfair methods of competition."Kessler, 69  L.J. at 54 n.236 (quoting brief). While holding that there was a violation of § 5 of the FTC Act because there was violation of § 1 of the Sherman Act, the Court suggested that the FTC might have been entitled to relief just under § 5.See  126 n.51 (1957): "Although the Supreme Court actually found that the exclusives at issue violated the Sherman Act, it indicated by way of dictum that the Commission might have been entitled to relief under Section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act, even if it had not been able to prove a violation of either the Sherman or Clayton Act."
In the Brown Shoe case, the Court took the next step. Brown had entered into agreements with about 40% of its 600 shoe dealers that they would not carry any other brand and in return Brown would give them special benefits. The FTC found that this was "an unfair method of competition within the meaning of § 5, and ordered Brown to cease and desist from its use."384 U.S. at 319. The FTC did not find that the effect of the arrangements "may be to substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly," and Brown therefore argued that the FTC lacked power to find a violation of § 5 of the FTC Act.
The Court noted that the quoted words would have to be proved to establish a violation of the antitrust laws.384 U.S. 321-22. But that made no difference, the Court said, and quoted this passage from the MPAS decision:
It is . . . clear that the Federal Trade Commission Act was designed to supplement and bolster the Sherman Act and the Clayton Act . . . to stop in their incipiency acts and practices which, when full blown, would violate those Acts . . . as well as to condemn as 'unfair methods of competition' existing violations of them.384 U.S. at 322.
The Court concluded: We hold that the Commission acted well within its authority in declaring the Brown franchise program unfair whether it was completely full blown or not."
Liu case
In Liu v. Amerco, Inc., the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit applied the doctrine of MPAS and Brown Shoe to private damages litigation under a state unfair competition law (a so-called Little FTC Act). Amerco is the parent company of U-Haul, a trunk rental company. U-Haul engaged in what was in substance an attempted price-fixing scheme and the complaint, based on a consent order between the FTC and Amerco,See Federal Trade Commission, U-Haul Int'l, Inc. and AMERCO, 75 Fed. Reg. 35033, 35034 (June 21, 2010). sought damages on behalf of both Liu and a large class of persons who rented U-Haul vehicles for trips to and from Massachusetts during a specified period. The CEO of U-Haul contacted the other major truck rental companies, Budget and Penske, and invited them to join U-Haul in a scheme to raise truck rental prices. He instructed his regional managers to raise their prices, contact the other companies, urge them to join U-Haul in raising prices, and tell them that if they joined in, U-Haul would maintain the price rise but if they would not it would go back to the old rates. The managers did as their CEO instructed, but "the FTC made no findings as to the consequences of the direct or indirect attempts, concluding that the overtures were unlawful regardless of whether the parties reached and successfully implemented an agreement to collude on prices."677 F.3d at 490-92.
Because no federal law clearly provides for damages for an attempt or solicitation to fix prices, Liu sued under Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 93A, which like § 5 of the FTC Act prohibits unfair methods of competition, and which allows consumer class actions. Liu alleged that the U-Haul scheme caused her to pay 10% higher rates on two trips. The district court granted U-Haul's motion to dismiss and Liu appealed to the First Circuit.
That court said it would expect the Massachusetts courts to find that the conduct alleged was unfair to consumers under the Brown Shoe/MPAS interpretation of § 5, since 93A is similar in wording to § 5. "Assuming consumer harm were proved (a quite separate question), we would expect Massachusetts courts to follow FTC precedent that sensibly holds unlawful pernicious conduct with a clear potential for harm and no redeeming value whatever."677 F.3d at 494. The First Circuit therefore reversed and remanded.
Commentary
An academic study of contractual and ownership forms of vertical integration of business organizations emphasized the Court's migration of the "collective even though not collusive foreclosure" theory from the Standard Stations requirements contract decision to the MPAS output contract decision.Kessler, 69  L.J. at 53–55, 59-60. The study also faults the dissent for making unduly formalistic distinctions between Sherman Act and Clayton Act antitrust prosecutions, arguing:
Testing contracts in their whole business setting is the very essence of the Sherman Act rule of reason. According to that general test, restrictive agreements are banned whenever they are intended to have, or in fact have, a significant anticompetitive effect—this being measured in terms of price, output, or quality of goods. Thus, in MPAS, it was essential to evaluate the effect of respondents' contracts in their whole business setting in order to determine whether they passed the Sherman Act test.Kessler, 69  L.J. at 55–56.
Joseph J. Simons,Fixing Price With Your Victim: Efficiency and Collusion with Competitor-Based Formula Pricing Clauses, 17  599 (1989) analyzes MPAS and Standard Stations as exemplifying a principle that in a proper antitrust analysis the only "significant fact is the existence of a contract creating anticompetitive effects," and that "it should make no difference whether one of the parties is a monopolist, whether two or more parties are on the same level of production, or whether neither is true." Furthermore, it is essential, he argues, that the court evaluate a contract in light of what other contracting parties in the same market are agreeing to do, in particular "the existence of similar contracts made by competitors with their own customers or suppliers." He points out that both the MPAS and Standard Stations cases involve similar analysis of similar types of conduct, where the effect on competition and therefore the antitrust legality depend on the similar contracts of the defendants and their competitors.Id. at 631-33.
References
External links
Category:Federal Trade Commission litigation
Category:United States antitrust case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:1953 in United States case law
Category:History of film of the United States
"""

From "Fuentes v. Shevin" ==> """
Fuentes v. Shevin, 407 U.S. 67 (1972), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States wherein petitioners challenged the constitutionality of the Uniform Commercial Code provisions of two states, Florida and Pennsylvania, which allowed for the summary seizure of a person's goods or chattels under a writ of replevin.  The statutes were challenged under the Fourteenth Amendment.  The Court held that the statutes acted as deprivations of plaintiff's property without due process.
The Court noted that seizure without notice and the opportunity for a hearing is acceptable only under limited circumstances:
 The seizure is necessary for an important public or government interest,
 There is a need for prompt action, and
 The seizure is initiated by an agent of the government.
These exceptions would apply (for example) when property is tainted food, misbranded drugs or unpaid taxes needed to fund a war.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 407
Kahn v. Shevin, 416 U.S. 351 (1974)
Nebraska v. One 1970 2-Door Sedan Rambler (Gremlin), Nebraskan case that cited this
External links
Category:United States civil due process case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1972 in United States case law
"""

From "Fullilove v. Klutznick" ==> """
Fullilove v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448 (1980), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that the U.S. Congress could constitutionally use its spending power to remedy past discrimination.. The case arose as a suit against the enforcement of provisions in a 1977 spending bill that required 10% of federal funds going towards public works programs to go to minority-owned companies.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Court was deeply divided as to both the rationale for the decision and the outcome.  Five separate opinions were filed, none of which commanded the support of more than three members of the Court. Chief Justice Burger wrote a plurality opinion, joined by Justices White and Powell; Justice Powell also wrote a separate concurrence. Justice Marshall delivered an opinion for a concurrence with an entirely different basis in law, joined by Justices Brennan and Blackmun. Since there was neither a single opinion that represented the views of a majority of the court nor a clear proposition in opinion that commanded a majority, only the judgment of the court, affirming the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, unambiguously has precedential value.
The Court held that the minority set-aside program was a legitimate exercise of congressional power, and that under the particular facts at issue, Congress could pursue the objectives of the minority business enterprise program under the Spending Power. The plurality opinion noted that Congress could have regulated the practices of contractors on federally funded projects under the Commerce Clause as well. The plurality further held that in the remedial context, Congress did not have to act "in a wholly 'color-blind' fashion."
 Dissent 
Two dissenting opinions were written, one by Justice Stewart, joined by Justice Rehnquist, and the other by Justice Stevens. Justice Stevens objected to the congressional procedures to determine the 10% set-aside figure.
 Subsequent history 
Fullilove v. Klutznick was overruled by Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Peña.. There the Court adopted strict scrutiny for race preference in federal contracting.  This brought the standard of review into uniformity with City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., which applied strict scrutiny for race preferences in state and local government contracting..
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 448
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States affirmative action case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1980 in United States case law
Category:United States racial discrimination case law
"""

From "Fulton v. City of Philadelphia" ==> """
Fulton v. City of Philadelphia, 593 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case dealing with litigation over discrimination of local regulations based on the Free Exercise Clause and Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The specific case deals with a religious-backed foster care agency that was denied a new contract by the City of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, due to the agency's refusal to certify married same-sex couples as foster parents on religious grounds. 
In a unanimous judgment on June 17, 2021, the Court ruled that the city's refusal due to the agency's same-sex couple policy violated the Free Exercise Clause. The case was decided on narrow grounds outside of the Supreme Court's prior decision in Employment Division v. Smith, which had previously ruled that neutral laws of general applicability could not be challenged for violating religious exemptions. Instead, in Fulton, the court ruled that services like foster care contracting were not generally applicable under Smith, and thus were subject to strict scrutiny review. Because the city allowed for exceptions to be made in its anti-discrimination policy for foster care certification, the Court deemed the city's refusal to grant an exemption for Catholic Social Services as violating its free exercise of religion under Smith.
Background
The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Philadelphia runs the Catholic Social Services of the Archdiocese of Philadelphia (CSS), which has operated a foster care agency in Philadelphia for over 100 years. The foster care agency had been registered with the city up through 2018.
The Philadelphia Inquirer ran an article on March 13, 2018, which described the experience of a same-sex couple that went to an information session at Bethany Christian Service, which operated its own foster care service separate from CSS. At the session, the couple were told they would be wasting time because there was a policy for refusing to certify same-sex couples as foster parents. In following up, the reporter discovered that CSS held a similar policy, and had spoken to the city's Department of Human Services, which oversaw regulating foster care services, to notify them of these issues. The Commissioner of Human Services for the city, Cynthia Figueroa, followed up on the report with both CSS and Bethany Christian Services to confirm its veracity towards discrimination against same-sex couples. Figueroa also reviewed the standard with other registered foster care agencies for the city, many also who were also run by religious organizations, but found none of the others had similar restrictions against same-sex couples. Within a few days of the article's publication, the city suspended CSS's contract; the Bethany Christian Service had been able to work a deal to accept foster care from same-sex couples to maintain theirs.Fulton v. City of Philadelphia, 320 F. Supp. 3d 661, 671 (E.D. Pa. 2018), aff'd, 922 F.3d 140 (3d Cir. 2019), cert. granted, 140 S. Ct. 1104, 206 L. Ed. 2d 177 (2020). 
CSS and several foster couples under CSS, including Black Catholic foster mothers Sharonell Fulton and Toni Simms-Busch, brought litigation against the city in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania under the Free Exercise Clause and Establishment Clause of First Amendment to the United States Constitution, the Pennsylvania State Religious Freedom Restoration Acts, Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment and the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993, Pub. L. No. 103-141, 107 Stat. 1488 (November 16, 1993), codified at  through  (also known as RFRA). CSS also had argued from the recent Supreme Court decision of Masterpiece Cakeshop v. Colorado Civil Rights Commission that they had been subject to hostility from the city based on anti-religious prejudice. The city countered that the precedent set by Employment Division v. Smith, alongside that other agencies in the city with similar religious backing accepted same-sex foster couples, supported the city's decision to terminate CSS's contract. 
The District Court refused to grant a preliminary injunction against the city's contract termination, leading CSS to appeal to the Third Circuit. The Third Circuit unanimously ruled against CSS, upholding the city's claim against Employment Division v. Smith.
Supreme Court
CSS and the foster parents petitioned to the Supreme Court to hear the case, which was certified in February 2020. Oral arguments occurred over telephone on November 4, 2020; Neal Katyal offered oral argument for the city.
Oral arguments
Background of oral arguments
On November 4, the Court heard oral arguments in Fulton, in which Catholic Social Services (CSS) sued the city of Philadelphia over CSS's having been offered a new contract enforcing the city's Fair Practices Ordinance that bars discrimination in accommodations. CSS says that for religious reasons it can not vet potential foster parents who are gay couples. CSS's suit asks the Court to overrule its 1990 decision Employment Division v. Smith that allows the government to enforce neutral and generally applicable laws without having to make exceptions for individual religions. CSS also contends that even under Smith the Court should find that the faith-based charity had been unfairly targeted by the city, given that the city allows race- and disability-based exceptions within foster-care placements, and Smith held that "where the State has in place a system of individual exemptions, it may not refuse to extend that system to cases of 'religious hardship' without compelling reason.". CSS further claims that the law is shown to not be "neutral" as required under Smith, since the city referred to CSS's motives as "discrimination that occurs under the guise of religious freedom". This argument is similar to the one made in Masterpiece Cakeshop, where the Court held that the government had not enforced the law in a manner that was neutral toward religion. The city of Philadelphia argues that the law is neutral and generally applicable, as required by Smith, and that the Court's ruling in CSS's favor would impinge on the civil rights of not only LGBT individuals but potentially those of such groups as religious minorities.
Oral arguments
Some of the Court's conservative members like Justice Amy Coney Barrett didn't reveal their positions, while others did. Two conservative members made clear that in their eyes the city of Philadelphia is not respectful of the religious beliefs held by Catholic Social Services (CSS). It appeared to Justice Brett Kavanaugh that Philadelphia was “looking for a fight” and “created a clash.” Justice Samuel Alito noted that the case wasn't about same-sex couples in Philadelphia having the opportunity to be foster parents, but it's “the fact the city can’t stand the message that Catholic Social Services and the Archdiocese are sending by continuing to adhere to the old-fashioned view about marriage.” Justice Stephen Breyer from the liberal wing of the Court asked Lori Windham, who argued on behalf of CSS: "What’s the problem? I still don’t quite see it." Windham answered that even if the religious-backed foster care agency were to “tag a disclaimer” on its forms related to same-sex couples, CSS would still require the group to “evaluate, assess, and approve” of relationships that go against its religious beliefs. 
Justice Breyer and the other two liberal justices Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor seemed to be intrigued by arguments from Philadelphia's attorney Neal Katyal, who stated that the stakes of the case go beyond the current case and includes virtually all government services. Katyal said a religious exemption to Philadelphia’s nondiscrimination law by the Supreme Court would “radiate far beyond foster care.” According to him this would allow private contractors to refuse to provide services to religious groups from “Buddhist to Baptist” if those contractors cite their own religious convictions. The central question during oral argument was whether CSS is running a government program or is it the recipient of a license to provide a service. This distinction is crucial, for "it could determine the outcome and allow the court to avoid confronting the vexing intersection of religious liberties and marriage equality." CSS request to the Supreme Court to overrule its precedent Employment Division v. Smith case, in which it was decided that neutral laws of general applicability don't violate the First Amendment’s Free Exercise Clause, didn't play a central part during oral argument, which lasted approximately one hour and 45 minutes. According to the New York Times,  questions posed by newly appointed Associate Justice Amy Coney Barrett during the case's oral arguments were "evenhanded and did not reveal her position."
Decision
The Court issued its decision on June 17, 2021. In a unanimous judgment, the Court reversed the Third Circuit's ruling and remanded the case for further review. The majority opinion was written by Chief Justice John Roberts and joined by Justices Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor, Elena Kagan, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett. The decision was made on narrow grounds beyond the scope of Smith.  Roberts identified that the anti-discrimination clause in the city's foster care certification policy included an allowance for exceptions to be made by the Commissioner of Human Services. Roberts found that with this exception capability, the anti-discrimination clause failed via Smith, in that "where the State has in place a system of individual exemptions, it may not refuse to extend that system to cases of 'religious hardship' without compelling reason". Roberts wrote that the city's policy to deny contracting CSS due to their same-sex couple policy violated the Free Exercise Clause. Roberts concluded that "The City has burdened CSS's religious exercise through policies that do not satisfy the threshold requirement of being neutral and generally applicable", and thus ruled against the city. Roberts wrote "it is plain that the city's actions have burdened CSS's religious exercise by putting it to the choice of curtailing its mission or approving relationships inconsistent with its beliefs." Roberts wrote that foster care services do not fall as a public accommodation, and as such, the Court applied strict scrutiny review of the city's policies towards any potential discrimination. 
Justice Barrett wrote a concurring opinion to which Justice Kavanaugh joined and Justice Breyer joined for all but the first paragraph. While Barrett wrote that "the textual and structural arguments against Smith...are compelling", she joined in the majority in the narrow opinion that did not evoke Smith, stating that "There would be a number of issues to work through if Smith were overruled."
Justice Samuel Alito wrote an opinion concurring in judgment, which was joined by Justices Clarence Thomas and Neil Gorsuch. Justice Gorsuch also wrote an opinion concurring in judgment, which Thomas and Alito joined. In both opinions, the Justices expressed concerns that the majority rationale for the judgment did not do enough to support religious freedoms and had left Smith in place. Alito called for the overturning of Smith and wrote in his opinion "The Court has emitted a wisp of a decision that leaves religious liberty in a confused and vulnerable state. Those who count on this Court to stand up for the First Amendment have every right to be disappointed -- as am I." Alito opined that the Smith standard should be replaced with "the standard that Smith replaced: A law that imposes a substantial burden on religious exercise can be sustained only if it is narrowly tailored to serve a compelling government interest." Gorsuch's opinion echoed Alito's call for overturning Smith, adding that the majority opinion had undertaken a "dizzying series of maneuvers" to arrive at their judgment.
Reactions
Prior to the Court's ruling, Fulton had been anticipated to be a landmark case in the conflict between freedom of religious expression and LGBT rights; with the Court's conservative majority, it had been expected that the decision would have been a significant victory for religious groups and a loss for LGBT supporters. Instead, the Court's decision was seen as narrowly focused that only gave a small victory for conservative religious groups, and bypassed larger questions that had been asked regarding the accommodations for LGBT by religion-based groups in governmental regulations. Mark Joseph Stern for Slate opined that Roberts had written the opinion in a narrow matter to minimize the impact on LGBT rights so as to bring the liberal members of the Court into joining with the majority. 
Legal experts stated that the decision was tailored around the specific wording in Philadelphia's contract, which made a specific exemption in the anti-discrimination clause, and likely would not apply for a governmental regulation that lacked such exemption language and was applied broadly. Other legal scholars believed that since the judgment was unanimous, it signaled that the decision was a significant result that would instruct lower courts to rule against any government regulation that singled out against a religious practice. The narrowness of the decision in Fulton was compared to the Court's approach in deciding Masterpiece Cakeshop v. Colorado Civil Rights Commission in 2018, where a baker refused to provide a custom-made cake for a gay couple's wedding and had faced action under the Colorado anti-discrimination laws; in Masterpiece, the Court similarly ruled on a narrow basis on the approach Colorado had taken in reprimanding the baker, rather than establish any landmark decision.
Philadelphia's City Solicitor Diana Cortes called the ruling a "difficult and disappointing setback" but was also gratified that the decision did not "radically change existing constitutional law to adopt a standard that would force court-ordered religious exemptions from civic obligations in every arena." A lawyer at The Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, which represented CSS and other foster care groups in the case, named Lori Windham stated that the Court's decision was a "common-sense ruling in favor of religious social services". "It’s a beautiful day when the highest court in the land protects foster moms and the 200-year-old religious ministry that supports them", said Lori Windham, the senior counsel at Becket who argued the case in Fulton. Plaintiffs Sharronell Fulton and Toni Simms-Busch were both pleased with the ruling; Fulton stated "I am overjoyed that the Supreme Court recognized the import work of Catholic Social Services and has allowed me to continue fostering children most in need of a loving home", while Simms-Busch said "The Supreme Court’s decision ensures the most vulnerable children in the City of Brotherly Love have every opportunity to find loving homes."
Civil rights organization that (also) focuses on lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people and communities reacted differently to the court's decision. Their reactions ranged from the emphasis upon the narrow grounds on which the decision rested to deep disappointment. The Supreme Court's decision was regarded as an infringement on the rights of LGBTQ parents by LGBTQ Nation. Ronald E. Richter, the CEO of New York City's largest foster care system, stated that the decision "to allow private agencies that receive tax dollars to provide government services to discriminate against LGBTQ+ families like mine is devastating for the human rights of people who identify as LGBTQ+". However, the ACLU LGBT + HIV Project, which helped to defend two agencies on behalf of the city, supported the ruling, stating that the Court denied "opponents of LGBTQ equality" the "constitutional right to opt out of [non-discrimination protections] when discrimination is motivated by religious beliefs".
Religious groups were also mixed on the decision. Progressive religious groups were generally disappointed by the decision, but some like the Americans United for Separation of Church & State commended the Court for maintaining a narrow decision. Conservative religious groups were generally more supportive of the Court's ruling, though recognized the narrowness of the ruling. The Family Research Council called the ruling "a substantial win for religious liberty", and "In a time of growing hostility towards religion, the Supreme Court's reaffirmation of this fundamental freedom is even more critical." The Southern Baptist Convention stated that the ruling "prohibits no one from serving children" but "simply ends state discrimination against religious groups."  American attorney Roger Severino who served as the director of the Office of Civil Rights (OCR) at the United States Department of Health and Human Services opined that "religious liberty won 9 votes" in a "nearly unbroken religious-freedom win streak now stretches back decades, essentially all the way to the Employment Division v. Smith decision from 1990 ... ."
References
Further reading
 External links 
Category:Adoption law
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States LGBT rights case law
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:2021 in LGBT history
"""

From "Funk Bros. Seed Co. v. Kalo Inoculant Co." ==> """
Funk Brothers Seed Co. v. Kalo Inoculant Co., 333 U.S. 127 (1948), is a United States Supreme Court decision in which the Court held that a facially trivial implementation of a natural principle or phenomenon of nature is not eligible for a patent.. 
Factual background
Leguminous plants are able to take nitrogen from the air and fix it in the plant for conversion to organic nitrogenous compounds. The ability of these plants to fix nitrogen from the air depends on the presence of bacteria that infect the roots of the plant and form nodules on them. These bacteria include six species of the genus Rhizobium. No one species works with all species of leguminous plants, but each works with different groups of those plants.For example, Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. trifolii works with clover; Sinorhizobium meliloti works with alfalfa; and Bradyrhizobium japonicum works with soybeans. Moreover, different species of Rhizobia bacteria produce an inhibitory effect on each other when mixed.
These bacteria have long been packaged for sale to and use by farmers in the inoculation of the seeds of leguminous plants, with each package containing only one species of root nodule bacteria, to avoid the mutual inhibition effect. The packaged inoculant could therefore be used successfully only in plants of the particular group corresponding to this bacterial species. Thus, if a farmer had crops of clover, alfalfa, and soybeans, they would have to use three separate inoculants.
The patentee discovered that there are strains of each species of root nodule bacteria which do not exert a mutually inhibitive effect on each other. Thus, he was able to provide a mixed culture of Rhizobia capable of inoculating plants belonging to several groups. Kalo exploited the claimed invention by selling multi-purpose packages containing a mixture of different species of Rhizobia suitable for different plants. Funk infringed by selling similar packages and Kalo sued for patent infringement. While the patent had claims both to the method of producing a multi-purpose inoculant by mixing together mutually non-inhibitive strains of Rhizobia and to the inoculant product comprising a mixture of mutually non-inhibitive strains of Rhizobia, the case before the Court involved only the product claims.
Supreme Court opinion
The majority opinion (per Justice Douglas) held that the properties of inhibition or of noninhibition in the bacteria were “the work of nature.,” and therefore not subject to being patented.  “[P]atents cannot issue for the discovery of the phenomena of nature.” The Court added:
The qualities of these bacteria, like the heat of the sun, electricity, or the qualities of metals, are part of the storehouse of knowledge of all men. They are manifestations of laws of nature, free to all men and reserved exclusively to none. He who discovers a hitherto unknown phenomenon of nature has no claim to a monopoly of it which the law recognizes. If there is to be invention from such a discovery, it must come from the application of the law of nature to a new and useful end.
The court of appeals thought that packaging the non-inhibitory strains together went beyond the discovery of a phenomenon of nature and conferred patentability, because a “new and different composition of noninhibitive strains…contributed utility and economy to the manufacture and distribution of commercial inoculants.” But the Supreme Court disagreed, and reversed, because the “aggregation of species fell short of invention within the meaning of the patent statutes.” The Court explained:
The aggregation of select strains of the several species into one product is an application of that newly discovered natural principle. But however ingenious the discovery of that natural principle may have been, the application of it is hardly more than an advance in the packaging of the inoculants. Each of the species of root nodule bacteria contained in the package infects the same group of leguminous plants which it always infected. No species acquires a different use. The combination of species produces no new bacteria, no change in the six species of bacteria, and no enlargement of the range of their utility. Each species has the same effect it always had. The bacteria perform in their natural way. Their use in combination does not improve in any way their natural functioning. They serve the ends nature originally provided, and act quite independently of any effort of the patentee.
… The application of this newly discovered natural principle to the problem of packaging of inoculants may well have been an important commercial advance. But once nature's secret of the noninhibitive quality of certain strains of the species of Rhizobium was discovered, the state of the art made the production of a mixed inoculant a simple step. Even though it may have been the product of skill, it certainly was not the product of invention. There is no way in which we could call it such unless we borrowed invention from the discovery of the natural principle itself. That is to say, there is no invention here unless the discovery that certain strains of the several species of these bacteria are noninhibitive, and may thus be safely mixed, is invention. But we cannot so hold without allowing a patent to issue on one of the ancient secrets of nature now disclosed.
… Since we conclude that the product claims do not disclose an invention or discovery within the meaning of the patent statutes, we do not consider whether the other statutory requirements…are satisfied.
Rationale and subsequent developments
The Court decided this case under the patent statute in effect before the 1952 recodification, which distinguished obviousness from "invention." It is therefore not certain from the language used whether the Court held that the claimed invention was too obvious to justify a patent or, as appears more likely, that when the discovery of a phenomenon of nature is implemented in a facially trivial manner, the subject matter is not patent-eligible.
However, on the basis of how subsequent Supreme Court opinions, such as Gottschalk v. Benson. and Parker v. Flook,. treat Funk, it appears that the opinion is one on patent-eligibility.
A lower court opinion illustrating the application of the doctrine of the Funk case is Armour Pharmaceutical Co. v. Richardson Merrell, Inc. In that case, the patentee desired to administer trypsin orally for use as an anti-inflammatory. He discovered that trypsin could be absorbed effectively in the lower small intestine (ileum). However, stomach acids destroyed trypsin. The patentee proposed and claimed coating trypsin with an enteric coating (stomach-acid-resistant coating), which permitted the trypsin to pass through the stomach to the small intestine without damage to be absorbed and then, it would act as an anti-inflammatory or analgesic. However, the enteric coating expedient was already known for other products. The United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit invalidated the patent on the basis of Funk:
Our reading of the Supreme Court's opinion in Funk leads us to conclude that the test of patentability of a natural phenomenon is as follows: Would an artisan, knowing the newly discovered natural phenomenon require more than ordinary skill to discover the process by which to apply that phenomenon as the patentee had done? Once nature's secret that the ileum would absorb trypsin was uncovered, any artisan would have known the process of enterically coating the trypsin to enable it to pass through the acidic environment of the stomach and continue into the ileum.... [The inventor’s] application of that newly discovered principle would itself have to be inventive in order to sustain [the] patent.396 F.2d at 74.
Thus, the court held that according to Funk the manner of implementation of a natural principle must itself be patentable, as Parker v. Flook subsequently held.Other lower court cases stating so are National Lead Co. v. Western Lead Co., 324 F.2d 539 (9th Cir. 1963); Davison Chem. Corp. v. Joliet Chems., Inc., 179 F.2d 793 (7th Cir. 1950); 
 References 
External links
Category:1948 in United States case law
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Hyphomicrobiales
Category:Seed companies
"""

From "Furman v. Georgia" ==> """
Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238 (1972), was a landmark criminal case in which the United States Supreme Court invalidated all then existing legal constructions for the death penalty in the United States. It was 5–4 decision, with each member of the majority writing a separate opinion.Criminal Law - Cases and Materials, 7th ed. 2012, Wolters Kluwer Law & Business; John Kaplan, Robert Weisberg, Guyora Binder, ,  Following Furman, in order to reinstate the death penalty, states had to at least remove arbitrary and discriminatory effects in order to satisfy the Eighth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
The decision mandated a degree of consistency in the application of the death penalty. This case resulted in a de facto moratorium of capital punishment throughout the United States, which ended when the case Gregg v. Georgia was decided in 1976 to allow the death penalty.
The Supreme Court consolidated the cases Jackson v. Georgia and Branch v. Texas with the Furman decision, thereby invalidating the death penalty for rape; this ruling was confirmed post-Gregg in Coker v. Georgia. The Court had also intended to include the case of Aikens v. California, but between the time Aikens had been heard in oral argument and a decision was to be issued, the Supreme Court of California decided in California v. Anderson that the death penalty violated the state constitution; Aikens was therefore dismissed as moot, since this decision reduced all death sentences in California to life imprisonment.
Background
In the Furman v. Georgia case, the resident awoke in the middle of the night to find William Henry Furman committing burglary in his house. At trial, in an unsworn statement allowed by Georgia criminal procedure, Furman said that while trying to escape, he tripped and the weapon he was carrying fired accidentally, killing the victim. This contradicted his prior statement to police that he had turned and fired a shot blindly while fleeing. In either event, because the shooting occurred during the commission of a felony, Furman would have been guilty of murder and eligible for the death penalty under then-extant state law, according to the felony murder rule. Furman was tried for murder and was found guilty based largely on his own statement. Although he was sentenced to death, the punishment was never performed.
Jackson v. Georgia, like Furman, was also a death penalty case confirmed by the Supreme Court of Georgia. Unlike Furman, the convicted man in Jackson had instead of killing someone, attempted to commit armed robbery and committed rape in the process of doing so. Branch v. Texas was brought to the Supreme Court of the United States on appeal on certiorari to the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals. Like Jackson, Branch was convicted of rape.
Decision
In a 5–4 decision, the Court's one-paragraph per curiam opinion held that the imposition of the death penalty in these cases constituted cruel and unusual punishment and violated the Constitution. However, the majority could not agree as to a rationale. There was not any signed opinion of the court or any plurality opinion as none of the five justices constituting the majority joined officially with the opinion of any other.
Justices Potter Stewart, Byron White and William O. Douglas expressed similar concerns about the apparent arbitrariness with which death sentences were imposed by the laws existing, often indicating a racial bias against black defendants. Because these opinions were the narrowest, finding only that the death penalty as currently applied was cruel and unusual, they are often considered the controlling majority opinions. Stewart wrote:
Justices William J. Brennan and Thurgood Marshall concluded that the death penalty was in itself "cruel and unusual punishment", and incompatible with the evolving standards of decency of a contemporary society. Marshall commented further on the possibility of wrongful execution, writing: 
Dissents
Chief Justice Warren Burger and Justices Harry Blackmun, Lewis F. Powell, and William H. Rehnquist, each appointed by President Richard Nixon, dissented. They argued that a punishment provided in 40 state statutes (at the time) and by the federal government could not be ruled contrary to the so-called "evolving standard of decency". The four also stated that they personally opposed the death penalty, and would vote against it if on the state legislature, but that it was constitutional nonetheless. In his dissent, Burger wrote, "in the 181 years since the enactment of the Eighth Amendment, not a single decision of this Court has cast the slightest shadow of a doubt on the constitutionality of capital punishment.
Aftermath
The Supreme Court's decision marked the first time the Justices vacated a death sentence under the Eighth Amendment's Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause, resulting in over 630 death sentences being vacated.
The Furman decision caused all death sentences pending at the time to be reduced to life imprisonment.Barry Latzer (2010), Death Penalty Cases: Leading U.S. Supreme Court Cases on Capital Punishment, Elsevier, p.37. The next day, columnist Barry Schweid wrote that it was "unlikely" that the death penalty could exist anymore in the United States.The Free Lance-Star - Jun 30, 1972: "New laws unlikely on the death penalty," by Barry Schweid
The Supreme Court's decision forced states and the U.S. Congress to reconsider their statutes for capital offenses to ensure that the death penalty would not be administered in a capricious or discriminatory manner.
During the next four years, 37 states enacted new death penalty laws intended to overcome the court's concerns about the arbitrary imposition of the death penalty. Several statutes that mandated bifurcated trials, with separate guilt-innocence and sentencing phases, and imposing standards to guide the discretion of juries and judges in imposing capital sentences, were upheld in a series of Supreme Court decisions in 1976, beginning with Gregg v. Georgia. Other statutes enacted in response to Furman, such as Louisiana's (which mandated imposition of the death penalty upon conviction of a certain crime), were invalidated for cases of that same year.
See also
Capital punishment in the United States
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 408
Gregg v. Georgia
Baze v. Rees
Glossip v. Gross
 References 
Further reading
Category:Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause and death penalty case law
Category:Capital punishment in Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:1972 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Fussell v. Gregg" ==> """
Fussell v. Gregg, 113 U.S. 550 (1885), was an appeal from the United States District Court for the Northern District of Ohio regarding a bill in equity filed November 20, 1879, to establish the title of the plaintiff to, and recover the possession of, a certain tract of land in the County of Logan, in the State of Ohio, and for an account of rents and profits.. The dispute was one of many issues with land titles in the former Virginia Military District section of Ohio.
Decision
The court syllabus states:
A court in equity has no jurisdiction over a suit based upon an equitable title to real estate unless the nature of the relief asked for is also equitable.
A court of the United States sitting in equity cannot control the principal surveyor of the Virginia Military District in the discharge of his official duties or take charge of the records of his office or declare their effect to be other than what appears on their face.
The plain meaning of the Act of March 23, 1804, 2 Stat. 274, to ascertain the boundaries of the Virginia Military District in Ohio is that a failure within five years to make return to the Secretary of War of the survey of any tract located within the territory, made previous to the expiration of the five years, should discharge the land from any claim founded on such location and survey and extinguish all rights acquired thereby.
The series of acts relating to this district, beginning with the Act of March 23, 1804, and ending with the Act of July 7, 1838, 5 Stat. 282, as revived and continued in force by later acts, are to be construed together, and as if the third section of the Act of March 23, 1804, had been repeated in every act of the series.
The Act of March 3, 1855, 10 Stat. 701, allowing persons who had made entries before January 1, 1852, two years time to return their surveys did not apply to those who had made both entries and surveys before the latter date.
The land office referred to in § 2 of the Act of May 27, 1880, 21 Stat. 142, relating to the Virginia Military District in Ohio is the General Land Office.
On the pleas and issues in this cause, the complainant has failed to make good the case stated in the bill.
The plaintiff insisted that the first and second sections of the Act of May 27, 1880, repeal by implication the third section of the Act of March 23, 1804. There is no ground for such a contention. It is most unreasonable to suppose that Congress intended, by doubtful inference, to repeal the salutary provision of § 4 of the act of 1804, which, in numerous enactments, it had cautiously preserved for a period of seventy-six years, and on which the titles to a vast domain rested.
The object of the first and second sections of the Act of May 27, 1880, was not to confer new rights, but to preserve rights already vested from impairment by any construction which might be placed on the Act of February 18, 1871, by which the unsurveyed and unsold lands in the Virginia Military District were ceded to the State of Ohio. But it is enough to say that there is no inconsistency between the two enactments, one of which is said to repeal the other. There can therefore be no repeal by implication.
It followed that the plaintiff could derive no aid from any act of Congress passed since the first day of January 1852. On that day, all interest and estate of the heirs of Archibald Gordon in the lands covered by his entry recorded on January 1, 1823, and his survey recorded on November 6, 1824, ceased and determined. The plaintiff therefore has failed to make good her averment that she has an equitable estate in fee simple to the premises in controversy. She has therefore shown no right to the relief prayed by her bill.
The court found that it was immaterial whether the patent of Gregg under which the defendants claim was valid or void. The plaintiff, having no title, can have no relief against them. The defendants, being in possession, are entitled to retain possession until ousted by one who has the title. The decree of the circuit court, by which the bill was dismissed, was therefore right, and was affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 113
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Waite Court
Category:1885 in United States case law
Category:Logan County, Ohio
"""

From "G. & C. Merriam Co. v. Syndicate Pub. Co." ==> """
G. & C. Merriam Co. v. Syndicate Pub. Co., 237 U.S. 618 (1915), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that, under the Trademark Act of 1881, after a copyrighted work expires, the word used to designate that work falls into the public domain and cannot be trademarked.
 References 
External links
Category:1915 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States trademark case law
"""

From "Gabelli v. SEC" ==> """
Gabelli v. SEC, 568 U.S. 442 (2013), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that the statute of limitations for filing civil penalty actions initiates when the offending act is committed or finished.. The Securities and Exchange Commission filed suit against Bruce Alpert and Marc Gabelli of Gabelli Funds, LLC, alleging the firm made secret agreements with Headstart Advisers Ltd concerning Headstart's investment in a mutual fund managed by Gabelli. Headstart realized large profits at the expense of Gabelli's remaining investors, and the SEC argued that Gabelli's actions violated the Investment Advisers Act. Gabelli and Alpert sought dismissal of the case, arguing the SEC lawsuit came after the five year statute of limitations expired. In response, the SEC argued that under the discovery rule, the statute had not expired when the case was filed.
In a unanimous decision, Chief Justice John Roberts ruled against the federal government's argument that the discovery rule determined the statute of limitations for filing the fraud lawsuit. Roberts' opinion explained that the discovery rule, which starts the statute of limitations once the plaintiff becomes aware of the fraud, applies only to victims of the fraud itself. Government regulatory agencies are subject to the standard rule, which initiates the standard of limitations upon the perpetration of the fraud.  Under this earlier threshold, the SEC missed the five-year deadline to file suit against Gabelli. The Supreme Court's decision reversed the earlier decision of the Second Circuit, and the case was remanded to the lower courts.
 See also 
2012 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States
 References 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Statutes of limitations
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission litigation
"""

From "Gade v. National Solid Wastes Management Ass'n" ==> """
Gade v. National Solid Wastes Management Association, 505 U.S. 88 (1992), is a United States labor law case of the United States Supreme Court. The Court determined that federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration regulations preempted various Illinois provisions for licensing workers who handled hazardous waste materials.. 
Facts
The National Solid Wastes Management Association, a business group, sought an injunction against two Illinois statutes requiring workers get training and pass exams to handle hazardous waste. It argued these statutes were preempted by the Occupational Safety and Health Act and Occupational Safety and Health Administration regulations implementing a requirement of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 which also standards to train workers who handle hazardous wastes. The claim was brought against petitioner Gade's predecessor as director of the state environmental protection agency.
The District Court held that the state acts were not preempted because they protected public safety and promoted job safety, but it invalidated some provisions of the acts.
The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed in part and reversed in part, holding that the OSH Act preempts any state law that "constitutes, in a direct, clear and substantial way, regulation of worker health and safety," unless the Secretary of Labor has explicitly approved the law pursuant to § 18 of the OSH Act. In remanding, the court did not consider which, if any, of the provisions would be pre-empted.
Judgment
O'Connor J, writing for the majority, reiterated the ways in which federal law can preempt state law.
O'Connor, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist, Justice White and Justice Scalia, concluded in Part II that the OSH Act impliedly pre-empts any state regulation of an occupational safety or health issue with respect to which a federal standard has been established, unless a state plan has been submitted and approved pursuant to § 18(b) of the Act. The Act as a whole demonstrates that Congress intended to promote occupational safety and health while avoiding subjecting workers and employers to duplicative regulation. Thus, it established a system of uniform federal standards, but gave States the option of pre-empting the federal regulations entirely pursuant to an approved state plan that displaces the federal standards. This intent is indicated principally in § 18(b)'s statement that a State "shall" submit a plan if it wishes to "assume responsibility" for developing and enforcing health and safety standards. Gade's interpretation of § 18(b)—that the Secretary's approval is required only if a State wishes to replace, not merely supplement, the federal regulations would be inconsistent with the federal scheme and is untenable in light of the surrounding provisions. The language and purposes of §§ 18(a), (c), (f), and (h) all confirm the view that the States cannot assume an enforcement role without the Secretary's approval, unless no federal standard is in effect. Also unacceptable is Gade's argument that the OSH Act does not pre-empt nonconflicting state laws because those laws, like the Act, are designed to promote worker safety. Even where such laws share a common goal, a state law will be pre-empted if it interferes with the methods by which a federal statute was intended to reach that goal. International Paper Co. v. Ouellette, 479 U.S. 481, 494, 107 S.Ct. 805, 812, 93 L.Ed.2d 883. Here, the Act does not foreclose a State from enacting its own laws, but it does restrict the ways in which it can do so. pp. 96–104.
Concurrence
Justice Kennedy concurred but thought that Congress had expressly preempted this area and that the application of implicit preemption in this case expanded the doctrine too far. Kennedy, agreeing that the state laws are pre-empted, concluded that the result is mandated by the express terms of § 18(b) of the OSH Act and that the scope of pre-emption is also defined by the statutory text. Such a finding is not contrary to the longstanding rule that this Court will not infer pre-emption of the States' historic police powers absent a clear statement of intent by Congress. Unartful though § 18(b)'s language may be, its structure and language, in conjunction with subsections (a), (c), and (f), leave little doubt that in the OSH Act Congress intended to pre-empt supplementary state regulation of an occupational safety and health issue with respect to which a federal standard exists. Pp. 109, 111-113.
Dissent
Justice Souter, writing for a four Justice minority, felt state law was not preempted. Though he agreed with Justice O'Connor that there were three categories of preemption (express, field, and conflict) he believed that congress must "unmistakably ordain" to preempt state law. He felt that state law would not interfere enough with the federal regulatory scheme to qualify as an obstacle to the full purpose and effect of federal law.
He felt the majority's strongest argument was that the regulations contained a "saving clause" which stated that any issues not spoken on were not preempted. The majority interpreted this clause to mean that Congress had assumed that issues that were spoken on were preempted. In Souter's opinion, this inference was not necessary. Finally, he stated that the requirement that state regulatory plans be submitted for approval does not indicate that an area is preempted. All that this requirement meant is that in areas which are preempted, the state must submit a plan to overcome that preemption.
See also
US labor law
 National Solid Wastes Management Association
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States federal preemption law
Category:1992 in United States case law
Category:Waste in the United States
"""

From "Gaffney v. Cummings" ==> """
Gaffney v. Cummings, 412 U.S. 735 (1973), is a Supreme Court decision upholding statewide legislative apportionment plans for Connecticut.  The Court admitted that these plans entailed "substantial inequalities in the population of the representative districts." It observed that "the States have made virtually no attempt to justify their failure 'to construct districts ... as nearly of equal population as is practicable." It was a Fourteenth Amendment case. At issue was whether the election districts had been gerrymandered in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution.
Facts and prior history
The various states were eligible, and in some cases required, to redraw certain House districts and state assembly districts as a result of the 1970 Census. Connecticut's assembly has 30 senators and 151 house members.  A perfect apportionment would have had 84,228 citizens per senate seat and 20,081 per assembly seat. In Connecticut, the township is the primary unit of government, not the county.  The districting commission developed a plan that almost perfectly divided the state into thirty senate districts (mean deviation 0.45%, or +/- 400). The plan for the assembly, respecting the township boundaries as required by the state constitution, had a mean deviation of 1.9%, with the maximum difference between districts 7.83%. The Court did not discuss the choice of townships that composed each district, only the imbalance in size.  A voter in a small district would have more influence than a voter in a large district.  In other cases, the court had found deviations of 5.97% and 13.1% unacceptable.
Democrats alleged the plan amounted to a political gerrymander and was biased in favor of the Republican Party. The District Court had found against the plan—and by extension, the Republicans.  J. Brian Gaffney was chairman of the state Republican Party and is the named petitioner in this case. Theodore R. Cummings was a long-time Connecticut Democrat, before he died in 2015.
Court decision
The Supreme Court's decision was announced on March 18, 1973, and delivered by Justice White. The Connecticut districting system, with mean deviation of 1.9%, was approved.
Minor deviations from mathematical equality among state legislative districts are insufficient to make out a prima facie case of invidious discrimination under the Fourteenth Amendment so as to require justification by the State.
Implications
For the past fifty years, the two principal guidelines for determining whether a state redistricting plan is fair are: 
One man's vote in a congressional election is to be worth as much as another's
A State must make an honest and good faith effort to construct its districts as nearly of equal population as is practicable, but that absolute equality was a practical impossibility. Mathematical exactness or precision is hardly a workable constitutional requirement.
Subsequent analysis of the facts of the case provided analysts arguments against First-past-the-post voting systems.
In 2019, the Court addressed partisan redistricting in Rucho v. Common Cause and Lamone v. Benisek, and determined that partisan redistricting was outside of the jurisdiction of the federal judiciary, due to it presenting political questions.
References
See also
 Fourteenth Amendment
External links
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:Legal history of Connecticut
Category:1973 in United States case law
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
"""

From "Gagnon v. Scarpelli" ==> """
Gagnon v. Scarpelli, 411 U.S. 778 (1973), was the second substantive ruling by the United States Supreme Court regarding the rights of individuals in violation of a probation or parole sentence. .
The case involved Gerald Scarpelli, a man serving a probation sentence in the State of Wisconsin for armed robbery. While the judge sentenced Scarpelli to 15 years' imprisonment, the judge suspended Scarpelli's sentence and ordered him to serve 7 years' probation. After the probation sentence began, Scarpelli was arrested for burglary in Illinois. Scarpelli's probation was revoked by the Wisconsin Department of Public Welfare subsequent to his confession to police that he was involved in the burglary. The confession in question was later challenged by Scarpelli as being made under duress. After the revocation proceedings, Scarpelli was incarcerated.
After 3 years of incarceration, Scarpelli challenged the revocation of his probation because he was not afforded a hearing on the matter. The State of Wisconsin argued that his probation was violated for two legitimate reasons: Scarpelli had been associating with felons in general and Scarpelli was associated with a known felon at the time of his arrest.
Supreme Court decision
Based on the holding of Morrissey v. Brewer a year earlier,. which extended Fourteenth Amendment due process protection to the parole revocation process, the Supreme Court held, in an 8–1 decision, that a probationer's sentence can only be revoked after a preliminary revocation hearing and a final revocation hearing. These hearings are now known as Gagnon I and Gagnon II hearings, respectively.
Justice Lewis Powell delivered the opinion of the court, which held that:
 Scarpelli should be given a hearing regarding the status of his probation,
 Scarpelli was entitled to a writ of habeas corpus, and
 The Wisconsin Department of Public Welfare should have been directed to 'consider' providing the assistance of counsel to Scarpelli in dealing with his new charge of burglary.
Regarding the first part of the ruling, the probation sentence of an individual cannot be revoked without a hearing. If a probationer commits a violation of their probation, that probation sentence can be revoked only after holding a final violation hearing. The Court explained:
 When the (parole officer's) view of the probationer's or parolee's conduct differs in this fundamental way from the latter's own view, due process requires that the difference be resolved before revocation becomes final. Both the probationer or parolee and the State have interests in the accurate finding of fact and the informed use of discretion—the probationer or parolee to insure that his liberty is not unjustifiably taken away and the State to make certain that it is neither unnecessarily interrupting a successful effort at rehabilitation nor imprudently prejudicing the safety of the community.
The Court dismissed the unilateral denial of counsel to a probationer when they are arrested on new charges within the period of probation. Instead, the Court stated a determination if counsel should be provided shall be made on a case-by-case basis. Justice Powell wrote for the majority:
 The differences between a criminal trial and a revocation hearing do not dispose altogether of the argument that under a case-by-case approach there may be cases in which a lawyer would be useful but in which none would be appointed because an arguable defense would be uncovered only by a lawyer. Without denying that there is some force in this argument, we think it a sufficient answer that we deal here, not with the right of an accused to counsel in a criminal prosecution, but with the more limited due process right of one who is a probationer or parolee only because he has been convicted of a crime.
Impact of the Gagnon decision
All probationers in the United States who incur a violation or multiple violations are guaranteed certain hearings before any permanent, punitive action is taken. A Gagnon I hearing occurs when a probationer is taken into custody for an alleged violation; this first hearing determines if the probationer should remain in custody or be released back into the community. A Gagnon II hearing is the final revocation procedure. A determination on the status of the probation is made, and if the probationer is found in violation, a sentence (resentence) for the original criminal charge is handed down by the judge.
A violation of probation does not necessarily mean that a violation occurred beyond a reasonable doubt; instead, the standard of evidence required is that the violation occurred by the preponderance of evidence.
See also
Gideon v. Wainwright, 
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 411
References
External links
Category:United States criminal due process case law
Category:United States Sixth Amendment appointment of counsel case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1973 in United States case law
"""

From "Gall v. United States" ==> """
Gall v. United States, 552 U.S. 38 (2007), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that the federal appeals courts may not presume that a sentence falling outside the range recommended by the Federal Sentencing Guidelines is unreasonable.  Applying this rule to the case at hand, it upheld a sentence of 36 months' probation imposed on a man who pleaded guilty to conspiracy to distribute ecstasy in the face of a recommended sentence of 30 to 37 months in prison.
Facts
Brian Gall was a sophomore at the University of Iowa when he befriended Luke Rinderknecht, who got Gall into selling ecstasy.  Over the course of seven months, Gall made over $30,000 selling the drug.  Then he stopped using ecstasy, graduated from college, moved to Arizona, got a job in the construction industry, and then became a master carpenter in Colorado.  He had not used any illegal drugs since graduating from college.
While Gall was living in Arizona, federal agents approached him as part of an investigation into the drug conspiracy.  He admitted participating in it for a brief time, and the agents moved on with their investigation.  A year and a half after the agents approached Gall, Gall was indicted as part of an ongoing drug distributing ring that lasted from 1996 until 2002.  By this time, Gall had been away from the drug ring for over three years.  When the indictment came down, Gall returned to Iowa, surrendered to authorities, and was released on his own recognizance pending trial.  While awaiting trial, Gall began his own contracting business, making profits of $2,000 per month in his first year. Gall was represented by attorney Marc Milavitz from Boulder, Colorado.
Gall struck a plea bargain with the Government, stipulating that he was responsible for the equivalent under the federal sentencing guidelines of 87.5 kilograms of marijuana.  (This was relevant for sentencing purposes.)  The Government acknowledged that Gall had withdrawn from the conspiracy in September 2000.  The probation office also concluded (again, for sentencing purposes) that Gall was never an organizer or leader in the conspiracy, that his offense did not involve the use of weapons, and that he had no significant criminal history.  The probation officer's report also pointed out that Gall had always been candid with the Government, but that his information was not useful to the investigators.  Ultimately the probation officer recommended a sentence of 30 to 37 months.
At the sentencing hearing, several witnesses testified to Gall's good character.  The defense reminded the court that two of Gall's accused codefendants had been sentenced to 30 and 35 months, respectively, and neither of them had voluntarily withdrawn from the conspiracy as Gall had.  Although the Government's attorney urged the court to impose a sentence within the range recommended by the probation office, U.S. District Judge Robert W. Pratt ultimately imposed a sentence of 36 months' probation, explaining that it had considered the purposes of punishment and how a probation-only sentence would further those goals.  The Government then appealed the sentence.
The Eighth Circuit vacated and remanded the sentence.  As circuit precedent required at the time, the court noted that the district court had not justified the sentence adequately in light of the proportional variation from the bottom end of the Guidelines range.  Because Gall's probation-only sentence was, in effect, a 100% downward variation from the Guidelines range, the court reasoned, it had to be justified by extraordinary circumstances, circumstances that were not present in Gall's case.  After Claiborne v. the United States terminated with the unexpected premature death of the defendant, in that case, the Supreme Court agreed to hear Gall's case in order to clarify how the lower federal courts should handle sentences falling outside the Guidelines range.
Majority opinion
After United States v. Booker, , the Federal Sentencing Guidelines are merely one of seven factors federal district courts must look to when imposing sentences, and federal appellate courts must review those sentences for "reasonableness."  "Our explanation of 'reasonableness' review in the Booker opinion made it pellucidly clear that the familiar abuse-of-discretion standard of review now applies to appellate review of sentencing decisions."  At the same time, while the Guidelines are one factor among many, they remain the product of empirical study of thousands of sentencing decisions over a quarter of a century.  Accordingly, while sentences that fall farther outside the Guidelines range must be justified with appropriate reference to the other factors, no "rigid mathematical formula" can dictate the precise extent of that justification.  Such a formula smacks of a presumption of unreasonableness for sentences imposed outside the Guidelines range, an approach the Court rejects and that the Government had conceded was inconsistent with Booker.
With respect to the sentence the district court had imposed on Gall, it is of course true that custodial sentences are qualitatively more harsh than noncustodial ones, even taking into account the restrictions on freedom that any program of probation will entail.  Yet the Court concluded that it was nearly unworkable to arrive at "some ascertainable method of assigning percentages to various justifications" district courts might proffer for various sentences.  More importantly, however, was that the proportionality review the Eighth Circuit had employed effectively imposed a greater standard of review on some sentences than on others.  Such an approach is inconsistent with an abuse-of-discretion standard of review that the Court in Booker and again in Rita v. United States had held should apply.
Turning to the particular facts of this case, the Court commented that the district judge had committed no significant procedural error.  He correctly calculated the Guidelines range, considered the statutory factors, and "thoroughly documented his reasoning."  In particular, the judge did not ignore the seriousness of the offense.  To be sure, he did not specifically recite the adverse health effects that ecstasy presents.  Yet the prosecutor did not urge those adverse health consequences as a basis for imposing the sentence it felt was reasonable.  "It was not incumbent upon the District Judge to raise every conceivably relevant issue on his own initiative."  Moreover, the probation-only sentence in this case promotes respect for the law.  Seven of the eight defendants in the case received prison terms.  Gall did not because, as the district judge explained, "a sentence of imprisonment may work to promote not respect, but derision, of the law if the law is viewed merely as a means to dispense harsh punishment without taking into account the real conduct and circumstances in sentencing."  Finally, Gall understandably received a more lenient sentence because he withdrew from the conspiracy while the other defendants did not.
The Court also held that the sentence was substantively reasonable.  Virtually no conspiracy defendants voluntarily withdraw; Gall did, and did so years before he even knew he was the target of a federal investigation.  In the Court's eyes, this was a sign of genuine rehabilitation.  "Compared to a case where the offender's rehabilitation occurred after he was charged with a crime, the District Court here had greater justification for believing Gall's turnaround was genuine, as distinct from a transparent attempt to build a mitigation case."  The Eighth Circuit had faulted the district court for taking into account Gall's youth at the time of the crime; the Supreme Court noted that such a consideration was permissible as part of the "history and characteristics of the defendant."  The Government had never contended that a probation-only sentence was inappropriate in a case such as Gall's; in fact, it had conceded that such a sentence might sometimes be appropriate.  These differing policy choices were incompatible with an abuse-of-discretion review; hence, the Eighth Circuit's decision could not stand.
Concurring opinions
Justice Antonin Scalia reiterated his view that substantive reasonableness review was incompatible with the Sixth Amendment, but concurred out of concerns for stare decisis.
Justice David Souter urged Congress to "reestablish[] a system of mandatory sentencing guidelines, but provid[e] for jury findings of all facts necessary to set the upper range of sentencing discretion."
Dissenting opinions
Justice Clarence Thomas dissented for the same reason he did in Kimbrough v. United States.
Justice Samuel Alito dissented because he believed that district courts should be permitted to give "some significant weight" to the Guidelines "in making a sentencing decision."  This belief flowed from his reading of United States v. Booker—a decision he did not participate in writing because it was issued before he joined the Court—because to fail to do so would ignore Congress's directive to not only "consult" the Guidelines but to "take [them] into account."  Appellate courts, in turn, must be able to police compliance with this directive by forcing district courts to reevaluate sentences that stray too far from the Guidelines range.  "It is unrealistic to think that this goal can be achieved over the long term if sentencing judges need only give lip service to the Guidelines."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 552
External links
 Petitioner's merits brief
 Petitioner's reply brief
 Links to defense-side briefs, fd.org 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2007 in United States case law
Category:United States Federal Sentencing Guidelines case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Gallagher v. Crown Kosher Super Market of Massachusetts, Inc." ==> """
Gallagher v. Crown Kosher Super Market of Massachusetts, Inc., 366 U.S. 617 (1961), is a United States Supreme Court case that declared that a kosher butcher store had to abide by the state laws that banned them from selling on Sunday.
Background
The owners of the Crown Kosher Super Market of Massachusetts were Orthodox Jews whose religion forbids them to shop or sell from sundown on Friday until sundown on Saturday and requires them to eat only kosher food, were keeping their store open on Sunday at times when it was against the Massachusetts state law.
The lawsuit was in a Federal District Court to make certain sections of the Massachusetts Sunday Closing Laws unconstitutional. Specifically, "the selling or delivering of kosher meat by any person who, according to his religious belief, observes Saturday as the Lord's day by closing his place of business during the day until six o'clock in the afternoon, or the keeping open of his shop on the Lord's day for the sale of kosher meat between the hours of six o'clock and ten o'clock in the forenoon."
The store had formerly been open for business all day on Sundays and had done about a third of its weekly business then. It was closed from sundown on Fridays until sundown on Saturdays. The store had claimed that it was economically impractical for it to keep open on Saturday nights and until 10 a.m. on Sundays. Many who bought at the store would not have been able to get meat from Friday afternoon until Monday.
Counsel of Record
ACLU Side: Herbert B. Ehrmann, with Samuel L. Fein on the brief.
Opposing Side: Joseph H. Elcock, Jr., Asst. Attorney General of Massachusetts. With him on the brief were Edward J. McCormack, Jr., John Warren McGarry, Arthur E. Sutherland, Jr., and S. Thomas Martinelli.See case summary and details on the ProCon site.
Opinion of the Court
The court 6-3 approved the state law, due to the laws not being exclusively religious.
"An examination of recent Massachusetts legislative history bolsters the State's position that these statutes are not religious.
"In general, Sunday laws protect the public by guaranteeing one day in seven to provide a period of rest and quiet. Health, peace and good order of society are thereby promoted. Such provision is essentially civil in character, and the statutes are not regarded as religious ordinances."
Also on the issue of free exercise of religion they stated: "Secondly, appellees Orthodox Jewish customers allege that, because their religious beliefs forbid their shopping on the Jewish Sabbath, the statutes' effect is to deprive them, from Friday afternoon until Monday of each week, of the opportunity to purchase the kosher food sanctioned by their faith. The orthodox rabbis allege that the statutes' effect greatly complicates their task of supervising the condition of kosher meat, because the meat delivered on Friday would have to be kept until Monday. Furthermore, appellees contend that, because of all this, the statutes discriminate against their religion.
These allegations are similar, although not as grave, as those made by appellants in Braunfeld v. Brown, ante, p. 366 U.S. 599. Since the decision in that case rejects the contentions presented by these appellees on the merits, we need not decide whether appellees have standing to raise these questions."
Justices William O. Douglas, William J. Brennan, Jr. and Potter Stewart dissented from the opinion.
Subsequent developments
This was one of the four cases decided in 1961 that declared "Sunday closing" blue laws to be constitutional. The other three were Braunfeld v. Brown, Two Guys from Harrison-Allentown, Inc., v. McGinleyCase in Wikisource and McGowan v. Maryland.
In the 1977 case Trans World Airlines, Inc. v. Hardison, the court held that firing an employee who observed a seventh-day sabbath did not constitute religious discrimination as prohibited by 
 See also 
 McGowan v. Maryland: another blue law court case
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 366
 References 
External links
 See Gallager v. Crown Kosher Super Market Case summary at ProCon.org
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:Antisemitism in the United States
Category:United States free exercise of religion case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1961 in religion
Category:Working time
Category:Sunday shopping
Category:History of Springfield, Massachusetts
Category:Jewish-American history
Category:Kosher meat
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Gallardo v. Marstiller" ==> """
Gallardo v. Marstiller, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case that held the Medicaid Act permits a state to seek reimbursement from settlement payments allocated for future medical care. The case was brought by the parents of Gianinna Gallardo, who was in a persistent vegetative state.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States statutory interpretation case law
"""

From "Galloway v. United States" ==> """
Galloway v. United States, 319 U.S. 372 (1943), was a Supreme Court of the United States decision in which the Court determined that a directed verdict in a civil case does not deprive litigants of their right to a trial by jury in civil cases under the Seventh Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Galloway, the petitioner, had an on and off history with the Army and Navy.  In 1930 he began a series of medical examinations with the Veterans' Bureau which labeled him as having psychosis.  The petitioner claimed that he was now totally and permanently disabled by reason of insanity brought about by the strain of active service abroad.  Petitioner alleged that his insanity had existed before May 31, 1919, the day on which his yearly renewable term insurance policy lapsed for nonpayment of the premium.  To prove his case, Petitioner offered a series of six witnesses who knew him before and after service and would comment on his behavioral change.  The Petitioner's burden was to demonstrate by more than speculative inference that his condition began on or before May 31, 1919 and continuously existed or progressed until 1930.  The Government moved for a directed verdict and the District Court granted it in favor of the Government stating Petitioner did not meet his burden with the evidence he presented.  Petitioner claimed the directed verdict denied him his right to a jury trial.  The Court of Appeals affirmed the District Court's ruling. The issue in this case was whether a directed verdict denied the Petitioner the right to a jury trial.
Background: The history of the Seventh Amendment
The Seventh Amendment provides that "In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved..." The Amendment was enacted to prevent oppression by a biased or corrupt court. It was meant as a guarantee that the personal interests or prejudices of certain judges would not serve to defeat the rights and responsibilities of citizens before the courts. To prevent corruption, the Seventh Amendment was written to guarantee a trial by our peers.
The Seventh Amendment has been interpreted to give people the right to a jury trial in many civil matters in federal court, but, seemingly contrary to the wording of the Amendment, not all. For example, lawsuits against the government, and admiralty matters, do not give rise to the right to have a jury decide the case. Rights to sue created by statute (versus the common law, or law created by court decision), including the ability to sue the United States Government, have jury rights created by statute and not the Seventh Amendment, according to the courts.
Federal medical facilities and medical practitioners overseen by the Federal Tort Claims Act are totally exempt from a jury trial. The decision to prevent jury trials in matters such as these was criticized by Superior Court Justice Hugo Black’s dissenting opinion in a case decided in 1943 wherein he pointed out “a continuation of the gradual process of judicial erosion which in one-hundred-fifty years has slowly worn away a major portion of the essential guarantee of the Seventh Amendment,” Galloway v. United States, 319 U.S. 372, 397 (U.S. 1943).
Facts of the case
The Petitioner, Galloway, claimed that his mental insanity was caused by this involvement in the military and sued the Government.  The District Court granted the Government's motion for a directed verdict and held for the Government, citing Petitioner's lack of sufficient evidence to prove his claim.  Petitioner appealed, stating that his Seventh Amendment rights of the United States Constitution right to a jury trial was denied because of the directed verdict.
 Petitioner seeks benefits for total and permanent disability by reason of insanity he claims existed May 31, 1919. On that day his policy of yearly renewable term insurance lapsed for nonpayment of premium.
 No contention that plaintiff's behavior was erratic prior to arrival in France for World War I
 Diagnosed with psychosis and other conditions in 1931 and 1934 at medical examinations
 Wife is guardian of his person and estate
 Admittedly, plaintiff is disabled by his insanity
 Plaintiff argues that strain of active service led to his mental breakdown
 Essential to this argument is view that it became total and permanent disability no later than May 31, 1919
Petitioner worked as a longshoreman in Philadelphia and elsewhere prior to enlistment in the Army November 1, 1917. He became a cook in a machine gun battalion. His unit arrived in France in April, 1918. He served actively until September 24. From then to the following January he was in a hospital with influenza. He then returned to active duty. He came back to the United States, and received honorable discharge April 29, 1919. He enlisted in the Navy January 15, 1920, and was discharged for bad conduct in July. The following December he again enlisted in the Army and served until May 1922, when he deserted. Thereafter he was carried on the Army records as a deserter.
In 1930 began a series of medical examinations by Veterans' Bureau physicians. On May 19 that year his condition was diagnosed as "Moron, low grade; observation, dementia praecox, simple type." In November, 1931, further examination gave the diagnosis, "Psychosis with other diseases or conditions (organic disease of the central nervous system — type undetermined)." In July, 1934, still another examination was made, with diagnosis: "Psychosis-manic and depressive insanity incompetent; hypertension, moderate; otitis media, chronic, left; varicose veins left, mild; abscessed teeth roots; myocarditis, mild."
Petitioner's wife, the nominal party in this suit, was appointed guardian of his person and estate in February, 1932. Claim for insurance benefits was made in June, 1934, and was finally denied by the Board of Veterans' Appeals in January, 1936. This suit followed two and a half years later.
Petitioner concededly is now totally and permanently disabled by reason of insanity and has been for some time prior to institution of this suit. It is conceded also that he was sound in mind and body until he arrived in France in April, 1918.
The theory of his case is that the strain of active service abroad brought on an immediate change, which was the beginning of a mental breakdown that has grown worse continuously through all the later years. Essential in this is the view it had become a total and permanent disability not later than May 31, 1919.
The evidence to support this theory falls naturally into three periods, namely, that prior to 1923; the interval from then to 1930; and that following 1930. It consists in proof of incidents occurring in France to show the beginnings of change; testimony of changed appearance and behavior in the years immediately following petitioner's return to the United States as compared with those prior to his departure; the medical evidence of insanity accumulated in the years following 1930; and finally the evidence of a physician, given largely as medical opinion, which seeks to tie all the other evidence together as foundation for the conclusion, expressed as of 1941, that petitioner's disability was total and permanent as of a time not later than May 1919.
Documentary exhibits included military, naval and Veterans' Bureau records. Testimony was given by deposition or at the trial chiefly by five witnesses. One, O'Neill, was a fellow worker and friend from boyhood; two, Wells and Tanikawa, served with petitioner overseas; Lt. Col. Albert K. Mathews, who was an Army chaplain, observed him or another person of the same name at an Army hospital in California during early 1920; and Dr. Wilder, a physician, examined him shortly before the trial and supplied the only expert testimony in his behalf. The petitioner also put into evidence the depositions of Commander Platt and Lt. Col. James E. Matthews, his superior officers in the Navy and the Army, respectively, during 1920-22.
What happened in France during 1918-19 is shown chiefly by Wells and Tanikawa. Wells testified to an incident at Aisonville, where the unit was billeted shortly after reaching France and before going into action. Late at night petitioner created a disturbance, "hollering, screeching, swearing. . . . The men poured out from the whole section." Wells did not see the incident, but heard petitioner swearing at his superior officers and saw "the result, a black eye for Lt. Warner." However, he did not see "who gave it to him."[4] Wells personally observed no infraction of discipline except this incident, and did not know what brought it on. Petitioner's physical appearance was good, he "carried on his duties as a cook all right," and the witness did not see him after June 1, except for about three days in July when he observed petitioner several times at work feeding stragglers.
Tanikawa, Hawaiian-born citizen, served with petitioner from the latter's enlistment until September, 1918, when Galloway was hospitalized, although the witness thought they had fought together and petitioner was "acting queer" at the Battle of the Argonne in October. At Camp Greene, North Carolina, petitioner was "just a regular soldier, very normal, . . . pretty neat." After reaching France "he was getting nervous . . ., kind of irritable, always picking a fight with other soldiers." This began at Aisonville. Tanikawa saw Galloway in jail, apparently before June. It is not clear whether these are references to the incident Wells described.
Tanikawa described another incident in June "when we were on the Marne," the Germans "were on the other side and we were on this side." It was a new front, without trenches. The witness and petitioner were on guard duty with others. Tanikawa understood the Germans were getting ready for a big drive. "One night he [petitioner] screamed. He said, `The Germans are coming' and we all gagged him." There was no shooting, the Germans were not coming, and there was nothing to lead the witness to believe they were. Petitioner was court-martialed for the matter, but Tanikawa did not know "what they did with him." He did not talk with Galloway that night, because "he was out of his mind" and appeared insane. Tanikawa did not know when petitioner left the battalion or what happened to him after (as the witness put it) the Argonne fight, but heard he went to the hospital, "just dressing station I guess." The witness next saw Galloway in 1936, at a disabled veterans' post meeting in Sacramento, California. Petitioner then "looked to me like he wasn't all there. Insane. About the same .. . as compared to the way he acted in France, particularly when they gagged him . . ."
O'Neill was "born and raised with" petitioner, worked with him as a longshoreman, and knew him "from when he come out of the army for seven years, . . . I would say five or six years." When petitioner returned in April or May, 1919, "he was a wreck compared to what he was when he went away. The fallow's mind was evidently unbalanced." Symptoms specified were withdrawing to himself; crying spells; alternate periods of normal behavior and nonsensical talk; expression of fears that good friends wanted "to beat him up"; spitting blood and remarking about it in vulgar terms. Once petitioner said, "G____ d____ it, I must be a Doctor Jekyll and Mr. Hyde."
O'Neill testified these symptoms and this condition continued practically the same for about five years. In his opinion petitioner was "competent at times and others was incompetent." The intervals might be "a couple of days, a couple of months." In his normal periods Galloway "would be his old self . . . absolutely O.K."
O'Neill was definite in recalling petitioner's condition and having seen him frequently in 1919, chiefly however, and briefly, on the street during lunch hour. He was not sure Galloway was working and was "surprised he got in the Navy, I think in the Navy or in the Government service."
O'Neill maintained he saw petitioner "right on from that [1920] at times." But his recollection of dates, number of opportunities for observation, and concrete events was wholly indefinite. He would fix no estimate for the number of times he had seen petitioner: "In 1920 I couldn't recall whether it was one or a thousand." For later years he would not say whether it was "five times or more or less." When he was pinned down by cross-examination, the effect of his testimony was that he recalled petitioner clearly in 1919 "because there was such a vast contrast in the man," but for later years he could give little or no definite information. The excerpt from the testimony set forth in the margin  shows this contrast. We also summarize below  other evidence which explains or illustrates the vagueness of the witness' recollection for events after 1919. O'Neill recalled one specific occasion after 1919 when petitioner returned to Philadelphia, "around 1920 or 1921, but I couldn't be sure," to testify in a criminal proceeding. He also said, "After he was away for five or six years, he came back to Philadelphia, but I wouldn't know nothing about dates on that. He was back in Philadelphia for five or six months or so, and he was still just evidently all right, and then he would be off."
Lt. Col. (Chaplain) Mathews said he observed a Private Joseph Galloway, who was a prisoner for desertion and a patient in the mental ward at Fort MacArthur Station Hospital, California, during a six weeks period early in 1920. The chaplain's testimony gives strong evidence the man he observed was insane. However, there is a fatal weakness in this evidence. In his direct testimony, which was taken by deposition, the chaplain said he was certain that the soldier was petitioner. When confronted with the undisputed fact that petitioner was on active duty in the Navy during the first half of 1920, the witness at first stated that he might have been mistaken as to the time of his observation. Subsequently he reasserted the accuracy of his original statement as to the time of observation, but admitted that he might have been mistaken in believing that the patient-prisoner was petitioner. In this connection he volunteered the statement, "Might I add, sir, that I could not now identify that soldier if I were to meet him face to face, and that is because of the long lapse of time." The patient whom the witness saw was confined to his bed. The record is barren of other evidence, whether by the hospital's or the Army's records or otherwise, to show that petitioner was either patient or prisoner at Fort MacArthur in 1920 or at any other time.
Commander Platt testified that petitioner caused considerable trouble by disobedience and leaving ship without permission during his naval service in the first half of 1920. After "repeated warnings and punishments, leading to courts martial," he was sentenced to a bad conduct discharge.
Lt. Col. James E. Matthews (not the chaplain) testified by deposition which petitioner's attorney interrupted Dr. Wilder's testimony to read into evidence. The witness was Galloway's commanding officer from early 1921 to the summer of that year, when petitioner was transferred with other soldiers to another unit. At first, Colonel Matthews considered making petitioner a corporal, but found him unreliable and had to discipline him. Petitioner "drank considerably," was "what we called a bolshevik," did not seem loyal, and "acted as if he was not getting a square deal." The officer concluded "he was a moral pervert and probably used narcotics," but could not secure proof of this. Galloway was court-martialed for public drunkenness and disorderly conduct, served a month at hard labor, and returned to active duty. At times he "was one of the very best soldiers I had," at others undependable. He was physically sound, able to do his work, perform close order drill, etc., "very well." He had alternate periods of gaiety and depression, talked incoherently at times, gave the impression he would fight readily, but did not resent orders and seemed to get along well with other soldiers. The officer attributed petitioner's behavior to alcohol and narcotics, and it occurred to him at no time to question his sanity.
Dr. Wilder was the key witness. He disclaimed specializing in mental disease, but qualified as having given it "special attention." He first saw petitioner shortly before the trial, examined him "several times." He concluded petitioner's ailment "is a schizophrenic branch or form of praecox." Dr. Wilder heard the testimony and read the depositions of the other witnesses, and examined the documentary evidence. Basing his judgment upon this material, with inferences drawn from it, he concluded petitioner was born with "an inherent instability," though he remained normal until he went to France; began there "to be subjected to the strain of military life, then he began to go to pieces." In May, 1919, petitioner "was still suffering from the acuteness of the breakdown . . . He is going down hill still, but the thing began with the breakdown . . ." Petitioner was "definitely insane, yes, sir," in 1920 and "has been insane at all times, at least since July, 1918, the time of this episode on the Marne"; that is, "to the point that he was unable to adapt himself. I don't mean he has not had moments when he could not [sic] perform some routine tasks," but "from an occupational standpoint . . . he has been insane." He could follow "a mere matter of routine," but would have no incentive, would not keep a steady job, come to work on time, or do anything he didn't want to do. Dr. Wilder pointed to petitioner's work record before he entered the service and observed: "At no time after he went into the war do we find him able to hold any kind of a job. He broke right down." He explained petitioner's enlistment in the Navy and later in the Army by saying, "It would have been no trick at all for a man who was reasonably conforming to get into the Service." (Emphasis added.)
However, the witness knew "nothing whatever except his getting married" about petitioner's activities between 1925 and 1930, and what he knew of them between 1922 and 1925 was based entirely on O'Neill's testimony and a paper not of record here. Dr. Wilder at first regarded knowledge concerning what petitioner was doing between 1925 and 1930 as not essential. "We have a continuing disease, quite obviously beginning during his military service, and quite obviously continuing in 1930, and the minor incidents don't seem to me ____" (Emphasis added.) Counsel for the government interrupted to inquire, "Well, if he was continuously employed for eight hours a day from 1925 to 1930 would that have any bearing?" The witness replied, "It would have a great deal." Upon further questioning, however, he reverted to his first position, stating it would not be necessary or helpful for him to know what petitioner was doing from 1925 to 1930: "I testified from the information I had."
Majority opinion
Justice Wiley Blount Rutledge delivered the opinion of the court. 
Petitioner's burden was to show, according to the statute, that he was totally and completely insane from on or before May 31, 1919, through 1930.  The Court held that the evidence Petitioner brought forth was speculative and vague.  At best, the Petitioner produced evidence of specific episodes during that time, but could not prove his continuous disability.  The Court further noted that the Petitioner wanted the court to infer his insanity for the whole time period stated and that inference did not take the place of evidence.  Therefore, Petitioner's burden was not met.  
The Court reasoned that the Seventh Amendment of the United States Constitution had no application, in this case, to begin with, because it was for a monetary claim against the Government, which historically did not go to a jury. Further, and more importantly, the directed verdict practice was valid because of prior precedent and its presence in the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP).
In action on war risk policy, the veteran had the burden of showing that disability which allegedly occurred during the life of the policy was continuous, and existed during the years intervening before the date the veteran was admittedly totally and permanently disabled.  Evidence, including proof of abnormal behavior of veteran on two occasions during war service, and irrational conduct after the war and after the lapse of war risk policy, and medical testimony, was insufficient to make issue for jury whether veteran was totally and permanently disabled by veteran's condition for a period of eight years during the time that intervened before suit.
Dissenting opinion
Justice Hugo Black wrote a dissenting opinion joined by Justice William O. Douglas and Justice Frank Murphy.  
Black argued that directed verdicts should only be used, if at all, when without weighing the credibility of the witnesses, there is no room in the evidence for honest difference of opinion over the factual issue in controversy.
Black also argued that because the majority's chief reason for approving the directed verdict was that no evidence except medical testimony was offered for a five- to eight-year period, that the Court should have at least authorized a new trial because Petitioner's knowledge that his evidence did not satisfy a judge, but perhaps could satisfy a jury, could make him obtain more evidence to fill that time period.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 319
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Seventh Amendment case law
Category:1943 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
"""

From "Gamble v. United States" ==> """
Gamble v. United States, No. 17-646, 587 U.S. ___ (2019), was a United States Supreme Court case about the separate sovereignty exception to the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which allows both federal and state prosecution of the same crime as the governments are "separate sovereigns". Terance Martez Gamble was prosecuted under both state and then federal laws for possessing a gun while being a felon. His argument that doing so was double jeopardy was found unpersuasive due to the exception. In June 2019, the Supreme Court affirmed the lower court decision 7–2, with the majority opinion stating that there was not sufficient cause for overturning the dual sovereignty doctrine..
Legal background
The separate sovereigns doctrine holds that because the federal and state government are "separate sovereigns", the Double Jeopardy Clause does not apply to prosecution of the same crime under both federal and state laws. The doctrine is more than 150 years old. States can (and some do) have "economy of prosecution" policies, which make it a policy to not concurrently expend resources to prosecute offenses against their State laws where an alleged perpetrator is arrested and being tried for equal or greater offenses, similar or identical to alleged offenses against the laws of the prosecution's State.  In those States, the District or States' Attorneys will only move to prosecute an alleged perpetrator should (1) the initial prosecution fail to convict, or (2) the case is abandoned before a verdict.  In all such instances, the separate Sovereigns doctrine retains the authority to prosecute at the discretion of the State, sister State, or Federal government. In the 1959 cases of Abbate v. United StatesAbbate v. United States, . and Bartkus v. Illinois,Bartkus v. Illinois, . the Supreme Court affirmed the doctrine. The doctrine has been criticized by many scholars as having no basis in the text of the clause.
Case background
In November 2015, Terance Martez Gamble was pulled over in Mobile, Alabama for a damaged headlight. After a search of the vehicle, a handgun was found which was illegal under both Alabama state and federal laws because he was a felon. He was convicted under Alabama state law and given a one-year sentence. He was also prosecuted under federal laws, and after the district court concluded that double jeopardy did not apply in this case, he pled guilty and received a 46-month sentence. Gamble appealed to the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals, who affirmed the district court's decision based on the precedent of Abbate.
Supreme Court
In June 2018 the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case. Gamble's petition to the Supreme Court noted that in 2016, Supreme Court Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Clarence Thomas argued for a review of the separate sovereigns doctrine in a concurring opinion in Puerto Rico v. Sanchez Valle;Puerto Rico v. Sanchez Valle, . Ginsburg's opinion stated that "The matter warrants attention in a future case in which a defendant faces successive prosecutions by parts of the whole USA."
Amicus briefs
According to The Atlantic, the U.S. federal government contended that "overturning the dual-sovereignty doctrine would upend the country’s federalist system", and that the increasing number of federal criminal laws means that it is important that states be allowed to "preserve their own sphere of influence and prevent federal encroachment on law enforcement".
The American Civil Liberties Union, the Cato Institute, and the Constitutional Accountability Center filed a joint amicus brief on the case, arguing that there is no textual basis for the doctrine in the Double Jeopardy Clause, which states that "[n]o person shall be ... subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb", and that the rising amount of federal criminal laws and state-federal task forces means there will be more dual state-federal prosecution.
The case has been analysed in the context of the Special Counsel investigation into the Trump campaign; if the separate sovereigns doctrine had been overruled, a pardon for federal crimes from President Donald Trump would have prevented state prosecution. United States Senator Orrin Hatch filed an amicus brief in the case, arguing against the separate sovereigns doctrine. A spokesperson for him denied any relation of the brief to the investigation, saying that Hatch wants the doctrine to be overturned due to "the rapid expansion of both the scope and substance of modern federal criminal law".
Columbia Law professor Daniel Richman wrote that state and federal charges usually have "no overlap, or almost no overlap, that would ring Fifth Amendment chimes in the absence of the dual sovereign analysis", and so the impact of overturning the separate sovereigns doctrine would be minimal.
Oral arguments
Oral arguments were originally scheduled to be heard on December 5, 2018, but were postponed due to a day of mourning for George H. W. Bush, who died on November 30, 2018. Oral arguments were heard on December 6.
Observers found the Court to be concerned about overruling 170 years of the doctrine and the instability that would result with this change, but did affirm that there is concern from academics and judiciaries on the doctrine's effects.
Decision
The Supreme Court issued its decision on June 17, 2019, affirming the lower court's decision. Justice Samuel Alito wrote the 7–2 majority opinion, stating that there was not sufficient cause for overturning the dual sovereignty doctrine. Alito highlighted that it is written into law that a person may be tried for the same offense in both national and international courts, so the exception for double jeopardy between state and federal trials already exists. Justice Clarence Thomas, who joined Alito's opinion, wrote a concurring opinion to state that the historical record of the double jeopardy clause does not justify overturning the dual sovereignty principle from this case, but urged the court to be more willing to overturn precedents when they are "demonstrably erroneous".
Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Neil Gorsuch wrote separate dissenting opinions. Ginsburg wrote citing The Federalist Papers in the "Different parts of the 'WHOLE' United States should not be positioned to prosecute a defendant a second time for the same offense". Gorsuch wrote "When governments may unleash all their might in multiple prosecutions against an individual, exhausting themselves only when those who hold the reins of power are content with the result, it is the poor and the weak, and the unpopular and controversial, who suffer first—and there is nothing to stop them from being the last."
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Double Jeopardy Clause case law
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States federal firearms case law
Category:Mobile, Alabama
"""

From "Arizona v. Gant" ==> """
Arizona v. Gant, 556 U.S. 332 (2009), was a United States Supreme Court decision holding that the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution requires law enforcement officers to demonstrate an actual and continuing threat to their safety posed by an arrestee, or a need to preserve evidence related to the crime of arrest from tampering by the arrestee, in order to justify a warrantless vehicular search incident to arrest conducted after the vehicle's recent occupants have been arrested and secured.
Background
The case involved Rodney J. Gant, who was arrested by Tucson, Arizona, police on an outstanding warrant for driving with a suspended driver’s license. Police arrested Gant in a friend's yard after he had parked his vehicle and was walking away. Gant and all other suspects on the scene were then secured in police patrol cars. The officers then searched Gant's vehicle. After finding a weapon and a bag of cocaine, they also charged him with possession of a narcotic drug for sale and possession of drug paraphernalia.
Arguments before the Court
Thomas Frank Jacobs (Tucson, Arizona), lead counsel for Rodney Gant, argued the case before the U.S. Supreme Court on October 7, 2008. Jacobs argued that an unreasonable expansion of a limited authority to search vehicles incident to arrest provided by the Supreme Court's 1981 decision in New York v. Belton was occurring. Lower courts were allowing searches after the initial justifications for setting aside the Fourth Amendment's warrant requirement had ceased to exist, relying on a so-called bright-line rule of "if arrest, then search." Jacobs argued, and the Court ultimately agreed, that such application of the Belton exception caused the exception to "swallow the rule," allowing unconstitutional searches.
Amici curiae
A group of legal scholars, including University of Iowa law professor James Tomkovicz, wrote an amicus curiae brief asking the court to overturn the 1981 case, New York v. Belton, that granted police the authority to search a person's vehicle even if that person is not in the vehicle. According to Tomkovicz, Belton failed to meet the constitutional standard of probable cause.
Opinion of the Court
In an opinion delivered by Justice Stevens, the Supreme Court held that police may search the passenger compartment of a vehicle, incident to a recent occupant's arrest (and therefore without a warrant) only if it is reasonable to believe that the arrestee might access the vehicle at the time of the search, or that the vehicle contains evidence of the offense of arrest.
Justice Scalia wrote a concurring opinion, stating that "we should simply abandon the Belton-Thornton charade of officer safety and overrule those cases. I would hold that a vehicle search incident to arrest is ipso facto 'reasonable' only when the object of the search is evidence of the crime for which the arrest was made, or of another crime that the officer has probable cause to believe occurred."
Justice Alito wrote a dissent joined by Chief Justice Roberts, Justice Kennedy, and Justice Breyer in part, saying that the court could not overrule New York v. Belton and Thornton v. United States, 541 U. S. 615 (2004).
Justice Breyer wrote a separate dissent.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 556
 Chimel v. California (1969)
 New York v. Belton
References
Further reading
 {{cite journal |last=Rudstein |first=David S. |year=2005 |title=Belton Redux: Re-evaluating Belton'''s Per Se Rule Governing the Search of an Automobile Incident to an Arrest |journal=Wake Forest Law Review |volume=40 |pages=1287 |issn=0043-003X }}
 Berland, David (2011). Note, "Stopping the Pendulum: Why Stare Decisis Should Constrain the Court from Further Modification of the Search Incident to Arrest Exception". University of Illinois Law Review'' 2011: 695.
External links
 Arizona v. Gant at ScotusWiki
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2009 in United States case law
Category:2009 in Arizona
Category:Legal history of Arizona
Category:History of Tucson, Arizona
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Garcetti v. Ceballos" ==> """
Garcetti v. Ceballos, 547 U.S. 410 (2006), is a U.S. Supreme Court decision involving First Amendment free speech protections for government employees. The plaintiff in the case was a district attorney who claimed that he had been passed up for a promotion for criticizing the legitimacy of a warrant. The Court ruled, in a 5–4 decision, that because his statements were made pursuant to his position as a public employee, rather than as a private citizen, his speech had no First Amendment protection.. 
 Background 
Richard Ceballos had been employed since 1989 as a deputy district attorney for the Los Angeles County District Attorney’s Office, which at the time was headed by Gil Garcetti. After the defense attorney in a pending criminal case contacted Ceballos about his motion to challenge a critical search warrant based on inaccuracies in the supporting affidavit, Ceballos conducted his own investigation and determined that the affidavit contained serious misrepresentations. Ceballos contacted the deputy sheriff who had sworn out the affidavit but was not satisfied by his explanations. Ceballos then communicated his findings to his supervisors and submitted a memorandum in which he recommended dismissal of the case. A meeting was subsequently held to discuss the affidavit with his superiors and officials from the sheriff's department, which Ceballos claimed became heated and accusatory of his role in handling the case. Despite Ceballos’ concerns, his supervisor decided to proceed with the prosecution. The criminal trial court held a hearing on the motion, during which Ceballos was called by the defense to recount his observations about the affidavit. The trial court nevertheless denied the motion and upheld the warrant.
Ceballos claimed that he was subsequently subjected to a series of retaliatory employment actions. These included reassignment to a different position, transfer to another courthouse, and denial of a promotion. He initiated an employment grievance, which was denied based on a finding that he had not suffered any retaliation.
District Court proceedings
Ceballos then brought a section 1983 claim in the United States District Court for the Central District of California, asserting that his supervisors violated the First AmendmentAs applied to the States by the Fourteenth Amendment; see Incorporation. by retaliating against him for his memo. His supervisors claimed that there was no retaliation, that the changes in his job were instead dictated by legitimate staffing concerns, and that regardless, Ceballos’ memo was not constitutionally protected speech under the First Amendment. The District Court granted their motion for summary judgment, concluding that because Ceballos wrote his memo pursuant to the duties of his employment, he was not entitled to First Amendment protection for the memo's contents. In the alternative, it ruled that even if he had a protected speech right in this context, the right was not clearly established and so qualified immunity applied to his supervisors' actions.
Court of Appeals decision
On appeal, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed, holding that his criticism of the warrant in the memo constituted protected speech under the First Amendment. The court applied the analysis set forth in Supreme Court precedent that looks to whether the expression at issue was made by the speaker "as a citizen upon matters of public concern."; see also .  Because his memo dealt with what he thought to be governmental misconduct, the court believed its subject was "inherently a matter of public concern."361 F. 3d at 1174. However, the court did not evaluate whether it was made in Ceballos' capacity as a citizen because of Ninth Circuit precedent ruling that the First Amendment applied to statements made pursuant to a duty of employment.
Having concluded that Ceballos’ memo satisfied the public-concern requirement, the Court of Appeals proceeded to balance Ceballos' interest in his speech against his supervisors' interest in responding to it. The court struck the balance in Ceballos' favor, noting that his supervisors had "failed even to suggest disruption or inefficiency in the workings of the District Attorney’s Office" as a result of the memo.361 F. 3d at 1180. The court further concluded that Ceballos' First Amendment rights were clearly established and that petitioner's actions were not objectively reasonable.361 F. 3d at 1181–1182.
Judge Diarmuid Fionntain O'Scannlain agreed that the panel's decision was compelled by Circuit precedent. He nevertheless concluded that the Circuit should be revisited and overruled: "when public employees speak in the course of carrying out their routine, required employment obligations, they have no personal interest in the content of that speech that gives rise to a First Amendment right."361 F. 3d at 1189.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit, ruling in a 5–4 decision delivered by Justice Anthony Kennedy that the First Amendment does not prevent employees from being disciplined for expressions they make pursuant to their professional duties.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 273 (2006). The case had been reargued following the retirement of Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, as the decision was tied without her; her successor, Justice Samuel Alito, then broke the tie.
The four dissenting justices, in three dissents written by Justices John Paul Stevens, David Souter, and Stephen Breyer, took issue with the majority's firm line against the First Amendment ever applying to speech made within the scope of public employment, arguing instead that the government's stronger interest in this context could be accommodated by the ordinary balancing test.
Kennedy's majority opinion
The Court wrote that its "precedents do not support the existence of a constitutional cause of action behind every statement a public employee makes in the course of doing his or her job." Instead, public employees are not speaking as citizens when they are speaking to fulfill a responsibility of their job.
Though the speech at issue concerned the subject matter of his employment, and was expressed within his office rather than publicly, the Court did not consider either fact dispositive, and noted that employees in either context may receive First Amendment protection. The "controlling factor" was instead that his statements were made pursuant to his duties as a deputy district attorney. Restricting such speech, which "owes its existence to a public employee's professional responsibilities," did not in the Court's view violate any rights that the employee had as a private citizen. Instead, the restrictions were simply the control an employer exercised "over what the employer itself has commissioned or created."
The Court found that Ceballos did not act as a citizen when he wrote the memo that addressed the proper disposition of a pending criminal case; he instead acted as a government employee. "The fact that his duties sometimes required him to speak or write does not mean his supervisors were prohibited from evaluating his performance." The Court believed this result was consistent with its precedents regarding the protected speech of public employees, because barring First Amendment claims based on "government employees' work product," as the Court characterized the speech at issue, would not prevent those employees from participating in public debate.
The Court criticized the Ninth Circuit's ruling, which had perceived a "doctrinal anomaly" between the toleration of employee speech made publicly but not made pursuant to assigned duties resulted from a misconception of "the theoretical underpinnings of our decisions." The Court instead found a reason for limiting First Amendment protection to public statements made outside the scope of official duties "because that is the kind of activity engaged in by citizens who do not work for the government."
The Court finally rejected the argument raised in Justice Souter's dissent that employers could restrict the rights of employees "by creating excessively broad job descriptions." Instead, the Court observed that formal job descriptions do not always correspond to actual expected duties, "and the listing of a given task in an employee’s written job description is neither necessary nor sufficient to demonstrate that conducting the task is within the scope of the employee’s professional duties for First Amendment purposes." The Court also reserved for a future decision the issue of whether its analysis would apply in the same manner to a case involving speech related to scholarship or teaching.
Stevens’ dissent
Justice Stevens filed a brief dissent. Though he agreed with the majority's determination that a supervisor may take corrective action against "inflammatory or misguided" speech, he questioned whether the same logic applies against "unwelcome speech" that "reveals facts that the supervisor would rather not have anyone else discover." Citing Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District (1979), Justice Stevens emphatically disagreed with the notion that there was a categorical difference between speech uttered by a citizen or by an employee in the course of his duties. In Givhan, ruling on the issue of an English teacher voicing concerns to the principal about the school's racist employment practices, the Court did not evaluate whether these concerns were raised in accordance with her job duties. Consequently, “our silence [in Givhan]...demonstrates that the point was immaterial.” Stevens added that it would be senseless for the constitutional protection of same words to be contingent on whether they are uttered as part of one's job duties; additionally, it would be “perverse” for the Court to essentially create an incentive for employees to bypass their employer-specified channels of resolution and voice their concerns directly to the public.
Souter’s dissent
Justice Souter's dissent was joined by Justice Stevens and Justice Ginsburg.
Like Justice Stevens, Souter agreed with the majority that a government employer has an active interest in effectuating its objectives, and can take corresponding action to ensure "competence, honesty, and judgment" from its employees. However, he argued that the interests in addressing official wrongdoing and threats to health and safety may trump the employer's interest, and that in such cases, public employees are eligible from the protections of the First Amendment.
Souter underlined that government employees may often be in best positions to know the problems that exist in their employer agencies.. Citing Givhan, Souter said that under the majority's view, the English schoolteacher is protected when complaining to the principal about discriminatory hiring policy, as such policy is not part of the job description of the teacher; however, if a school personnel office made that same complaint, he or she would not be entitled to that same protection. "This is an odd place to draw a distinction," Souter noted, particularly because the majority, in his view, did not justify its choice of distinction.
The Court's decision to qualify speech protection in Pickering v. Board of Ed. of Township High School Dist. (1968), aimed to create a balance that would resolve the tension between individual and public interest in the speech on one hand, and the public employer's interest in efficient operation, on the other. Souter wrote that the need to balance these competing needs hardly disappears when the employee happens to speak on issues that his job requires him to address. As noted in Waters, supra, such an employee is likely to be intimately aware of the precise nature of the problem exactly because it falls within his duties.
Though sharing the majority's concerns about the employer's interest in maintaining civility and competency in the workplace, Souter did not believe that such an interest required a categorical exclusion of First Amendment protections. Indeed, he added, the goal of most constitutional adjudication is to "resist the demand for winner-take-all" that has occurred under the majority opinion. He also voiced a concern that government employers would expand their employees' jobs descriptions to further exclude protection of speech that is currently protected by the First Amendment.
Souter elaborated on two reasons why an adjustment in line with the Pickering balancing test would be feasible in this instance. First, the extent of the public employer's authority over speech can be predetermined in advance to set up a barrier of sorts that the employee engaging in speech would have to overcome. In this way, the employee speaking on matters in the course of his employment would not be able to overcome the barrier unless he speaks "on a matter of unusual importance and satisfies high standards of responsibility in the way he does it." Additionally, should the incorporation of such a standard fail to discourage meritless action, the matter would get resolved at the summary-judgment level.
The second reason Souter cited for using Pickering in the case at hand was connected to legal outcomes in the Circuit levels. He noted that First Amendment protections even less limited than articulated above have been available in the Ninth Circuit for almost two decades, but the existence of these protections did not result in a "debilitating flood of litigation" there or in the other Circuits.
Souter also rebuked the majority for accepting the incorrect view that any statement made by a public employee constitutes, or should be treated as, the government's own speech, because such a view is valid only when a public employee is hired to promote a particular policy by communicating a particular message.; . He further disagreed with the majority's argument for limiting the Pickering doctrine, which held that the First Amendment protections were unnecessary in light of the existence of a comprehensive set of state and federal statutes that protected government whistle-blowers. Souter noted that speech that addressed official wrongdoing may well be unprotected under existing statutory protections (e.g., the teacher in Givhan would not qualify as a whistle-blower).
Finally, Souter also voiced a concern about the breadth of the majority holding, noting that it was spacious enough to imperil even the First Amendment protection of academic freedom in public colleges and public universities.
Breyer’s dissent
Justice Breyer dissented from the majority opinion; he also noted that he could not accept Justice Souter's answer as satisfactory.
Breyer agreed that the First Amendment protections cannot be universal for plurality speech, political speech, or government speech. In instances where the speech of government employees is concerned, the First Amendment protections exist only when such protection does not unduly interfere with governmental interests. In cases where the employee speaks as a citizen upon matters of public concern, the speech receives protection only if it passes the Pickering balancing test. However, prior cases did not decide what screening test a judge should utilize in circumstances where the government employee both speaks upon matters of public concern, and speaks in the course of his public employee duties.
Like Souter, Breyer believed that the majority's holding that the First Amendment protections do not extend to public employees speaking pursuant to their official duties was too absolute. In the instant case, the speech was professional speech, as it was uttered by a lawyer. As such, it is governed also by "canons of the profession"; these canons contain an obligation to speak in certain instances. In cases where this occurs, the government's interest in prohibiting that speech is diminished.
Additionally, Breyer wrote that the Constitution itself imposed speech obligations on professional employees. For example, a prosecutor has a constitutional obligation to preserve, and to communicate with the defense about exculpatory evidence in the possession of the government.. Therefore, where there are both professional and constitutional such obligations, "the need to protect the employee’s speech is augmented, the need for broad government authority is likely diminished, and administrable standards are quite likely available." Breyer added that in such cases, the Constitution requires special protection of employee speech, and the Pickering balancing test should apply.
Though Breyer noted that he agrees with much of Souter's analysis, he wrote that Souter's constitutional standard does not give sufficient weight to the serious "managerial and administrative concerns" described by the majority. Souter's proposed barrier would not screen out very many cases, because there are too many issues of public concern; further, the speech of a vast many public employees deals with wrongdoing, health, safety, and honesty, and such a rule would protect speech by an employee engaged in almost any public function. The problem with such wide coverage is that the standard enunciated by Souter would not avoid the judicial need "to undertake the balance in the first place."
 Subsequent developments 
In a telephone interview with the San Francisco Chronicle, Ceballos said, "it puts your average government employee in one heck of a predicament ... I think government employees will be more inclined to keep quiet."
The outcry among whistle-blower advocates and First Amendment advocates was particularly extensive. Whistleblower lawyer Stephen M. Kohn called the ruling "the single biggest setback for whistleblowers in the courts in the past 25 years." Under the ruling, Kohn says, public employees—all 22 million of them—have no First Amendment rights when they are acting in an official capacity, and in many cases are not protected against retaliation. Kohn estimates that "no less than 90 percent of all whistleblowers will lose their cases on the basis of this decision."
The law blog Balkinization published an extensive review of the decision by guest writer Marty Lederman and an analysis by blog owner Jack Balkin.
In 2014, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals circumscribed Garcetti, ruling in Demers v. Austin that the First Amendment protects faculty speech that criticizes university administrators on issues of public concern related to teaching or scholarship. The decision, penned by William A. Fletcher, essentially extends free-speech protection to the process known as shared governance.Demers v. Austin, 746 F.3d 402, 9th Cir., 2014.
References
Further reading
Riera-Seivane, Jaime A., La libertad de expresión de los empleados públicos (Garcetti v. Ceballos y su eventual effecto en Pickering v. Bd. of Educ.) ("Public employees' freedom of speech (Garcetti v. Ceballos and its effect on Pickering v. Bd of Educ.)"), Rev. Colegio de Abogados de Puerto Rico, vol. 66 Núm. 2, Pág. 93.
Riera-Seivane, Jaime A., El golpe à la libertad de expresión, Garcetti v. Ceballos ("The hit to Freedom of Speech, Garcetti v. Ceballos"), Ley y Foro, 16 Año 6, Núm. 3, Pág. 16.
External links
Category:2006 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:Legal history of California
"""

From "Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority" ==> """
Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority, 469 U.S. 528 (1985), is a landmark United States Supreme Court decision in which the Court held that the Congress has the power under the Commerce Clause of the Constitution to extend the Fair Labor Standards Act, which requires that employers provide minimum wage and overtime pay to their employees, to state and local governments..  In this case, the Court overruled its previous decision in National League of Cities v. Usery,. in which the Court had held that regulation of the activities of state and local governments "in areas of traditional governmental functions" would violate the Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
History
When Congress passed the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) in 1938, it did not apply either to employees of private transit companies or to employees of state and local governments. Congress extended coverage of the FLSA's minimum wage provisions to employees of private transit companies of a certain size in 1961, then amended the Act to cover some employees of state and local governments in 1966 by withdrawing the minimum wage and overtime exemptions for public hospitals, schools, and mass transit carriers whose rates and services were subject to state regulation. At the same time, Congress eliminated the overtime exemption for all mass transit employees other than drivers, operators, and conductors. Congress later phased out these overtime exemptions when amending the Act in 1974.
The Supreme Court held in Maryland v. Wirtz. that Congress had the authority under the Commerce Clause to extend the FLSA to cover employees of public schools and hospitals. In 1976, however, the Court held in National League of Cities that Congress lacked authority to regulate the wages and hours of governmental employees performing "traditional governmental functions." The San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority (SAMTA, now known as VIA Metropolitan Transit), which had been observing the overtime requirements of federal law up to that point, responded by informing employees that it was no longer obliged to provide them with overtime pay.
In 1979, the Wage and Hour Division of the United States Department of Labor took the position that SAMTA's operations were covered by the FLSA because they were not a traditional governmental function. SAMTA then filed suit in the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas seeking a declaratory judgment that its transit operations were beyond Congress' power to regulate. The Department of Labor filed a counterclaim seeking enforcement of the Act.
Joe G. Garcia and other employees of SAMTA brought their own suit in the same court seeking to recover the overtime pay they claimed they were owed. The court stayed that action but allowed Garcia to intervene as a defendant in the SAMTA declaratory judgment action against the Department of Labor.
Prior rulings
The United States District Court for the Western District of Texas granted SAMTA the declaratory judgment it sought, ruling that its transit operations were a traditional governmental function and therefore exempt from regulation under National League of Cities v. Usery. Both Garcia and the Department appealed directly to the Supreme Court, which vacated and remanded the decision for reconsideration in light of its intervening decision in Transportation Union v. Long Island R. Co.,. that some transit operations were not a traditional function of government.
On remand, the district court again held for SAMTA, ruling that the historical record showed that, even though local mass transit operations had been largely privately owned in the past, they had also been heavily regulated by state and local governments, creating at least an "inference of sovereignty". Noting that the federal government had historically exempted the operations of state and local governments from federal regulation in many instances, it ruled that refusing to apply the FLSA would not run counter to a century of regulation, as was the case in the railroad industry, and that exemption of state and local governments' operations was, in fact, a supervening federal policy. Called on to draw a distinction between those governmental functions that were traditional and those that were not, the Court analogized the task to Justice Potter Stewart's famous definition of pornography in Jacobellis v. Ohio,. holding that it was impossible to articulate the distinction but "someone knows it when they see it". Both Garcia and the Department of Labor appealed again.
Supreme Court
Argument and reargument
The case was argued on March 19, 1984, with William Thaddeus Coleman, Jr. appearing to argue for the Transit Authority and Assistant Attorney General Theodore Olson arguing for the workers.Chicago-Kent College of Law at Illinois Tech. "Garcia v. San Antonio Metro. Transit Authority." Oyez.  At the March 21 conference five Justices, including Justice Harry Blackmun, voted to affirm, upholding National League of Cities.
Justice Blackmun had joined the Court in National League of Cities but wrote in concurrence that he was “not untroubled” by Justice William Rehnquist's majority opinion.Nat’l League of Cities, 426 U.S. at 856 (Blackmun, J., concurring).  Chief Justice Warren E. Burger preferred to assign opinions to the "least persuaded" justice, so now he asked Blackmun to write for the Court.  Justice Blackmun's law clerk, however, convinced Blackmun that he could not write a workable opinion upholding National League of Cities.  On June 11 Justice Blackmun circulated a memo announcing that he was switching his vote.
The case was scheduled for reargument and the Court asked for briefs on the additional question as to if National League of Cities “should be reconsidered”.. At reargument on October 1 former Secretary Coleman reappeared for the Transit Authority but this time the Solicitor General of the United States Rex E. Lee appeared, arguing to reverse.  Half of the States filed amici briefs urging affirmance, including then-Attorneys General Joe Lieberman and John Ashcroft.
In its decision, issued February 19, 1985, the Court ruled by a vote of five to four that the concept of "traditional governmental functions" was analytically unsound and that Congress had the power under the Commerce Clause to apply the FLSA to employees of state and local governments.
Opinion of the Court
Writing for the majority, Justice Blackmun noted that the courts had not come up with an analytically sound distinction between traditional and non-traditional governmental operations. He noted that the Court had adopted a similar distinction decades earlier in challenges to the federal government's taxation of the operations of state governments, only to reject it as well. The Court denounced any efforts to draw this distinction, whether based on the historical record or on historical grounds, as arbitrary and likely to be suffused with the prejudices of an unelected branch of government as to which governmental functions are proper and traditional and which ones are not.
The Court also rejected the theoretical underpinnings of the National League of Cities v. Usery decision—that the Constitution's recognition of the sovereignty of the states necessarily implies limits on the power of the federal government to regulate their employment relations. In the majority's view, the constitutional grant of authority to Congress to regulate interstate commerce was not qualified by any implied limitation on the right to regulate the activities of the states when they engaged in interstate commerce; on the contrary, the Commerce Clause invalidates state regulations that interfere with commerce, while the Supremacy Clause allows Congress to preempt state laws that conflict with federal law in this area. According to the majority, the framers believed that state sovereignty could be maintained by the peculiar structure they adopted: a Senate in which each state was given equal representation, regardless of its population, an electoral college that gave the states the power to choose electors, and the indirect election of Senators by the legislature of each state prior to the adoption of the Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Noting that the same Congress that extended the FLSA to cover government-run mass transit systems also provided substantial funding for those systems, the Court concluded that the structure created by the framers had indeed protected the states from overreaching by the federal government.
Powell's dissent
Justice Powell, joined by Chief Justice Burger, Justice Rehnquist and Justice O'Connor objected to both the Court's failure to grant stare decisis effect to its earlier decision in National League of Cities and for reducing the balancing test that the Court adopted in National League of Cities into a cruder categorical distinction between traditional and non-traditional governmental functions. Powell's opinion was even more critical of the majority's failure to recognize any limiting role of the Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, accusing it of negating the Court's role in mediating between the two through judicial review of the constitutionality of Congress' intrusions into areas previously left to the states.  Powell wrote "The State's role in our system of government is a matter of Constitutional law, not legislative grace."
Rehnquist's dissent
Justice Rehnquist expressed reservations as to Justice Powell's description of the standard actually adopted by the Court in National League of Cities and of the alternative standard proposed by Justice O'Connor, but reiterated his support of both dissenting opinions based on their opposition to the Court's resolution of those constitutional issues in this case.
O'Connor's dissent
Acknowledging that the changes in the national economy in the past two hundred years had transformed Congress' Commerce Clause power from being a marginal power that served mostly to mediate between the states by eliminating interstate tariffs and other burdens on interstate commerce into a general power that gave Congress essentially unlimited power to regulate in every area of economic life, O'Connor argued for special limitations on this power to protect the states' authority over their own employment relations. She invoked the limiting language of the most expansive interpretations of the Commerce Clause in the Court's decisions of the 1930s and 1940s to argue that the Court retained the power to decide whether a particular exercise of the Commerce Clause authority was necessary and proper to the federal purposes to be achieved. Applying that standard, she, joined by Justices Powell and Rehnquist, would find the FLSA unconstitutional as applied to employees of state and local governments.
The impact of the case
When the Court confirmed Congress' power to regulate the wage and hour standards applicable to employees of state and local governments, a different, more conservative Congress than the ones that had extended the FLSA to governmental employees in the first place now confronted the complaints from local governments that the Act was too inflexible and expensive to comply with. Congress responded by amending the Act in 1985, allowing governments to offer compensatory time off rather than overtime in some circumstances, creating an exemption for volunteers and excluding certain legislative employees from coverage under the Act. The Act also erased liabilities owed to employees who would not have been covered by the Act as interpreted by the Department of Labor's regulations prior to the Court's decision.
Garcia represents in many ways the high-water mark for the Court's expansive reading of the Commerce Clause to favor centralized national government as opposed to the more decentralized version of federalism, in which the Tenth Amendment limits the authority of the federal government vis à vis the states, as envisioned by Justices Rehnquist and O'Connor. While Chief Justice Rehnquist's later opinion in United States v. Lopez. did not purport to overturn Garcia, it reasserted the Court's power to set limits on Congress' authority to invoke the Commerce Clause to regulate in areas that have only an insignificant connection with interstate commerce.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 469
References
External links
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States public employment case law
Category:United States Tenth Amendment case law
Category:Minimum wage law
Category:1985 in United States case law
Category:Transportation in San Antonio
Category:Railway litigation in 1985
"""

From "Garland v. Gonzalez" ==> """
Garland v. Gonzalez, 596 U.S. ___ (2022), was a United States Supreme Court case related to immigration detention.
 Background 
Aliens who have been ordered to be deported by immigration courts can be detained by the federal government, pending their removal from the country. The statute that authorizes such detention does not contain a set time limit for the detention, but in Zadvydas v. Davis (2001), the Supreme Court read in a six-month limitation to avoid what it perceived were constitutional issues. Two separate classes of aliens filed lawsuits in the United States District Courts for the Northern District of California and Western District of Washington. The courts granted class action status, and enjoined enforcement of the law by the United States Department of Homeland Security, ruling the aliens must be provided with bond hearings where the government had the burden of proving that they are flight risks or dangers to the community. The federal government appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which affirmed, over the dissent of Judge Ferdinand Fernandez. The government subsequently filed a petition for a writ of certiorari.
 Supreme Court 
Certiorari was granted in the case and the companion case Johnson v. Arteaga-Martinez on August 23, 2021. The court also asked for briefing in Gonzalez on the question of whether a separate provision of the statute stripped the lower courts over the jurisdiction necessary to issue a class-wide injunction. Oral arguments were held on January 11, 2022. On June 13, 2022, the Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit in a 6–3 vote, with Justice Samuel Alito writing the majority opinion, and Justice Sonia Sotomayor concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part.
 Opinion of the Court 
The court's majority opinion authored by Justice Alito concluded that section 1252(f)(1) of the INA deprived the district courts of jurisdiction to issue the class-wide injunction.Garland v. Aleman Gonzalez, 596 U. S. ___ (2022) Opinion of the Court p.3. The court's ruling was based on the premises that 1) "enjoin" in 1252(f)(1) ["to enjoin or restrain the operation of the provisions"] is best read in its broader meaning which includes "require", and 2) "operation" means "implementation as is" and not "implementation in accordance with the law". The court backed the latter determination by citing many other instances in case law in which "unlawful" or "improper" "operation[s]" are discussed.Garland v. Aleman Gonzalez, 596 U. S. ___ (2022) Opinion of the Court pp. 4-5; 7-8. Furthermore, the court argued, if respondents' interpretation were to be adopted, 1252(f)(1) would cover only constitutional claims with almost no exception:
In addition the court  emphasized the singular-person character of the language - "an individual alien", and cited a previous case which held that provision to bar class-wide injunction by lower courts.Garland v. Aleman Gonzalez, 596 U. S. ___ (2022) Opinion of the Court  pp.5-6, the case cited is Reno v. American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Comm. 525 U. S. 471 (1999).
 Sotomayor's Opinion 
Justice Sotomayor wrote an opinion concurring in judgement in part "because the government prevails on the merits",Garland v. Aleman Gonzalez, 596 U. S. ___ (2022) Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J. n.1. while dissenting on the jurisdiction issue. Justice Kagan joined fully, and Justice Breyer partially. Justice Sotomayor described the court as "elevate[ing] piecemeal dictionary definitions and policy concerns over plain meaning and context".Garland v. Aleman Gonzalez, 596 U. S. ___ (2022) Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J. p.1. She then turned to context for illuminating the primary clause, arguing that the statute's regular use of "implementation" in place of the court's "operation", and its use of "enjoin" in a more narrow sense in other provisions, suggests an interpretation that doesn't strip the lower courts of their injunctive power in cases like these.Garland v. Aleman Gonzalez, 596 U. S. ___ (2022) Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J. pp. 4-7 Along with this, the dissent disregarded the courts list of improper "operation[s]", reasoning that "Unlike all of those examples, a statute is the law. Officials may implement a statute unlawfully, but a statute does not operate in conflict with itself." Garland v. Aleman Gonzalez, 596 U. S. ___ (2022) Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J. p.11
In response to the court's emphasis on the word "individual", the dissent cited Califano v. Goldfarb as a case that held the mere use of "individual" not to preclude classwide relief.Garland v. Aleman Gonzalez, 596 U. S. ___ (2022) Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J. p.8
 References 
 External links 
Category:2022 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
"""

From "Garner v. Board of Public Works" ==> """
Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716 (1951), is a ruling by the United States Supreme Court which held that a municipal loyalty oath which required an oath and affidavit about one's beliefs and actions for the previous five years and which was enacted more than five years previous is not an ex post facto law nor a bill of attainder.
Background
In 1941, the California State Legislature amended the charter of the city of Los Angeles so that no person could obtain or retain public employment with the city if they advocated the violent overthrow of either the state or federal government, belonged to any organization that did so advocate, or had advocated or been a member of an organization which advocated such action in the last five years. In 1948, the city of Los Angeles passed local ordinance No, 94,004, which required all employees to take the loyalty oath.
Fifteen employees with the Los Angeles Board of Public Works refused to execute the required affidavit. At an administrative hearing on January 6, 1949, all 15 individuals were fired.  They sued for back pay and reinstatement in their jobs, claiming that the oath and the affidavit they were required to execute constituted a bill of attainder and an ex post facto law. The District Court of Appeals denied relief.
The petitioners then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which granted certiorari.
Decision
Majority opinion
Associate Justice Tom C. Clark wrote the opinion for the majority.
Clark discussed the oath and the affidavit separately. In three sentences, Clark held that since past actions and beliefs may impugn present fitness for duty, the affidavit was justified.Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 720. The question for the oath (which reached back five years into the past) was its constitutionality, and here Clark relied heavily on United Public Workers v. Mitchell, 330 U.S. 75 (1947), to answer that the oath was valid.Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 720-721. Since the charter change had occurred seven years before, and the oath reached back only five years, the oath was also not a bill of attainder or ex post facto law.Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 721. Clark distinguished United States v. Lovett, 328 U.S. 303 (1946), which was not a general law establishing qualifications for office but which specifically named certain individuals and required their separation from government service.Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 723.
Petitioners had argued that the charter amendment required scienter (knowledge that the organizations they belonged to did, in fact, advocate the violent overthrow of the government or a communist political philosophy). Clark assumed that the city would not implement the law in such a way as to punish those individuals who lacked scienter, and assumed that scienter was implicit in the ordinance.
The decision of the District Court of Appeals was affirmed.
Frankfurter's dissent
Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter concurred in part and dissented in part.
Frankfurter noted in his dissent that the majority had repeatedly referred to public employment as a privilege, which to his mind invoked the "doctrine of privilege."In the 19th century, American courts had established the "doctrine of privilege." This legal doctrine concluded that public employment was a privilege, not a right, and subsequently significant restrictions could be placed on public employees that could not be constitutionally tolerated in the private sector. See: Rosenbloom and O'Leary, Public Administration and Law, 1996, p. 190-191. Invoking this doctrine, he concluded "does not meet the problem."Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 725.
But Frankfurter was unable to agree that the Los Angeles ordinance implied scienter. He wrote:  "To find scienter implied in a criminal statute is the obvious way of reading such a statute, for guilty knowledge is the normal ingredient of criminal responsibility. The ordinance before us exacts an oath as a condition of employment; it does not define a crime. It is certainly not open to this Court to rewrite the oath required by Los Angeles of its employees..."Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 727. The lack of an explicit requirement for scienter in the law, he concluded, asked the employees "to swear to something they cannot be expected to know. Such a demand ... can no more be justified than the inquiry into belief which [was] invalid in American Communications Association v. Douds, 339 U.S. 382 (1950)."Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 728.
Frankfurter would have remanded the case back to the state court with instructions that the petitioners be allowed to take the oath under the scienter requirement imposed by the Court.
Burton's dissent
Associate Justice Harold Hitz Burton dissented in part. Under the Court's decisions in United States v. Lovett, Ex parte Garland, 71 U.S. 333 (1867), and Cummings v. Missouri, 71 U.S. 277 (1867), Burton concluded, the oath as currently framed was an ex post facto law and a bill of attainder.Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 729. However, Burton would have affirmed the lower court concerning the judgment regarding the two employees who had refused to sign the affidavit. The affidavit merely represented an assertion of true facts, Burton said, and as such could be required of the employees.Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 729-730.
Douglas' dissent
Associate Justice William O. Douglas dissented, joined by Associate Justice Hugo Black.
Douglas concluded that the entire case was governed by the decisions in Ex parte Garland and Cummings v. Missouri.Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 732. A bill of attainder as defined in these cases inflicts punishment without a judicial trial, and may be inflicted against an individual or a class (contrary to the majority's conclusion that it applies only to an individual).Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 733. That Garland and Cummings involved professionals rather than laborers and that Garland and Cummings involved vague accusations of misconduct rather than the single specific accusation in Garner was irrelevant, Douglas said.Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 735. Since the Los Angeles ordinance permitted no hearing, it was a bill of attainder and not constitutionally valid.Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 735-736.
Douglas did not reach the issue of whether the ordinance was an ex post facto law.Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 736.
Black's dissent
Justice Black further dissented from the majority by making two additional points.  First, he argued that the majority mischaracterized the decision in Gerende v. Board of Supervisors. The Maryland law in Gerende was limited to actual acts of violence or overthrow, while the Los Angeles ordinance was not.Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 730. Second, Black believed that the majority's decision in Garner significantly weakened the Court's holdings in Ex parte Garland, Cummings v. Missouri, and United States v. Lovett.Garner v. Board of Public Works, 341 U.S. 716, 730-731.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 341
Footnotes
Bibliography
Rosenbloom, David and O'Leary, Rosemary. Public Administration and Law. 2d ed. Washington, D.C.: CRC Press, 1996.
External links
Category:1951 in United States case law
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States elections case law
Category:History of Los Angeles
Category:United States ex post facto case law
Category:Oaths of allegiance
"""

From "Garner v. Louisiana" ==> """
Garner v. Louisiana, 368 U.S. 157 (1961), was a landmark case argued by Thurgood Marshall before the US Supreme Court. On December 11, 1961, the court unanimously ruled that Louisiana could not convict peaceful sit-in protesters who refused to leave dining establishments under the state's "disturbing the peace" laws..
Background
African-American students from Southern University sat at a whites-only segregated lunch bar at Sitman's Drugstore in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. The management summoned the police after the students quietly remained despite being asked to relocate to another counter.
After ordering the black patrons to leave, the police arrested them, charged them with disturbing the peace, and claimed that their behavior could "foreseeably disturb or alarm the public," according to the state's "disturbing the peace" statute. 
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People defended the student demonstrators, and the Kennedy administration's Justice Department filed a legal brief on their behalf.Geer, J. G., W. J. Schiller, et al. (2011). Gateways to Democracy: An Introduction to American Government, Wadsworth Pub Co.
Decision
In a 9–0 decision, the Supreme Court ruled in the African-American students' favor, agreeing that the state had violated due process of law under the Fourteenth amendment, and found no evidence that the students' behavior could have foreseeably disturbed the peace.
In his written opinion, Justice John Marshall Harlan likened sit-in demonstrations to verbal expression as a form of free speech.
Justice William O. Douglas's concurring opinion stated, “For the police are supposed to be on the side of the Constitution, not on the side of discrimination. Yet if all constitutional questions are to be put aside and the problem treated merely in terms of disturbing the peace, I would have difficulty in reversing these judgments. I think, however, the constitutional questions must be reached and that they make reversal necessary.”Garner v. Louisiana. 368 U.S. 157. Supreme Court of the United States. 1961.
Garner v. Louisiana was an important case for the Civil Rights Movement, and one of many civil rights cases argued before the Warren Court (1953–69). 
Eventually, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 "outlawed discrimination based on race, color, religion or national origin in hotels, motels, restaurants, theaters, and all other public accommodations engaged in interstate commerce."
References
External links
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:1961 in United States case law
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Garner v. Teamsters Local 776" ==> """
Garner v. Teamsters Local 776, 346 U.S. 485 (1953), is a US labor law case, concerning the scope of federal preemption against state law for labor rights.
Facts
Garner claimed that a dispute over picketing was not governed by federal law in the National Labor Relations Act of 1935, but by state law. Garner ran a trucking business with 24 employees, four members of the Teamsters Union. The union placed rotating pickets, of people who did not work for the business, at the platform for loading onto trucks, holding signs saying "Local 776 Teamsters Union (A.F. of L.) wants Employees of Central Storage & Transfer Co. to join them to gain union wages, hours and working conditions." Drivers and other carriers refused to cross the picket, and the business fell by 95%. A Pennsylvania court found this violated the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Act and the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania decided that the issue fell within the NLRB's jurisdiction to prevent unfair labor practices.
Judgment
Jackson J decided the Pennsylvania statute was preempted from providing superior remedies or processing claims quicker than the NLRB because "the Board was vested with power to entertain petitioners’ grievance, to issue its own complaint" and apparent "Congress evidently considered that centralized administration of specially designed procedures was necessary to obtain uniform application of its substantive rules".
See also
United States labor law
References
External links
Category:United States labor case law
Category:1953 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Garrity v. New Jersey" ==> """
Garrity v. New Jersey, 385 U.S. 493 (1967), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that law enforcement officers and other public employees have the right to be free from compulsory self-incrimination.. It gave birth to the Garrity warning, which is administered by investigators to suspects in internal and administrative investigations in a similar manner as the Miranda warning is administered to suspects in criminal investigations.
Background
In 1961 allegations of "ticket fixing" came to light in the townships of Bellemawr and Barrington, New Jersey. Six officers, including Edward Garrity, were suspected and subsequently interviewed in connection. Although they were told that their statements could be used to bring about criminal charges and that they were not required to answer any questions, the officers were threatened with removal from office if they did not cooperate. The officers answered the incriminating questions, which eventually led to criminal charges. The officers appealed their convictions, but they were upheld by the state supreme court.
The U.S. Supreme Court then ruled in 1967's Garrity v. New Jersey that the employees’ statements, made under threat of termination, were compelled by the state in violation of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments.  The decision asserted that “the option to lose their means of livelihood or pay the penalty of self-incrimination is the antithesis of free choice to speak or to remain silent.”
Therefore, because the employees’ statements were compelled, it was unconstitutional to use the statements in a prosecution. The convictions were overturned.
Majority opinion
The majority opinion, written by Douglas, found that the officers were compelled to testify against themselves under threat of removal from office. This constitutes coercion and violates the Fourteenth Amendment Right due process clause as well as Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination. Their convictions were subsequently overturned.
'The privilege against self-incrimination would be reduced to a hollow mockery if its exercise could be taken as equivalent either to a confession of guilt or a conclusive presumption of perjury. * * * The privilege serves to protect the innocent who otherwise might be ensnared by ambiguous circumstances.' Id., at 557-558, 76 S.Ct. at 641.
We conclude that policemen, like teachers and lawyers, are not relegated to a watered-down version of constitutional rights.
Harlan's dissent
Associate Justice Harlan, joined by Justices Clark and Stewart, argued that none of the officers' statements were coerced. They were also not under arrest therefore they weren't guaranteed Miranda Rights.It would be difficult to imagine interrogations to which these criteria of duress were more completely inapplicable, or in which the requirements which have subsequently been imposed by this Court on police questioning were more thoroughly satisfied. Each of the petitioners received a complete and explicit reminder of his constitutional privilege. Three of the petitioners had counsel present; at least a fourth had consulted counsel but freely determined that his presence was unnecessary. These petitioners were not in any fashion 'swept from familiar surroundings into police custody, surrounded by antagonistic forces, and subjected to the techniques of persuasion * * *.' Miranda v. State of Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 461, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 1621. I think it manifest that, under the standards developed by this Court to assess voluntariness, there is no basis for saying that any of these statements were made involuntarily.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 385
Due Process Clause
References
External links
Garrity v. New Jersey :: 385 U.S. 493 (1967)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:1967 in United States case law
"""

From "Garza v. Idaho" ==> """
Garza v. Idaho, 586 U.S. ___, 139 S. Ct. 738 (2019), was a case in which the United States Supreme Court held that the presumption of prejudice for Sixth Amendment purposes applies regardless of whether a defendant has waived the right to appeal.
 Background 
In 2015, petitioner Gilberto Garza, Jr. signed two plea agreements which required him to waive his right to appeal. After sentencing, Garza informed his trial counsel of his wish to appeal. Due to the appeal waivers signed by Garza, counsel declined to file a notice of appeal. After the time period to file an appeal lapsed, Garza filed a petition for state post-conviction relief on the basis of ineffective assistance of counsel. The trial court denied relief and the Idaho Court of Appeals affirmed. The Idaho Supreme Court affirmed, concluding that the presumption of prejudice as recognized in Roe v. Flores-Ortega does not apply when the defendant has agreed to waive the right to appeal.
 Opinion 
Amir Ali presented oral argument for Garza before the Supreme Court, with Ken Jorgensen and Alon Kedem representing the State of Idaho and United States, respectively. The Court announced its judgment in favor of the petitioner on February 27, 2019, with the court reversing and remanding by a vote of 6–3..
 Opinion of the Court 
The majority opinion, written by Sotomayor and joined by Roberts, Ginsburg, Breyer, Kagan, and Kavanaugh, held that Garza's trial counsel rendered ineffective assistance. In Strickland v. Washington, the Supreme Court held that a defendant claiming ineffective assistance of counsel must prove counsel's representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness and such deficiency was prejudicial to the defense.
 Dissent 
Justice Thomas, joined by Gorsuch and joined in part by Alito, filed a dissenting opinion which held that the defense acted reasonably by refusing to file an appeal. The dissent argued that the majority's opinion creates a "defendant-always-wins" rule that has no basis in previous case law or the Sixth Amendment. Part III of Thomas' dissent, joined by Gorsuch but not Alito, suggests the landmark Gideon v. Wainwright (1963, guaranteeing poor defendants a right to a lawyer in state criminal cases) was wrongly decided and should be overruled.
 See also 
2018 term opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States
 References 
 External links 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Sixth Amendment ineffective assistance of counsel case law
Category:2019 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States plea bargaining case law
"""

From "Gasperini v. Center for Humanities, Inc." ==> """
Gasperini v. Center for Humanities, 518 U.S. 415 (1996), was a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in which the Court further refined the Erie doctrine regarding when and how federal courts are to apply state law in cases brought under diversity jurisdiction. The Court held that the New York state rule applied.
Background of the case
The plaintiff, William Gasperini, was an American journalist and photographer for CBS News and the Christian Science Monitor who, during the course of seven years in Central America, took over 5,000 slide transparencies depicting war, political leaders and everyday life. In 1990, Gasperini supplied 300 of his original transparencies to The Center for Humanities for use in an educational video.  The center agreed to return the transparencies, but they were lost. Gasperini commenced suit in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, invoking diversity jurisdiction. The trial jury applied New York law and found for Gasperini, awarding him $450,000 in compensatory damages. The defendant moved for a new trial, asserting, among other things, excessiveness of the award. The district court dismissed the motion and the defendant appealed. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit vacated the judgment and remanded for a new trial, unless the plaintiff accepted a remittitur for $100,000. Gasperini petitioned and the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Issue
The case involved an important issue of what standard of review should be used by a federal court in measuring the excessiveness of a jury verdict. The standard typically applied by federal courts was that a verdict was excessive if it "shocked the conscience of the court." New York had recently enacted legislation changing the standard as a part of a tort reform initiative, codifying in CPLR §5501(c) the standard that an award was excessive if it "deviates materially from what would be reasonable compensation." The question arose as to whether the standard was substantive or procedural, as the Erie Doctrine stipulated that the federal court should apply the substantive law of the state and federal procedural law.
The court's decision
Justice Ginsburg delivered the majority opinion of the Court, which held that the federal district court should apply the New York standard for excessiveness, reasoning that the case did not include a distinct choice between federal and state interests, but rather presented an opportunity to serve both interests. The federal interest lay primarily in discharging the Seventh Amendment, which precludes review of facts tried by a jury. The Second Circuit had reviewed the verdict against the New York excessiveness standard and thus ran afoul of the Seventh Amendment. Accordingly, the Court vacated the judgment of the Second Circuit and ordered the case remanded to the district court for a new trial so that the trial judge could test the jury's verdict against the state standard.
See also
 Erie Doctrine
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 518
External links
 Summary of Gasperini v. Center for Humanities
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Diversity jurisdiction case law
Category:1996 in United States case law
Category:Conflict of laws case law
Category:United States Erie Doctrine
"""

From "Gebser v. Lago Vista Independent School District" ==> """
Gebser v. Lago Vista 524 U.S. 274 (1998) is a United States Supreme Court ruling regarding sexual harassment in schools. The case was heard before the Rehnquist Court on March 25, 1998, and decided on June 22, 1998. In a 5-4 ruling, the Court held that a school district may be liable for a teacher’s sexual harassment of a student, but in order for an aggrieved party to recover damages under Title IX, a school official who had authority to address the alleged discrimination must have actual knowledge of the discrimination and must be deliberately indifferent. 
 Case summary 
Alida Star Gebser, a high school student in the Lago Vista Independent School District of Texas, sued the school district and one if its teachers for violating the Title IX and state negligence law. During the eighth grade, Alida Star Gebser, the plaintiff, was placed in a high school book discussion group led by Frank Waldrop, a Lago Vista high school teacher. During discussions, Waldrop made sexually suggestive remarks to students. When Gebser entered the Lago Vista High School, Waldrop continued to make sexual remarks. In the spring of 1992, Waldrop and Gebser’s relationship became sexual. During the summer, the plaintiff was placed in Waldrop’s Advancement Placement class. Gebser did not report the incident, and their sexual relationship continued with secret off-campus sexual encounters. During Gebser’s freshman year, under the pretext of giving her a book relating to a school project, Waldrop made multiple sexual advances towards the plaintiff. Gebser later testified—“I was terrified. I had no idea what I was supposed to do. I had trusted him. I had believed him. I—you know, he was basically my mentor. And it was terrifying. He was the main teacher at the school with whom I had discussions, and I didn’t know what to do."While Lago Vista’s superintendent was the district’s Title IX coordinator, the Lago Vista School District had no official procedure for filing sexual harassment complaints and had not issued a formal anti-harassment policy.
Before the discovery of the relationship between Waldrop and Gebser, Lago Vista’s principal received complaints of Waldrop’s remarks from two other students and their parents. Waldrop apologized for the comments and was warned about his conduct, and the principal did not investigate the matter further. Waldrop met with the principal, apologized for the comments, and the principal did not investigate the matter further. The high school guidance counselor was informed of the meeting by the principal, yet the superintendent, the Title IX coordinator, was not told.  In January of 1993, a police officer discovered Gebser and Waldrop having sexual intercourse. Waldrop was fired, and his teaching license was revoked. The plaintiff and her mother originally suit only against Waldrop for violation of state tort law, but later amended the suit to join Lago Vista Independent School District for violations of the Civil Rights Act of 1866 and Title IX of the Educational Amendments of 1972. 
 In the State and District Courts 
Gebser and her mother sued against Lago Vista and Waldrop in state court, citing violations of Title IX, Rev. Stat. 42 U.S. Code § 1983, and state negligence law, seeking compensatory and punitive damages from both the school district and Waldrop. The case was removed to federal court where the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas granted summary judgment for Lago Vista and remanded the case against Waldrop to state court. Rejecting the Title IX claim, the district court ruled that Title IX was “enacted to counter policies of discrimination” and that “only if school administrators have some type of notice of the gender discrimination and fail to respond in good faith can the discrimination be interpreted as a policy of the school district.” Relating to the case, the parents’ complaints to the principal regarding Waldrop’s comments, were insufficient. 
On appeal, the Fifth Circuit ruled that the school district was not vicariously liable because “strict liability” is not part of the Title IX contract. Finding not enough evidence to prove a school official should have known about Waldrop and Gebser’s relations, the Fifth Circuit ruled that Lago Vista would not be liable under a constructive notice theory of liability.  The court rejected an agency theory, where an employer is vicariously liable for the tort of an employee accompanied by the “existence of the agency relationship.” The Fifth circuit ruled that a school district is not liable unless an official with supervisory power actually knew of the abuse and failed to end it. 
 Background 
Title IX provides that no “person…shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance. 
One of the cases that established early procedural requirements for Title IX sexual harassment was Cannon v. University of Chicago (1979). In Cannon, the Supreme Court held that, although the text of Title IX does not contain a specific private cause of action for damages, nevertheless, it provides an implied private cause of action. This is due to the similarity of Title IX to Title VI, which has an implied right of action. Another early case that established Title IX procedure was Franklin v. Gwinnett County Public Schools (1992). In Franklin, the Supreme Court went beyond Cannon to explicitly hold that Title IX provides a damages remedy. 
District courts have been divided about whether to compare the standard of liability of Title IX to Title VI or to Title VII. The text and subject matter of Title IX is closer to Title VII, which deals with gender discrimination and sexual harassment. Following Title VII, courts tend to adopt strict liability, agency principles, or a constructive notice theory.  The division between the district courts arose because the only guidance the Supreme Court provided was that Title IX should be given “a sweep as broad as its language.” As a result of the unclarity, four different standards of school district liability arose in the circuit courts: actual knowledge, constructive knowledge, agency principles, and strict liability. 
Actual knowledge is synonymous with intentional discrimination, a knowing failure to act on allegations of discrimination. The person with actual knowledge must be in a position of authority and must fail to respond adequately to the situation. Constructive knowledge would require that a school district “knew or should have known” of the harassment and failed to address it. This doctrine was developed in the Supreme Court case Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson (1986), where the court ruled sexual harassment is a violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Agency theory, in the context of Title IX, would bean a school district would be held liable for the actions of a teacher, even if those actions were outside the scope of the job, if the school discriminated intentionally, negligently, or recklessly or if the teacher was aided in performing a tort by virtue of his or her agency relationship with the school. Regarding types of harassment, in a quid pro quo situation, a school would always be held liable because the harasser uses authority that has been granted by the school. For hostile environment claims, a school would be held liable if the employee acted with authority or was aided in the harassing by their position of authority. 
 Supreme Court Ruling 
The Supreme Court granted certiorari to resolve the split among the circuits regarding the two questions: whether a school district could be held liable under Title IX with actual or constructive notice, and second, whether a court may use agency principles to establish Title IX liability as in Title VII cases. In a 5-4 ruling written by Justice O’Connor, the court held that a Title IX plaintiff could not recover damages unless a school district official, with authority to institute corrective measures on behalf of the school district, had actual notice of, and was deliberately indifferent to the teacher’s misconduct. As the ruling in Franklin was broad regarding liability, the Lago Vista ruling had a “measure of latitude to shape a sensible remedial scheme that best comports with the statute.” The majority also concluded that Title IX was modeled after Title VI, which the court has ruled is under to the Spending Clause legislation. Due to this, the ruling explained that it must “examine closely the propriety of private actions holding the recipient liable in monetary damages for noncompliance with the condition."  Effectively, the ruling that Title IX was enacted under the Spending Clause, would require that the recipients of those funds have clear notice of potential liability that it may incur when it chooses to accept the federal funds. 
Applying this new standard of actual notice plus deliberate indifference to the Gebser case, the Court ruled that the complaint to the school principal was insufficient to alert the school district that Waldrop was involved in a sexual relationship with one of the students, and that Lago Vista’s failure to establish a sexual harassment grievance procedure did not amount to either actual notice or deliberate indifference. The Court refused to allow recovery under a less strict standard than actual knowledge unless Congress addressed the issue directly. 
 Dissent 
Justice Stevens, joined by Justice Souter, Justice Ginsburg, and Justice Breyer dissented, arguing that the majority’s reasoning in Gebser was contrary to precedent and the Court’s “duty to interpret” Congressional legislation. Citing Cannon, Steven's dissent argues that Congress was aware of the Supreme Court’s interpretation of Title VI to include a private right of action and expected the interpretation of Title IX to do the same. Regarding the language of Title IX, the dissent argues that the language focuses on the victim of discrimination, rather than on the tort-feasor. As a result, the tort-feasor is entitled to greater protection than if the statute merely banned discriminatory conduct by those receiving federal funds. Rather than encourage districts to root out sexual harassment, the dissent argues the majority’s ruling in Gebser would provide incentives for district to turn a blind eye to sexual harassment and hide any evidence of wrongdoing. 
Justice Ginsburg also authored a dissent, joined by Justice Souter and Breyer, that argued for the same standard of liability established in Faragher v. City of Boca Raton (1998). 
 References 
 Further reading 
Education Law - Title IX - Seventh Circuit Holds School Not Liable in Case of Child Sex Abuse - Doe No. Madison Metropolitan School District, 132 HARV. L. REV. 1550 (2019).
Boschert, Sherry. 37 Words: Title IX and Fifty Years of Fighting Sex Discrimination. The New Press, 2022.
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1998 in United States case law
Category:Sexual harassment in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Geduldig v. Aiello" ==> """
Geduldig v. Aiello, 417 U.S. 484 (1974), was an equal protection case in the United States in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled on whether unfavorable treatment to pregnant women could count as sex discrimination. It held that the denial of insurance benefits for work loss resulting from a normal pregnancy did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment.  The California insurance program at issue did not exclude workers from eligibility based on sex but excluded pregnancy from a list of compensable disabilities. The majority found that even though only women would be directly affected by the administrative decision, the classification of normal pregnancy as non-compensable was not a sex-based classification and so the court would defer to the state so long as it could provide a rational basis for its categorization.
Facts
From 1946, California ran an insurance system to cover private sector employees if temporarily unemployed because of a disability not covered by workmen's compensation. It was funded by contributions deducted from the wages of participating employees, for whom participation was generally mandatory unless they belonged to an approved private insurance plan. Employees who had contributed 1% of a minimum income to the disability fund for one year prior to a period of disability were eligible to receive benefits.  However, certain disabilities would not be covered, including those resulting from commitment for dipsomania, drug addiction, or sexual psychopathy.In his dissent, Justice Brennan pointed out that at oral arguments, the  Deputy Attorney General of California testified that such commitments for these conditions were “fairly archaic” and did not realistically constitute “valid exclusions” from the insurance program.  In Geduldig, the appellees challenged the further exclusion of certain disabilities resulting from pregnancy, as found in §2626 of the Unemployment Insurance Code: “In no case shall the term ‘disability’ or ‘disabled’ include any injury or illness caused by or arising in connection with pregnancy up to the termination of such pregnancy and for a period of 28 days thereafter.”
The litigation began as two separate class action suits brought by employees who had paid into the state’s disability fund but who had been denied benefits relating to pregnancy-related disabilities.  Three of the employees suffered employment disability after complications that arose during their pregnancies, while the fourth experienced a normal pregnancy which still led to a temporary inability to work.  Carolyn Aiello brought suit in Federal District Court, while Augustina Armendariz, Elizabeth Johnson, and Jacqueline Jaramillo brought suit as a petition for a writ of mandate in the state’s supreme court.  The separate cases were consolidated when the state suit was removed to federal court by the appellant, Dwight Geduldig, Director of the California Department of Human Resources Development.
Initially, the appellees sought to enjoin enforcement of the exclusionary policy, and the District Court, as a divided three-judge panel, granted their motion for summary judgment, holding that the program’s administration violated the Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause and stating that “the exclusion of pregnancy-related disabilities is not based upon a classification having a rational and substantial relationship to a legitimate state purpose.”  The court further denied a motion to stay its judgment pending appeal.  The appellant proceeded to file a similar motion with the Supreme Court, which noted probable jurisdiction of the appeal.
Although three of the appellees brought suit to recover benefits for loss of work after complications from pregnancy (tubal and ectopic pregnancies and a miscarriage), this issue was moot by the time the case reached the Supreme Court due to a decision in another case.  In Rentzer v. California Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board, the state court interpreted the statute as applying only to benefit payments for disabilities resulting from normal pregnancies, thus allowing a woman who had suffered an ectopic pregnancy to recover benefits.Rentzer v. California Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board, 32 Cal. App.3d 604, 108 Cal. Rptr. 336 (Cal. App.2.Dist. 1973).  Therefore, the only remaining live controversy in Geduldig was whether appellee Jaramillo and others similarly situated were entitled to benefits for work loss related to normal and generally healthy pregnancy and childbirth.
Judgment
Part II of the majority opinion first laid out the rational basis for the policy as argued by the state.  Justice Stewart focused largely on the economics of the benefit system, which had been operating as a self-supporting system since its inception.  The contribution rate to the disability fund as set struck a balance that allowed the state to cover the health conditions that it had deemed eligible under the program: in the years immediately preceding Geduldig, 90-103% of the disability fund's revenue had been utilized to pay disability and hospital benefits.  Both parties acknowledged that to cover more disability risks would require an increase in the amount of money going into the fund, although they disagreed on the amount this would entail.The appellants argued the increase would be between $120.2 million and $131 million per year, a 33-36% increase in the amount of benefits paid out to California citizens, while the appellees maintained that the increase would be $48.9 million, a 12% overall increase.  The District Court accepted the state's estimate that to cover normal pregnancy and delivery would require the fund to pay out over $100 million more in benefits but found that this would not destroy the solvency of the program, although it would require “reasonable changes in the contribution rate, the maximum benefits allowable, and other variables.”Aiello v. Hansen, 359 F.Supp. 792, 7 Fair Empl. Prac.Cas. (BNA) 1041, 7 Empl. Prac. Dec. P 9283 (D.C.Cal. 1973).  The state, however, argued that such changes would jeopardize the ability of low-income Californians to participate in the program, and thus it had a rational basis to maintain the system in its existing state.
The majority pointed to Williamson v. Lee Optical, in which the Court found that a legislature could legitimately address problems in phases, prioritizing issues which were most pressing.  The Geduldig majority stated that it would be particularly hesitant to second-guess such prioritization and legislative calculation in regards to social welfare programs, citing the premise in Dandridge v. Williams that the Equal Protection Clause “does not require that a State must choose between attacking every aspect of a problem or not attacking the problem at all.”Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471, 486-487, 90 S.Ct. 1153, 1162, 25 L.Ed.2d 491 (1970).  California, the majority held, could legitimately and constitutionally decide that it was better to “keep benefit payments at an adequate level for disabilities that are covered, rather than to cover all disabilities inadequately.”
Finally, Stewart's opinion turned to the issue of whether California's rational basis for its policy was sufficient to uphold the state's position.  The majority found in the insurance system no invidious discrimination that would violate the Equal Protection Clause, pointing out that women as a group were still eligible for benefits even though the particular condition of pregnancy might not be covered.  The Court reasoned that there was “no risk from which men are protected and women are not,” and “no risk from which women are protected and men are not.”  As stated in Footnote 20 of the majority opinion,
The program divides potential recipients into two groups-pregnant women and nonpregnant persons. While the first group is exclusively female, the second includes members of both sexes. The fiscal and actuarial benefits of the program thus accrue to members of both sexes.
While the Court acknowledged that only women could undergo the excluded condition, “it does not follow that every legislative classification concerning pregnancy is a sex-based classification.”  Pregnancy was an objectively identifiable characteristic rather than a subjective judgment, and the appellants had made no showing that the state's asserted rationale for the policy was a pretext for invidious discrimination. Thus, California's policy was not one which the Court would subject to the heightened scrutiny that it had used to evaluate cases such as Reed v. Reed and Frontiero v. Richardson, and therefore the rational basis presented by the state was enough to allow the policy to stand.
The majority reversed the lower court's decision and vacated the stay previously granted.
Dissent
Justice Brennan, joined by Justices Douglas and Marshall, dissented from the majority's opinion, arguing that under Reed and Frontiero, intermediate scrutiny was the proper level of review for the issue, and that under this analysis California's classification failed, as the appellants had only set out a rational basis for the state's policy.  The dissenters acknowledged that the fiscal solvency of California's insurance program was a legitimate concern and that to include temporary disabilities resulting from normal pregnancy in the scope of conditions covered by the system would require an increase in the employee contribution, an increase in the yearly contribution ceiling, or state subsidization.  However,
whatever role such monetary considerations may play in traditional equal protection analysis, the State’s interest in preserving the fiscal integrity of its disability insurance program simply cannot render the State’s use of a suspect classification constitutional.
The dissenters pointed out that pregnancy was one of the only common conditions affecting health that was not covered by the broad scope of California's Unemployment Insurance Code, even though the economic results of it might be functionally identical to those of other disabilities, in that wages might be lost due to temporary physical inability to work, and even in healthy individuals, pregnancy, delivery, and post-partum care are costly.
Brennan and the other dissenters viewed the state's policy as “singling out for less favorable treatment a gender-linked disability peculiar to women,” creating a “double standard.”  They interpreted the policy as one in which
a limitation is imposed upon the disabilities for which women workers may recover, while men receive full compensation for all disabilities suffered.  ...In effect, one set of rules is applied to females and another to males.  Such dissimilar treatment of men and women, on the basis of physical characteristics inextricably linked to one sex, inevitably constitutes sex discrimination.
The dissenters expressed dissatisfaction with the majority's explanation for its refusal to apply a higher standard of review in a case involving issues tied to sex.  Brennan, Douglas and Marshall viewed Stewart's opinion as a retreat from recent equal protection decisions and voiced concern that the majority's decision would relegate sex-based classifications to the same “traditional” analysis that had allowed legislation such as that in Muller v. Oregon.
See also
 United States labor law
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 417
 Craig v. Boren
 Gender equality
 List of gender equality lawsuits
Notes
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:United States equal protection case law
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:United States gender discrimination case law
Category:Parental leave in the United States
Category:United States employment discrimination case law
Category:1974 in women's history
"""

From "Geer v. Connecticut" ==> """
Geer v. Connecticut, 161 U.S. 519 (1896), was a United States Supreme Court decision, which dealt with the transportation of wild fowl over state lines. Geer held that the states owned the wild animals within their borders and could strictly regulate their management and harvest. According to the Geer Court, "the right to preserve game flows from the undoubted existence in the State of a police power." Although this statement is often quoted by state advocates, it is followed by the qualification that this power reaches only "in so far as its exercise may not be incompatible with, or restrained by, the rights conveyed to the Federal government by the Constitution." The Geer decision supported the view that the states owned all resident wildlife, but at the time there were no conflicting federal wildlife laws.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 161
Live export
Missouri v. Holland, 
Hunt v. United States, 
Kleppe v. New Mexico, 
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:1890s in the environment
Category:1896 in United States case law
Category:United States land use case law
Category:1896 in Connecticut
Category:Legal history of Connecticut
"""

From "Geier v. American Honda Motor Co." ==> """
Geier v. American Honda Motor Company, 529 U.S. 861 (2000), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that a federal automobile safety standard pre-empted a stricter state rule.. The Court held that Alexis Geier, who suffered severe injuries in a 1987 Honda Accord, could not sue Honda for failing to install a driver-side airbag – a requirement under District of Columbia tort law but not Federal law – because Federal law pre-empted the District's rule.
Background
Alexis Geier suffered severe injuries in a 1987 Honda Accord that did not possess a driver's side airbag. Geier and her family sought damages under the District of Columbia tort law "claiming that American Honda Motor Company was negligent in not equipping the Accord with a driver's side airbag." The District Court ruled in favor of Honda finding that "Geier's claims were expressly pre-empted by the Act." and created a conflict because the safety features of the 1987 Honda Accord were in compliance with Federal Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS) 208, under the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit affirmed.
Decision of the Supreme Court
Justice Stephen G. Breyer delivered the Court's 5–4 decision, which held: "[Geier's] 'no airbag' lawsuit conflicts with the objectives of FMVSS 208 and is therefore pre-empted by the Act."Geier, 529 U.S. at 866. The dissent challenged the majority's "unprecedented use of inferences from regulatory history and commentary as a basis for implied pre-emption."Geier, 529 U.S. at 913 (Stevens, J., dissenting).
See also
 Honda Motor Company v. Oberg
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 529
References
Further reading
Suing the Tobacco and Lead Pigment Industries: Government Litigation as Public Health Prescription by Donald G. Gifford. Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press, 2010. 
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:2000 in United States case law
Category:Airbags
Category:Honda
Category:Product liability case law
"""

From "General Dynamics Corp. v. United States" ==> """
General Dynamics Corp. v. United States, 563 U.S. 478 (2011), is a U.S. Supreme Court case in which the State Secrets Privilege prevented the plaintiff from using the evidence it needed to protect itself from an expensive judgement..
 Background 
In 1988 the U.S. Navy ordered a new stealth aircraft, the A-12 Avenger, to be built by contractors General Dynamics and McDonnell Douglas.  The parties agreed to what would be the main problem with the contract: instead of a "cost-reimbursable" contract (which would have limited the contractors' liability to the funding provided by the Government, and is the most commonly used when dealing with new weapons systems, especially with new technology), they agreed to a "fixed-price" contract (which required the contractors to complete the work regardless of final cost) of around US$4.8 billion (the competing industry team, composed of contractors Northrop, Grumman, and Vought, somewhat surprisingly never submitted a final bid and dropped out of the competition, possibly due to the intended contract type).
Not unexpectedly (given the nature of the program) the contract encountered difficulty in meeting the technical requirements, which resulted in huge cost overruns, but in this case the overruns (combined with the contract type) threatened the existence of both companies, two of the largest United States defense contractors.  The contractors' requested that the fixed-price contract be converted to a cost-reimbursable contract, agreeing to absorb $150 million in cost overruns as consideration.  Instead, in 1991 the Navy gave up and cancelled the contract, saying too little progress had been made.  Yet the cancellation would cause another problem: instead of cancelling the contract as a "termination for convenience" (where the Government decides it no longer wants an item; this may require the Government to spend additional funds to make a contractor whole), it instead chose to cancel it as a "termination for default" (where the Government cancels a contract upon belief that the contractor is not performing in accordance with contract terms, and often demands repayment of funds provided), and asked the contractors to return roughly US$1.35 billion of "progress payments" (payments based upon work performed) already made.  The contractors refused, saying the government had kept too much information secret under the "state secrets privilege" for there to be adequate progress, and therefore a default termination was not justified.General Dynamics Corp. v. United States (09-1298); Boeing Company v. United States (09-1302) at Cornell Law School's Legal Information Institute site
The manner in which the program was canceled led to years of litigation between the contractors and the Department of Defense over breach of contract:
Initially the United States Court of Federal Claims agreed with the contractors, changing the termination for default into a termination for convenience (the contractors sought US$1.2 billion in total costs under such a termination); however, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit reversed the decision and remanded the case back to the Court of Federal Claims.  (But during discovery, on at least two separate occasions inadvertent disclosure of classified information took place, forcing the Court to halt further discovery.)
Upon remand, the Court of Federal Claims then sided with the Government, ordering a repayment; however, the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit again reversed and remanded.
On the second remand, the Court of Federal Claims again sided with the Government; this time, on 1 June 2009, the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit upheld the lower court's ruling that the U.S. Navy was justified in canceling the contract. The ruling also required the two contractors to repay the U.S. government the roughly US$1.35 billion it initially sought, plus interest charges, making the total owed around US$1.45 billion. Boeing (which had acquired McDonnell Douglas) and General Dynamics (which by then had sold its military aircraft business to Lockheed Martin, but as part of the sale retained its rights in this case) vowed to appeal the ruling."Court upholds Navy cancellation of A-12 aircraft". Associated Press via thefreelibrary.com, 2 June 2009. Retrieved: 26 February 2011.
In September 2010, the U.S. Supreme Court said it would hear the arguments of the two companies that the government canceled the project improperly and that the use of a state secrets claim by the U.S. prevented them from mounting an effective defense.Liptak, Adam. "Supreme Court Takes Cases on Corporations' Rights". The New York Times, 28 September 2010. Retrieved: 28 September 2010.
Opinion of the Court
In May 2011, the Supreme Court set aside the Appeals Court decision and returned the case to it "for proceedings consistent with this opinion".Weisgerber, Marcus. "Supreme Court Overturns A-12 Ruling Against Contractors". Defense News, 23 May 2011.  The Court unanimously held that "when litigation would end up disclosing state secrets, courts may not try the claims and may not award relief to either party."General Dynamics Corp. v. United States at SCOTUSblog  Thus it neither granted the contractors the US$1.2 billion awarded in the earlier termination for convenience, nor the Navy the roughly US$1.35 billion in prior payments made.
In January 2014, the case was settled with Boeing and General Dynamics agreeing to pay US$400 million to the Navy, equally divided between them."UPDATE 1-Boeing, General Dynamics reach $400 mln A-12 settlement with U.S. Navy". Reuters, 23 January 2014.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 563
United States v. Reynolds
 Declassification
 Classified information in the United States
 References 
External links
 OPINION AND ORDER from 1998 case of McDonnell Douglas and General Dynamics v. United States, on Federation of American Scientists site
 Aaron D. Van Oort; Marie E. Williams. Supreme Court Decides General Dynamics Corp. v. United States. 23 May 2011.
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States government secrecy
Category:2011 in United States case law
Category:General Dynamics
Category:Military scandals
Category:United States state secrets privilege case law
"""

From "General Electric Co. v. Joiner" ==> """
General Electric Co. v. Joiner, 522 U.S. 136 (1997), was a Supreme Court of the United States case between Robert Joiner and General Electric Co. that concerned whether the abuse of discretion standard is the correct standard an appellate court should apply in reviewing a trial court's decision to admit or exclude expert testimony..  The case is notable for helping articulate the Daubert standard.
Facts
Joiner had worked around transformers as an electrician since 1973.  During his electrical work, the dielectric fluid used as a coolant for the transformers got into his eyes and mouth, and stuck to his arms and hands. In 1983, it was discovered that the fluid in some of its transformers contained toxic PCBs.  Later, in 1991, Joiner was diagnosed with small cell lung cancer.  He sued General Electric, the manufacturer of the transformers and dielectric fluid.  Joiner had been a smoker for eight years and there was a history of lung cancer in his family.  Joiner alleged that his exposure to PCBs "promoted" his cancer.  He claimed that, had it not been for his exposure to these substances, his cancer would not have developed for many years, if at all.  General Electric claimed there was no evidence that Joiner suffered significant exposure to PCBs and that there was no admissible scientific evidence that PCBs promoted Joiner's cancer.General Electric Co. v. Joiner, https://www.oyez.org/cases/1990-1999/1997/1997_96_188
Holding
General Electric removed the case to federal court and then moved for summary judgment.  The district court ruled that there was no evidence that Joiner had been exposed to PCBs.  The district court also held that testimony of Joiner's experts failed to show that there was a link between exposure to PCB and small cell cancer.  The case was dismissed.  Joiner appealed the ruling and the court of appeals reversed. The Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari and, after review, reversed the appellate court's ruling and affirmed the district court's ruling.Albert J. Grudzinskas and Kenneth L. Appelbaum, General Electric Co. v. Joiner: Lighting Up the Post- Daubert Landscape?, http://www.jaapl.org/content/26/3/497.full.pdf'
References
External links
Category:1997 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:General Electric litigation
"""

From "General Talking Pictures Corp. v. Western Electric Co." ==> """
General Talking Pictures Corp. v. Western Electric Co., 304 U.S. 175 (1938), was a case that the Supreme Court of the United States decided in 1938. The decision upheld so-called field-of-use limitations in patent licenses: it held that the limitations were enforceable in a patent infringement suit in federal court against the licensee and those acting in concert with it—for example, a customer that knowingly buys a patented product from the licensee that is outside the scope of the license., affirmed on rehearing, . 
A field-of-use limitation is a provision in a patent license that limits the scope of what the patent owner authorizes a manufacturing licensee (that is, a licensee that manufactures a patented product or performs a patented process) to use the patent to make a specified product or do specified things. The license specifies a defined field of permissible operation or specifies fields from which the licensee is excluded. By way of example, such a license might authorize a licensee to manufacture patented engines only for incorporation into trucks, or to manufacture such engines only for sale to farmers, or only engines rated from 100 to 200 horsepower. More generally, this kind of license permits the licensee to use the patented invention in some, but not all, possible ways in which the invention could be exploited. In an exclusive field-of-use license the licensee is the only person authorized to use the invention in the field of the license.See generally Herbert Hovenkamp, Post-Sale Restraints and Competitive Harm: The First Sale Doctrine In Perspective, 66 NYU  487, 496 (2011).
The General Talking Pictures doctrine does not apply to all cases in which a patent owner imposes a restriction on what may subsequently be done with the patented product. When the patent owner sells a patented product to a customer, for example, the exhaustion doctrine applies instead and the patent no longer operates to limit what the customer does with the product or in what field the customer uses it.Hovenkamp.
Factual background
AT&T owned patents on vacuum tubes (which the majority opinion termed “amplifiers”) and licensed the patents to Transformer Company to manufacture tubes for use in the field of home radios, or small, so-called noncommercial amplifiers. AT&T licensed other companies (its subsidiaries) in the field of so-called commercial use, or large amplifiers for use in theaters. The vacuum tubes used in the different fields were indistinguishable. Transformer Company sold its products to General Talking Pictures (GTP), which knew of the field-of-use limitation but (like Transformer Company) ignored it. AT&T sued GTP and Transformer Company.
Supreme Court decision
Majority opinion
The majority upheld the arrangement as a well-known, legitimate expedient: “Patent owners may grant licenses extending to all uses or limited to use in a defined field.” The Transformer Company was only a nonexclusive licensee in a limited field, as it and General Talking Pictures knew. The Transformer Company had no rights outside its licensed field, and thus “could not convey to petitioner [General Talking Pictures] what both knew it was not authorized to sell.” The majority paid no attention to whether the so-called amplifiers were actually interchangeable shelf-item components of amplifying systems, a point that Justice Black emphasized in his dissent.It was also unmentioned that in Adams v. Burke the patentee Adams assigned the rights to manufacture, sell, and use the patented products in Boston and a ten-mile radius around it to Lockhart & Seelye, who manufactured them and sold them to Burke, who took them more than ten miles from Boston and used them in his business. See Adams v. Burks, 1 Fed. Cas. 100 (Case No. 50) (C.C.D. Mass. 1871). When Adams sued Burke for patent infringement the Supreme Court held that Burke was not liable because of the exhaustion doctrine. 84 U.S. (17 Wall.) 453 (1873).
Dissenting opinion
Justice Black dissented. As he perceived it, and considered of great importance, the tubes that all licensees made were fungible, interchangeable articles of commerce, which the Transformer Company was authorized to manufacture. Once they left the manufacturing licensee's hands, who sold them to General Talking Pictures, they passed outside the patent monopoly:
The patent statute which permits a patentee to “make, use and vend” confers no power to fix and restrict the uses to which a merchantable commodity can be put after it has been bought in the open market from one who was granted authority to manufacture and sell it. Neither the right to make, nor the right to use, nor the right to sell a chattel, includes the right …to control the use of the same chattel by another who has purchased it. A license to sell a widely used merchantable chattel must be as to prospective purchasers…a transfer of the patentee's entire right to sell; it cannot — as to noncontracting parties — restrict the use of ordinary articles of purchase bought in the open market.
Impact
The General Talking Pictures doctrine remains valid law, subject to possible antitrust exceptions (see below). The exhaustion doctrine does not operate to free from the patent monopoly product sales that a limited licensee makes to one who seeks to use the sold product outside the licensed field — at least when the buyer has notice of the limitation. Nonetheless, tension exists between the two doctrines — particularly when the field-of-use license is not as explicit as it might be. Then, as illustrated by the recent Supreme Court decision in Quanta Computer, Inc. v. LG Electronics, Inc.,. “default” rules take over. The default rules, which apply when a court interprets a license or other contract as ambiguous or not complete, are that the exhaustion doctrine governs over the General Talking Pictures doctrine in ambiguous cases. A use restriction in a license must be explicit to bind a seller, if it is to do so at all. Furthermore, the default rule for licenses to manufacture a patented product is that the license is unlimited, i.e., it covers all possible fields. Thus, a manufacturing license is unlimited unless its language explicitly provides otherwise. Because the contractual documents in the Quanta case were insufficiently explicit, or so the Supreme Court seemed to believe, the Court applied the exhaustion doctrine rather than the General Talking Pictures doctrine. Therefore, purchasers of the patented product were free to use them without restrictions that the patentee sought to have imposed on them.
Antitrust exception
In some circumstances, field-of-use arrangements (particularly those of patent pools) may violate the antitrust laws. A set of field-of-use licenses may be used to allocate markets among competing manufacturers of a product with attendant price manipulation.
Thus, in Hartford-Empire Co. v. United States,. the courts condemned a cartel among bottle manufacturers that operated by parceling out different markets to different members of the cartel. The members were given limited licenses in the respective markets allocated to them. This was held to violate the antitrust laws.
In Ethyl Gasoline Corp. v. United States,. the defendant Ethyl had established an elaborate licensing program under its several patents on a fuel additive tetra-ethyl lead, a motor fuel containing tetra-ethyl lead, and a method of operating an automobile engine with fuel containing tetra-ethyl lead. Ethyl sold the fuel additive, and licensed purchasers to use it to practice the other patents. The licensing program fixed prices for the motor fuel and strictly limited the types of customer to which given licensees could sell the motor fuel. Ethyl emphasized to the Supreme Court the fact that while it sold the fuel subject to a post-sale restraint it licensed the other patents, which covered the manufacture of the fuel (by adding tetra-ethyl lead to ordinary gasoline) and the use of the fuel in automobile engines. Ethyl argued that the licensed patents and the manufacturing brought the case within the shelter of the General Talking Pictures doctrine. The Supreme Court refused to make any distinctions among the different patents and struck the whole program down for improperly “regimenting” the industry in violation of the antitrust laws.
References
External links
Category:United States patent case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:1938 in United States case law
Category:Bell System
"""

From "Genesis Healthcare Corp. v. Symczyk" ==> """
Genesis HealthCare Corp. v. Symczyk, 569 U.S. 66 (2013), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court dealing with the justiciability doctrine of mootness..
Background
The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (FLSA) provides that all employees have the right to full pay for forty hours of work in any given week. Laura Symczyk, a nurse working for Genesis HealthCare, alleged that her employer would regularly dock thirty minutes of pay per shift for its employees as meal time, regardless of whether the employee actually took a meal break. Under the FLSA, an aggrieved employee can sue not only on her own behalf, but on behalf of all co-workers who have similarly been injured. This is called a "collective action," which is roughly (but not completely) similar to a class action.
Symczyk filed a collective action suit under the FLSA, and her employer thereafter offered her $7,500 in unpaid wages plus attorneys fees and other costs and expenses, which would have fully satisfied her individual claim. After she failed to respond to the offer, Genesis moved to dismiss the suit, arguing that through her failure to accept satisfaction, in full, of her claim for relief, she no longer had any interest in the litigation. Symczyk argued that her employer was simply attempting a "pick off" - by satisfying her claim, Genesis could avoid facing the collective action suit on behalf of the other employees. The district court found that because no other employees had joined the collective action and because Symczyk had been offered full relief, her claim was moot. The United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit agreed that Symczyk's personal claim was moot, but authorized her to proceed with the collective action.
Decision
In a 5–4 decision, the Supreme Court held that the entire action must be dismissed based on an assumption of mootness. The majority did not actually settle the mootness issue, claiming that the issue was not properly before the Court because Symczyk failed to file her own appeal on the point and had waived the issue in the proceedings below. The majority held that a collective action suit cannot survive once the individual claim is satisfied without other workers coming forward to take part. Because Symczyk failed to contest that the offer from Genesis mooted the claim, and because no other workers had joined the collective action, the entire action was moot.
The dissent emphasized that this case is largely meaningless in the grand scheme of things because this situation would likely never recur in another case. The dissent attacked the majority's assumption that the offer of satisfaction mooted the claim, and the dissenters further argued that when such an offer is simply unaccepted (as was the case here) the case can continue to move forward.
 References 
External links
Category:2013 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "George v. Victor Talking Machine Co." ==> """
George v. Victor Talking Machine Co., 293 U.S. 377 (1934), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held the district court's ruling of infringement of a song's common law copyright, granting an injunction so that damages could be determined, was interlocutory. The appeal came too late, so the Court vacated the appeal.
 References 
External links
Category:1934 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
Category:United States copyright case law
"""

From "George W. Bush & Sons Co. v. Malloy" ==> """
George W. Bush & Sons Co. v. Malloy, 267 U.S. 317 (1925), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court, which held that the state statute under which the Maryland Public Service Commission (PSC) issued certificates of public convenience and necessity to common carriers engaged in interstate commerce violated the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution..
Background
The Maryland General Assembly in 1922 amended the PSC statutes to require common carriers to obtain a certificate from the PSC based upon whether the proposed motor carrier service was "good for the public convenience and necessity." George W. Bush & Sons, which operated a truck line between Delaware and cities in eastern Maryland, was directed by the PSC to apply for a certificate. After a hearing, the PSC denied the application. The company then appealed to the state courts up through the Maryland Court of Appeals, arguing that the state statute violated the Commerce Clause by attempting to regulate interstate commerce, but the state courts upheld the denial of the certificate by the PSC.
The company's name is a coincidence; it has no connection to later U.S. President George W. Bush or his family.
Court's decision
The majority opinion noted that the PSC under the state statute used an arbitrary test for the granting of permits for common carriers engaged in interstate commerce, similar to the statutory scheme that was struck down in Buck v. Kuykendall,. a companion case whose decision announced the same day as George W. Bush & Sons Co. Although the highways in Maryland were constructed without federal aid, the majority opinion noted that this was without significance as the federal legislation aiding in the construction of highways make clear the purpose of Congress that state highways shall be open to interstate commerce. Since the Maryland statute attempted to regulate interstate commerce, the statute as construed in this manner was held by the majority to invade a field reserved by the Commerce Clause for federal regulation.
The dissent by Justice McReynolds stated that the state statute did not discriminate against interstate commerce or impede it, and were necessary to protect the state roads. The dissent stated that this regulation was similar to that of harbor regulation by state governments, which the Supreme Court had upheld as being within the class of powers that a state could exercise until Congress had acted on the subject. The dissenting opinion was intended to also apply to Buck.
Justice McKenna is not listed as participating in the decision.
Critical response
The Supreme Court from 1924 to 1926 issued four decisions striking down attempts by states to regulate or to set tariff rates or fares of private commercial carriers that used state highways. Besides George W. Bush & Sons and Buck, these were Michigan Pub. Util. Comm'n v. Duke.  and Frost & Frost Trucking Co. v. Railroad Comm'n of Cal.. In these cases, although presented with the issue of the right to travel in argument in cases such as Buck, the Supreme Court never ruled on whether personal, noncommercial automobile travel on state highways was a constitutional right.
Subsequent developments
During the Great Depression, which undercut the financial stability of many common carrier companies, there was a concern over the creation of an oversupply of passenger transportation which would drive many companies out of business. To meet this concern, Congress by the Motor Carrier Act of 1935 empowered the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to bring about equality of regulation between intrastate and interstate motor carriers to prevent such an oversupply. The ICC by its regulation restricted interstate competition among common carriers through the issuance of certificates for specific routes based upon the public convenience and necessity.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 267
References
External links
Category:1925 in United States case law
Category:Trucking industry in the United States
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:United States Dormant Commerce Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
"""

From "Georgia v. Ashcroft" ==> """
Georgia v. Ashcroft, 539 U.S. 461 (2003), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court found that a three-judge federal district court panel did not consider all of the requisite relevant factors when it examined whether the 2001 Georgia State Senate redistricting plan resulted in retrogression of black voters’ effective exercise of the electoral franchise in contravention of Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act. Section 5, which only applies to those states or political subdivisions that are considered “covered” under Section 4(b) of the VRA, requires that before any change in voting procedure can take effect, it must be precleared by the federal government by a demonstration that the change would not "lead to a retrogression in the position of racial minorities with respect to their effective exercise of the electoral franchise.”  The Court held that the district court analysis was incorrect “because it focused too heavily on the ability of the minority group to elect a candidate of its choice in the [safe] districts,” without giving proper consideration to other factors such as the state's creation of additional influence and coalition districts.  Accordingly, the Supreme Court vacated and remanded the case to the district court to examine the facts using the new standard announced in its opinion.
 Background 
§5 of the Voting Rights Act requires that, for covered jurisdictions (which in this case included Georgia), any change in a voting "standard, practice, or procedure" must receive federal preclearance in order to ensure that the change "does not have the purpose and will not have the effect of denying or abridging the right to vote on account of race or color." For such purposes, the United States Supreme Court has generally held that the determination whether such a change should be precleared depends on whether the change would lead to a "retrogression" in the position of racial minorities with respect to their effective exercise of the electoral franchise.
Georgia adopted a new state voter redistricting plan after the 2000 census.  The plan "unpacked" the most heavily concentrated majority-minority districts in the benchmark plan, and created a number of new influence districts.  After the 1990 census, there were some redistricting disputes involving Georgia's United States House of Representatives seats and the seats in the two houses of the state's legislature. Eventually, among other dispositions, the state's 1997 plan for redistricting the state's senate was precleared.   After the 2000 census, there were again redistricting disputes. In 2001, the state enacted a new redistricting plan for the state's senate.
Subsequently, the state
(1) filed a preclearance suit in the District Court for the District of Columbia; and
(2) sought a declaratory judgment that several redistricting plans, including the 2001 state-senate plan, did not violate § 5.
The United States, through its Attorney General, opposed preclearance of the 2001 plan and argued that the plan's changes to three state-senate districts—in each of which the plan assertedly reduced the percentage of black voting-age population to just over 50 percent—unlawfully reduced the ability of black voters to elect candidates of their choice.
Eventually, the District Court, in pertinent part, denied § 5 preclearance for the 2001 plan, as the court expressed the view that
(1) the three districts in question were retrogressive, for in each of those districts, a lesser opportunity existed for a black candidate of choice to win election under the new plan than under the benchmark 1997 plan; and
(2) Georgia had "failed to present any . . . evidence" that the retrogression in those three districts would be offset by gains in other districts (195 F Supp 2d 25).
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court vacated and remanded.  Justice O'Connor wrote for a 5-4 court.
As an initial matter, the Supreme Court found that the private intervenors were properly allowed to intervene pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 24.
The Court held, however, that the district court failed to consider all the factors relevant to § 5 preclearance when it examined whether the 2001 state-senate redistricting plan resulted in a retrogression of black voters' effective exercise of the electoral franchise.
First, while the district court acknowledged the importance of assessing the statewide plan as a whole,
(a) it focused too narrowly on three proposed districts;
(b) it gave inadequate consideration to the resulting increases in the percentages of black voting-age population in many other districts, which would likely offset any marginal decreases in the first three districts;
(c) it  ignored the evidence of such other districts, as well as other evidence that the state had decided that a way to increase black voting strength was to adopt a plan that "unpacked" the high concentration of minority voters in a few majority-minority districts.
Second, the District Court did not explore in any meaningful depth any other factor beyond the comparative ability of black voters in the majority-minority districts to elect a candidate of their choice. In doing so, it paid inadequate attention to
(a) the support of legislators representing the benchmark majority-minority districts and
(b) the maintenance of the legislative influence of those representatives.
Third, an examination of black voters' opportunities to participate in the political process showed, if anything, an increase in the effective exercise of the electoral franchise. Given that no litigant contested that a substantial majority of black voters in the state voted Democratic, an examination of black voters' opportunities to participate in the political process showed, if anything, an increase in the effective exercise of the electoral franchise, as some statistics—that the 34 districts in the 2001 plan with a black voting-age population of above 20 percent consisted almost entirely of districts that had an overall percentage of Democratic votes of above 50 percent--
(a) made it more likely that black voters would constitute an effective voting bloc, even if they could not always elect the candidate of their choice; and
(b) buttressed the testimony of a plan designer that the plan's goal was to maintain or increase black voting strength and relatedly to increase the prospects of Democratic victory.
 Concurrences 
Kennedy concurred, arguing that
(1) race had been a predominant factor in drawing the lines of Georgia's 2001 state-senate redistricting map;
(2) considerations of race that would have doomed a redistricting plan under the Federal Constitution's Fourteenth Amendment or § 2 of the Voting Rights Act (42 USCS § 1973) seemed to be what would save such a plan under § 5; and
(3) while the Supreme Court's decisions controlling the § 5 analysis required the court's ruling in the case at hand, the discord and inconsistency between § 2 and § 5 ought to be noted and—in a future case where this issue was properly raised—confronted.
Thomas said that while he continued to adhere to the views expressed in his opinion concurring in the judgment in Holder v Hall (1994) 512 US 874—in which he had said, among other matters, that the court's expansive reading of the Voting Rights Act had involved the federal judiciary in dividing the nation into racially segregated electoral districts—he joined the court's opinion in the case at hand, because it was fully consistent with the court's § 5 precedents.
 Dissents 
Souter—joined by Stevens, Ginsburg, and Breyer—dissented, on the grounds that
(1) while § 5's prudential objective was not betrayed if a state could show that a new districting plan shifted from supermajority districts, in which minorities could elect their candidates of choice by their own voting power, to coalition districts, in which minorities were in fact shown to have a similar opportunity when joined by predictably supportive nonminority voters, the state ought to bear the burden of proving that nonminority voters would reliably vote along with minority voters;
(2) the Supreme Court's decision in the case at hand--by redefining effective voting power, in § 5 analysis, without the anchoring reference to electing a candidate of choice--(a) went beyond recognizing the possibility of coalition districts, and (b) left § 5's nonretrogression requirement substantially diminished and practically unadministrable; (3) one District Court finding--that Georgia had not shown the possibility of actual coalitions in the affected state-senate districts that would allow any retreat from majority-minority districts without a retrogressive effect--should have been (a) crucial, and (b) invulnerable under the correct clear-error standard of review; and (4) instead, the Supreme Court had mistakenly (a) discovered evidence which the Supreme Court thought the District Court had overlooked, and (b) drawn evidentiary conclusions which the District Court supposedly had not seen.
See also
 Wesberry v. Sanders, :  Georgia congressional redistricting case
Thornburg v. Gingles, 
 Miller v. Johnson, :  Georgia congressional redistricting case
 Alabama Legislative Black Caucus v. Alabama, 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 539
 References 
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:2003 in United States case law
Category:2003 in Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:Georgia General Assembly
"""

From "Georgia v. Brailsford (1792)" ==> """
Georgia v. Brailsford, 2 U.S. (2 Dall.) 402 (1792), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that "[a] State may sue in the Supreme Court to enjoin payment of a judgment in behalf of a British creditor taken on a debt, which was confiscated by the State, until it can be ascertained to whom the money belongs".The Supreme Court Reporter
by Robert Desty, United States. Supreme Court, West Publishing Company
Published by West Pub. Co., 1888
Item notes: v. 8, pg.1376 The Constitution of the United States: With Notes of the Decisions of the Supreme Court Thereon, from the Organization of the Court Till October, 1900
By Edwin Eustace Bryant, United States
Published by The Democrat Printing Company, 1901, pg. 230 James R. Perry, The Documentary History of the Supreme Court of the United States, 1789-1800, Volume 6, "Georgia v. Brailsford," p. 73. .
The case was the first United States Supreme Court case where a state appeared as a party. It includes an opinion from Thomas Johnson, who joined the court on November 7, 1791, and resigned after fourteen months.
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Jay Court
Category:1792 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Georgia v. Brailsford (1793)" ==> """
Georgia v. Brailsford, 2 U.S. (2 Dall.) 415 (1793), was a United States Supreme Court case continuing the case of Georgia v. Brailsford (1792).  Here, the court held that "upon a motion to dissolve that injunction, this court held that, if the state of Georgia had the title in the debt, (upon which no opinion was then expressed,) she had an adequate remedy at law by action upon the bond; but, in order that the money might be kept for the party to whom it belonged, ordered the injunction to be continued till the next term, and, if Georgia should not then have instituted her action at common law, to be dissolved."The Supreme Court Reporter
by Robert Desty, United States. Supreme Court, West Publishing Company
Published by West Pub. Co., 1888
Item notes: v. 8, pg. 1376The Constitution of the United States: With Notes of the Decisions of the Supreme Court Thereon, from the Organization of the Court Till October, 1900
By Edwin Eustace Bryant, United States
Published by The Democrat Printing Company, 1901, pg. 230 James R. Perry, The Documentary History of the Supreme Court of the United States, 1789-1800, Volume 6, "West v. Barnes," p. 73. 2 U.S. 402 (1793) 
See also
 Georgia v. Brailsford (disambiguation)
 Georgia v. Brailsford (1794)
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 2
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1793 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Jay Court
"""

From "Georgia v. Brailsford (1794)" ==> """
Georgia v. Brailsford, 3 U.S. (3 Dall.) 1 (1794), was an early United States Supreme Court case holding that debts sequestered but not declared forfeit by states during the American Revolution could be recovered by bondholders.Georgia v. Brailsford, . It is the only reported jury trial in the history of the Supreme Court.
Background
During the American Revolution, the state of Georgia passed a law that sequestered debts owed to British creditors. The Treaty of Paris between the United States and Great Britain asserted the validity of debts held by creditors on both sides. Samuel Brailsford, a British subject and holder of such a debt, attempted to recover from Georgia resident James Spalding. The case was filed directly in the United States Supreme Court, rather than in a lower court, under its constitutionally defined original jurisdiction. Georgia intervened in the Supreme Court, claiming that the debt was owed instead to the state. Brailsford was joined by Messrs. Hopton and Powell, residents of South Carolina, who were partners in the debt. Because the Court was trying a common law dispute, it impaneled a jury for the case.
Decision
The Court concluded that the sequestration law did not transfer the debt interest to the state. After being advised of that opinion, the jury found for the defendants.
Power of juries
Chief Justice Jay's instructions to the jury have attracted much interest surrounding their implications for jury nullification. Jay noted it as a "good old rule" that juries should judge questions of fact while deferring to the court on questions of law; yet he observed that the jury could, if it chose, judge both to arrive at a decision. As mentioned, the jury neither challenged the Court's conclusions of law nor needed to examine the facts, which the parties had agreed upon.Lochlan F. Shelfer, Special Juries in the Supreme Court, 123 Yale. L.J. 208 (2013). 
Subsequent jurisprudence has tended to discount the Brailsford court's view. In United States v. Morris (1851), Justice Benjamin Robbins Curtis commented on the apparent inconsistency of Jay's recorded instructions, going so far as to suggest that the record was inaccurate and, in any case, not in line with recent English or American law. Sparf v. United States (1895) repeated Curtis's doubts and found that federal courts had no obligation to give similar instructions..
Stanford Law School fellow Lochlan F. Shelfer has examined the case record in depth. He notes that the jury was a special jury, drawn from a pool of merchants informed on matters of law relevant to the case. Their relation to the court, then, was different from that of a typical fact-finding jury. Shelfer concludes that the instructions were neither anomalous nor an endorsement of jury nullification but rather reflected the immaturity of American merchant law and the reliance of courts on experts.
See also
 Jury nullification in the United States
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1794 in United States case law
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Jay Court
Category:Jury nullification
"""

From "Georgia v. McCollum" ==> """
Georgia v. McCollum, 505 U.S. 42 (1992), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that a criminal defendant cannot make peremptory challenges based solely on race.. The court had previously held in Batson v. Kentucky (1986) that prosecutors cannot make peremptory challenges based on race, but did not address whether defendants could use them.. The court had already ruled in Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete Company (1991) that the Batson prohibition also applies to civil litigants because they are state actors during the jury selection process..
However, in Polk County v. Dodson,. the court had held that a public defender is not a state actor in the context of a lawsuit for inadequate legal representation. McCollum argued that Polk County was the controlling precedent, so public defenders are not state actors during jury selection. Writing for the court, Justice Harry Blackmun disagreed. Blackmun found that whether a public defender is a state actor "depends on the nature and context of the function he is performing."McCollum, 505 U.S. at 54. Just as he is a state actor in the context of personnel decisions like hiring and firing attorneys in his office, a public defender is a state actor in the context of peremptory challenges. Like in Edmonson, Blackmun found that race-based peremptory challenges by the defendant violate the Equal Protection Clause and are therefore unconstitutional.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 505
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
 Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
 List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Batson challenge case law
Category:1992 in United States case law
"""

From "Georgia v. Public.Resource.Org, Inc." ==> """
Georgia v. Public.Resource.Org, Inc., No. 18-1150, 590 U.S. ___ (2020), is a United States Supreme Court case regarding "whether the government edicts doctrine extends to—and thus renders uncopyrightable—works that lack the force of law, such as the annotations in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated" (OCGA). On April 27, 2020, the Court ruled 5–4 that the OCGA cannot be copyrighted because the OCGA's annotations were "authored by an arm of the legislature in the course of its legislative duties"; thus the Court found that the annotations fall under the government edicts doctrine and are ineligible for copyright.
Litigation began in 2013 after Carl Malamud published the OCGA on Public.Resource.Org (PRO). The state of Georgia filed a lawsuit in 2015. In March 2017, a federal court in the Northern District of Georgia ruled in the state's favor, after which in 2018 the Eleventh Circuit reversed the ruling. Both Georgia and PRO appealed to the Supreme Court, which heard arguments in December 2019. 
Background 
 Government edicts 
In the United States, laws, statutes, and court decisions, all as edicts of government, are considered to be in the public domain, available to the public for free and not protected by copyright. This doctrine is rooted in the Copyright Act's 'authorship' requirement and posits that officials empowered to speak with the force of law cannot be the authors of the works they create in the course of their official duties. Based on the principle, the law must be free for publication to all.
 Context 
The Official Code of Georgia Annotated (OCGA) is assembled by a state entity called the Code Revision Commission (the Commission) and is the official law of Georgia.  
The OCGA contains both the official statutes as well as annotations. The annotations explain and expound upon the statutes and contain "summaries of state attorney general's opinions, advisory opinions by the State Bar of Georgia, summaries of important court rulings, excerpts of law review articles, legislative histories[,] and repeals". The Commission entered into a work-for-hire agreement with Matthew Bender & Co., Inc., a division of the LexisNexis Group, to prepare annotations.The Georgia government asserted that it held copyright to the OCGA; further, Georgia's legislature exempted itself from the state's open records law. While the state claimed that the OCGA is easily accessible via libraries, journalists for Atlanta news channel 11Alive were "unable to find a complete set of current law books at three branches of the Fulton County Public Library, including the main branch in downtown Atlanta", noting that "[t]he law books were kept behind a locked door, and we had to ask for special permission to view them. Some volumes were as much as six years out of date." Additionally, LexisNexis's website displays only the statutory code and not the annotations.
In 2013, Carl Malamud purchased a 186-volume hard copy of the OCGA (at a cost of over $1,000; the cost is just below $400 for Georgia residents) and published the contents on the website Public.Resource.Org. In response, the State of Georgia, specifically the Code Revision Commission of the Georgia General Assembly, which oversees the OCGA's copyright, threatened to sue Malamud for copyright infringement over this posting."Georgia Claims Its Annotated Laws Are Covered by Copyright, Threatens Carl Malamud for Publishing the Law" 
 District court ruling 
In 2015, Georgia's Code Revision Commission filed a copyright infringement lawsuit against PRO in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, demanding that the OCGA be taken offline. In the lawsuit, Georgia further alleged that Malamud's actions reflected a "strategy of terrorism". State representative Johnnie Caldwell Jr., Chairman of the Code Revision Commission, issued a statement explaining that "the OCGA contains two separate and distinct types of content... the law itself... [and] ancillary material, such as cross references, case annotations, editor's notes, law reviews, etc. Such ancillary material is expressly not law." 
On March 23, 2017, a federal court in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia ruled in favor of the state. It acknowledged that the annotations in the OCGA presented “an unusual case because most official codes are not annotated and most annotated codes are not official" and therefore that these annotations were eligible for copyright protection since they were “not enacted into law” and lacked “the force of law.”  As a result it held that PRO did not "[meet] its burden of proving fair use, and [the state of Georgia] [is] entitled to partial summary judgment" and entered a permanent injunction requiring PRO to cease its distribution activities and to remove the digital copies of the OCGA from the internet. 
 Ruling of the 11th Circuit 
On October 18, 2018, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit unanimously struck down the previous ruling, finding that the OCGA is "intrinsically public domain material" and that its annotations "clearly have authoritative weight in explicating and establishing the meaning and effect of Georgia's laws". The Court relied on the case of Banks v. Manchester (1888), in which the Supreme Court articulated the government edicts doctrine by finding that "there can be no copyright in the opinions of the judges, or in the work done by them in their official capacity as judges", and a report from the Copyright Office noting that "the  judicially established rule... still  prevent[s] copyright in the text of state laws... and similar official documents". The Court also identified three factors that would determine whether authorship in a work is constrictively attributable to that of the people, namely:
 the identity of the public official who created the work; 
 the nature of the work; and 
 the process by which the work was produced. 
As a result the Court stated that the people are "constructive authors"Code Revision Comm’n, 906 at 1239. of the law and judges and legislators are merely draftsman that are exercising authority delegated to them. Thus, the court found that "the annotations in the OCGA, while not having the force of law, are part and parcel of the law. They are so  enmeshed with Georgia's law as to be inextricable... They are therefore uncopyrightable".Code Revision Comm’n, 906 at 1233. 
The state assembly of Georgia appealed this decision to the United States Supreme Court. Both PRO and the state of Georgia urged the Supreme Court to grant certiorari to the government's appeal; on June 24, 2019, the Supreme Court agreed to review the case (No. 18-1150). The Court heard oral arguments in the case on December 2, 2019.
Decision
The Court accepted the case to decide the question:Whether the government edicts doctrine extends to—and thus renders uncopyrightable—works that lack the force of law, such as the annotations in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated.
Oral arguments were held on December 2, 2019, at which many of the justices focused on the role of the legislature in approving the annotated statutes for publication, questioning whether this made the annotations equivalent to legislation, which cannot be copyrighted.
On April 27, 2020, the Court ruled in a 5-to-4 decision, that Georgia does not have copyright over its annotated legal code. Chief Justice John Roberts authored the majority opinion, joined by Associate Justices Sonia Sotomayor, Elena Kagan, Neil Gorsuch, and Brett Kavanaugh: he noted that, binding law or not, official works of the Georgia legislature could not be copyrighted, as they could deprive citizens of knowledge of those laws and their corollaries. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg filed a dissenting opinion, joined by Stephen Breyer, while Justice Clarence Thomas filed another dissenting opinion with which Samuel Alito joined and Breyer joined except for Part II-A and footnote 6. 
 Majority opinion 
The Majority held that copyright protection does not extend to the annotations contained in Georgia's official annotated code. The route taken to hold this was the 'government edicts doctrine'. Like the 11th Circuit, they cited the SCOTUS decision in Banks v. Manchester (1888) and extend the same logic as they applied to legal binding and non-bind material created by judges, to non-binding, non-authoritative and explanatory legal materials created by a legislative body vested with the authority to make law. 
The Court adopted the following framework to apply the government edicts doctrine as follows:
First, regarding the identity of the official that created the work, the Court held that the Commission, as the sole author of the work (since the annotations prepared by LexisNexis pursuant to the work-for-hire agreement.), qualifies as a legislator. They held that the Commission functions as an arm for the Georgia Legislature and its work thus falls under the sphere of "legislative authority". In order to hold this they noted that the Commission was composed predominantly of legislators and received funding designated by the law for the legislative branch. Finally, it was the legislature itself that approved and merged the annotations with the statutory provisions and published the OCGA "by authority of the state". 
Second, regarding the nature of work, the Court held that the Commission creating the annotations is in the "discharge" of its legislative duties.. Although the annotations are not enacted into law through bicameralism and presentment, the preparation of the annotations is under an act of "legislative authority". The fact that the commentary and case laws in the annotations are approved by the legislature shows that they deemed it to be relevant. 
The Court rejected the argument by the State of Georgia that the annotations are copyrightable by virtue of §101 of the US Copyright Statute since it specifically lists “annotations” among the kinds of works eligible for copyright protection. They ruled that this provision refers only to annotations that represent an original work of "authorship" and the Commission, serving in its official capacity, cannot serve as an author due to the government edicts doctrine. They clarified that §101 protects annotations in case they are prepared by a private party or non-lawmaking officials. This is elucidated by distinguishing the decision in Banks from Callaghan v. Myers. where the Court permitted a reporter to hold copyright in explanatory materials he had added to the judgements, such as headnotes, syllabi, tables of contents, on the grounds that he did not have authority to speak with the force of law. 
The Court also rejected the contention that the US Copyright Statute while excluding “work[s] prepared by an officer or employee of the United States Government as part of that person’s official duties” from copyright protection, does not establish a similar rule for the States. The Court held that the policy reasons that justify the Federal Government’s decision to forfeit copyright protection for its own proprietary works, does not suggest an intent to displace the already narrow government edicts doctrine with respect to the States. The doctrine does not apply to non-lawmaking officials, leaving States free to assert copyright in the vast majority of expressive works they produce, such as those created by their universities, libraries, tourism offices, and so on.
The State of Georgia also contended on policy grounds that the purpose of the Copyright Act is to promote the creation and dissemination of creative works and without such protection many states will be unable induce private parties to assist in the preparation of affordable annotated codes for widespread distribution. The Court however states that it cannot decide this matter and that the Congress is the right body to decide such a policy issue.
Additionally, contrary to the Justice Thomas' dissent and State of Georgia's contention that the government edicts doctrine lacks textual footing, the Court stated that the doctrine has textual footing by way of the "authorship" requirement. 
The Court finally observes that a decision allowing copyright protection for anything merely falling short of being classified as a statute or a judicial opinion would result in First Amendment concerns. 
 Dissenting opinions 
 Justice Thomas joined by Justice Alito and Justice Breyer 
Justice Thomas holds that regulations cannot be copyrighted, but accompanying notes lacking legal force can be.,  (CA6 1898) (Harlan, J.)  The opinion states that the majority opinion was flawed on the following precedential and textual grounds.
 Precedential Grounds
The opinion states that the majority incorrectly interpreted precedents and that they did not attempt to examine the root and context of the precedents. The opinion notes that while precedents establish that judicial opinion cannot be copyrighted,; . they do not exclude the notes prepared by an official court reporter published together with reported opinions from copyright protection. 
The opinion illustrates the context in which Banks was decided, i.e., in the 19th century, much before multiple revisions made to the Copyright Act. At the time, copyright protection was extended for books, maps, prints, engravings, musical and dramatic compositions, photographs, and works of art. It notes that judicial opinions were starkly different from this list of works because they are legally binding, reflect the application of the rule of law, and in turn represent the implementation of the will of the people. They note that in Banks, the Court never categorically prohibited the States from holding copyrights as authors or assignees and merely stated that the State fell outside the scope of the Act because it was not a “resident” or “citizen of the United States,” (which were the statutory requirements for "authorship" back then). The opinion observes that the Court in Banks stated “[w]hether the State could take out a copyright for itself, or could enjoy the benefit of one taken out by an individual for it, as the assignee of a citizen of the United States or a resident therein, who should be the author of a book, is a question not involved in the present case, and we refrain from considering it." 
The opinion also notes that in Callaghan, the Court, while accepting the principle in Banks, limited its application by concluding that “no [similar] ground of public policy” justified denying a state official a copyright “cover[ing] the matter which is the result of his intellectual labor.”  
The opinion distinguishes judicial opinions and statutes from annotations as follows:
First, annotations do not embody the will of the people since the General Assembly does not enact statutory annotation under its legislative powerSee Ga. Const., Art. III, §1, 5; Art. V §2  ¶4(they do not pass through the processes of bicameralism and presentment). They also do not create any binding legal obligations.OCGA §1–1–7 states that “[a]ll historical cita tions, title and chapter analyses, and notes set out in this Code are given for the purpose of convenient reference and do not constitute part of the law.”; Section 1–1–1 provides that “[t]he statutory portion of the codification of Georgia laws . . . is enacted and shall have the effect of statutes enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia."  
Second, unlike judges and legislators, the creators of annotations are incentivised by copyright law and profits. 
Third, while copyrighting judicial opinions and statutes would be contrary to fair notice of the laws, i.e., the legal presumption that every citizen is aware of the law, the same does not apply to annotations since they are non-binding.
They state that it is incorrect to hold that without access to annotations readers will be unable to understand the true meaning of the law and the status of the law. This is because, users may directly access court decisions themselves to understand the above. Inability to access the OCGA, therefore, only deprives readers of these additional functions and not the underlying legal information itself.
 Textual Grounds
The decision also questions the origins and the validity of the government edicts doctrine.  
They highlight four indications within the text of the Copyright Act to support their reading of the precedents:
First, the Act does not define the word "author" and neither does it make any reference to the government edicts doctrine. 
Second, while the Act excludes protection for works prepared by an officer or employee of the Government,; see also . the Act does not prohibit protection to works of state governments or works prepared at their behest.
Third, the Act notes that annotations are copyrightable derivative works..
Fourth, the Act provides that an author may hold a copyright in “material contributed” in a derivative work, “as distinguished from the preexisting material employed in the work.”; see also . 
 Policy issues
The opinion also highlights the difficulties in implementing the decision of the majority since nearly all States with annotated codes contract with private parties to make annotations who are almost invariably under the supervision of the legislative or judicial branch officers.Brief for State of Arkansas et al. as Amici Curiae 16–17 It states that disallowing copyright would result in the creation of an "economy-class" or sub par version of the Code, that would not contain these important annotations. This is because without the means of recuperating the resources spent on research for the annotations, this mechanism of contracting third parties to make annotations available at a fraction of a cost would cease to exist. 
It highlights the fact that the majority's decision fails to provide clarity on whether the factors which it used to classify the Commission as adjunct to the legislature (membership, funding etc) are exhaustive or illustrative and whether some factors possess more weightage when deciding whether to deem an oversight body a legislative adjunct.
 Justice Ginsburg joined by Justice Breyer 
The opinion notes that not every work produced by legislators is ineligible for copyright protection and that the government edicts doctrine shields only works that are (1) created by judges and legislators (2) in the course of their judicial and legislative duties.
While observing that annotations created by judges are not copyrightable while those created by legislators are, she highlights the difference between the roles of the two- while the judiciary is assigned the duty of interpretation and application of the law,. and at times making applicable law, the legislature on the other hand is assigned the role of making laws, instead of construing the statutes after they are enacted. 
Justice Ginsburg held that the annotations in the OCGA are not done in a legislative capacity because:
First, the annotations are not created contemporaneously with the statutes and merely a commentary on the statutes that have already been enacted. This sets the OCGA annotations apart from uncopyrightable legislative materials like committee reports, generated before a law’s enactment, and tied tightly to the task of law-formulation.
Second, annotations are descriptive rather than prescriptive and contain the views of the author on the given statute. 
Third, annotations are given for the purpose of convenient reference by the public and aim to inform the citizenry at large. Merely because they are considered to be merged with the statutory provisions does not render the annotations to be more than explanatory, referential, or commentarial material.
See also
 Edict of government
 Veeck v. Southern Building Code Congress Int'l
 References 
Further reading
.
.
.
.
External links
Category:Public.Resource.Org
Category:2020 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:Promulgation
Category:United States copyright case law
"""

From "Georgia v. Randolph" ==> """
Georgia v. Randolph, 547 U.S. 103 (2006), is a case in which the U.S. Supreme Court held that without a search warrant, police had no constitutional right to search a house where one resident consents to the search while another resident objects. The Court distinguished this case from the "co-occupant consent rule" established in United States v. Matlock, , which permitted one resident to consent in absence of the co-occupant.
Background
Respondent Scott Randolph and his wife, Janet Randolph, separated in late May 2001, when she left the marital residence in Americus, Georgia, and went to stay with her parents in Canada, taking their son and some belongings. In July, she returned to the Americus house with the child; the record does not register her motive for returning.
On the morning of July 6, she complained to the police that, after a domestic dispute, her husband had taken their son from the marital residence, and when the police reached the Randolph house, she told them that her husband was a cocaine user whose drug use habit had caused the family financial troubles. She mentioned the marital problems, saying that she and their son had only recently returned after a several weeks' stay with her parents. Shortly after the policemen arrived, Scott Randolph returned, explaining to them that he had removed their son to a neighbor's house, worried that his wife might again take the boy out of the U.S.; Scott Randolph denied using cocaine, and countered that it was his wife, Janet, who used illegal drugs and abused alcohol.
One of the policemen, Sergeant Murray, went with Janet Randolph to reclaim the Randolph child from the neighbor; when they returned, she renewed her complaints about her husband's drug use and volunteered that there were “items of drug evidence” in the house. Sergeant Murray asked Scott Randolph for permission to search the house; he refused. The sergeant then asked Janet Randolph's consent to search the Randolph house, which she readily gave, and then led him to an upstairs bedroom she identified as Scott's, where the sergeant noticed a section of a drinking straw with a powder residue he suspected was cocaine. He then left the house to get an evidence bag from his patrol car, and to call the district attorney's office, which instructed him to stop the search and apply for a search warrant. When Sergeant Murray returned to the house, Janet Randolph withdrew her consent to searching the house. The police took the drinking straw to the police station, along with the arrested occupants. After obtaining a search warrant, they returned to the Randolph house and seized further evidence of illegal drug use, on the basis of which Scott Randolph was indicted for possession of cocaine.
At court, Scott Randolph moved to suppress the evidence, as products of a warrantless search of his house, unauthorized by his wife's consent over his express refusal. The trial court denied the motion, ruling that Janet Randolph had "common authority" to consent to the search.
Opinion of the Court
In a 5-3 opinion written by Justice Souter, the Court held a co-resident could refuse consent to a police search, even if another resident consented.The Supreme Court, 2005 Term — Leading Cases, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 163 (2006). Specifically:
The question here is whether such an evidentiary seizure is likewise lawful with the permission of one occupant when the other, who later seeks to suppress the evidence, is present at the scene and expressly refuses to consent. We hold that, in the circumstances here at issue, a physically present co- occupant's stated refusal to permit entry prevails, rendering the warrantless search unreasonable and invalid as to him.
The Court's decision distinguished its previous rulings in Illinois v. Rodriguez, 497 U.S. 177 (1990) and United States v. Matlock, 415 U.S. 164 (1974). In Rodriguez and Matlock the police obtained voluntary consent from a co-occupant at the residence and found evidence implicating another resident who was not present when the police obtained consent. The Court said that the present case was different from the previous two in that the co-resident was not present to refuse consent to the search. In Rodriguez the co-occupant who later objected to the search was asleep in a bedroom within the residence; in Matlock, the later-objecting co-occupant was located in a nearby police vehicle.
Justice Alito, who had yet to be confirmed when the case was argued, did not participate in the argument or decision of the case.
Justice Stevens's concurrence
Justices Stevens and Breyer separately concurred with the Court majority opinion. Justice Stevens's concurrence attacked the "originalists" view of the Fourth Amendment, noting that the search would remain prohibited had the Court attempted to apply the law based upon the meaning intended by the Founding Fathers, noting that when the Fourth Amendment was written, the law of the time would have made the husband the "master of his house":
In the 18th century . . . given the then-prevailing dramatic differences between the property rights of the husband and the far lesser rights of the wife, only the consent of the husband would matter. Whether "the master of the house" consented or objected, his decision would control. Thus, if "original understanding" were to govern the outcome of this case, the search was clearly invalid because the husband did not consent. History, however, is not dispositive, because it is now clear, as a matter of constitutional law, that the male and the female are equal partners.
Justice Breyer's concurrence
Justice Breyer's concurrence stressed that the majority opinion was rather specific, writing "the circumstances here include the following": The search at issue was a search solely for evidence. The objecting party was present and made his objection known clearly and directly to the officers seeking to enter the house. The officers did not justify their search on grounds of possible evidence destruction. Cf. Thornton v. United States, 541 U.S. 615, 620–622 (2004); Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives' Assn., 489 U.S. 602, 623 (1989); Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757, 770–771 (1966). And, as far as the record reveals, the officers might easily have secured the premises and sought a warrant permitting them to enter. See Illinois v. McArthur, 531 U.S. 326 (2001). Thus, the "totality of the circumstances" present here do not suffice to justify abandoning the Fourth Amendment's traditional hostility to police entry into a home without a warrant. I stress the totality of the circumstances, however, because, were the circumstances to change significantly, so should the result.
Chief Justice Roberts's dissent
Chief Justice Roberts feared the Court's ruling would limit the ability of police to combat domestic violence. Chief Justice Roberts also noted that the purpose of the Fourth Amendment was to protect individual privacy, but any person who shares a dwelling (or, as Chief Justice Roberts points out, a locker or a hard drive) with another person may anticipate that the other person sharing access to their belongings might turn them over to authorities. In short, to share a home with someone is to surrender privacy as to that person, who might then consent to an invasion of it. Roberts also asserted that the majority opinion was arbitrary, as previous case law had held an objecting resident who was being held in the police car, as opposed to in the house, could be ignored with respect to the search.
 Justice Scalia's dissent 
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a short dissent as a response to Justice Stevens's concurrence:
The issue of who could give such consent generally depended, in turn, on “historical and legal refinements” of property law. As property law developed, individuals who previously could not authorize a search might become able to do so, and those who once could grant such consent might no longer have that power . . . There is nothing new or surprising in the proposition that our unchanging Constitution refers to other bodies of law that might themselves change . . . Finally, I must express grave doubt that today’s decision deserves Justice Stevens’ celebration as part of the forward march of women’s equality. Given the usual patterns of domestic violence, how often can police be expected to encounter the situation in which a man urges them to enter the home while a woman simultaneously demands that they stay out?
Further cases
In August 2006, a California trial court suppressed evidence after police acquired an absent resident's permission to enter a dwelling, but failed to knock-and-announce before entering to discover another resident using drugs.Recent Case: California Superior Court Holds That the Knock-and-Announce Requirement Is Applicable When an Absent Third Party Has Consented to Search, 120 Harv. L. Rev. 836 (2007).  In Fernandez v. California (2014), the Supreme Court held that, when the resident who objects to the search of the dwelling is removed for objectively reasonable purposes (such as lawful arrest), the remaining resident may validly consent to search.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 547
List of United States Supreme Court cases
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:2006 in United States case law
"""

From "Georgia v. South Carolina (1990)" ==> """
Georgia v. South Carolina, 497 U.S. 376 (1990), is one of a long series of U.S. Supreme Court cases determining the borders of the state of Georgia.  In this case, the Court decided the exact border within the Savannah River and whether islands should be a part of Georgia or South Carolina. It also decided the seaward border.Georgia v. South Carolina, .
Background
In 1787, the two states agreed in the Treaty of Beaufort that the boundary along the Savannah River was the river's "most northern branch or stream," "reserving all islands in [the river] to Georgia".497 U.S. at 376-77. In a subsequent 1922 Supreme Court decision, also called Georgia v. South Carolina, 257 U.S. 516, also held that all islands in the river belong to Georgia, but that the border should be in the middle of the river between the two shores, with the border halfway between any island and the South Carolina shore.
Since the 1922 case, a number of new islands had been created in the river between the city of Savannah and the ocean, due to the deposit of dredging spoilage or the natural deposit of sediments. In some cases, the new islands were on the South Carolina side of the previously drawn boundary, and Georgia claimed that once a new island emerged, the border should be moved to the midpoint between the new island and the South Carolina shore of the river. In some cases, the state of South Carolina had been collecting property tax from the land owners and policing the land in question for a number of years.497 U.S. at 392-3.
When an island causes the border to leave the middle of the river, it raises the question as to how the border line should return to the middle of the river at each end of the island. South Carolina advocated a right angle bend at each tip of the island, while Georgia advocated a "triequidistant" method which kept the border an equal distance between the two shores and the tip of the island (resulting in a smooth curve.)497 U.S. at 401.
The Savannah River north of Elba Island was particularly wide, and the Army Corps of Engineers built a training wall to narrow the channel to prevent it from filling up with silt. The Corps also filled the area behind the training wall with dredging spoilage. Both South Carolina and Georgia claimed the land that was created behind the training wall, even though it was on the South Carolina side of the river. This new land was called "Denwill and Horseshoe Shoal".497 U.S. at 402.
Given the valuable natural resources off the Atlantic Ocean shore, the two states also contested where the off-shore boundary between the two states is located. The typical procedure would be to locate the mouth of the Savannah River and then draw a line perpendicular to the shore from the midpoint of the river's mouth. However, the river does not have a clearly defined mouth. Tybee Island forms the southern edge of its mouth, but there is no highlands on the opposite side. South Carolina claimed that a submerged shoal formed the north side of the mouth, while Georgia claimed that Hilton Head Island was the north side of the mouth. The issue is complicated by a bend in the Atlantic coast at this point with Georgia's coast about 20 degrees from true north and South Carolina's coast about 47 degrees from true north.497 U.S. at 406. A perpendicular line drawn from each of these angles results in an overlapping 27 degree wedge claimed by both states.
In 1978, the Court appointed Walter E. Hoffman, Senior Judge of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, as special master to gather the facts and make a recommendation.497 U.S. at 379.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Blackmun delivered a plurality opinion and held that the new island on the South Carolina side of the border belonged to that state rather than Georgia. Georgia had lost the right to that land through prescription and acquiescence. He also found that any new islands emerging after the border was drawn would not cause the border to automatically shift so as to place the island in Georgia. The Court also adopted Georgia's "triequidistant" method for determining the boundary around the existing islands, resulting in the border line curving around those islands.497 U.S. at 401-02.
The Court awarded Denwill and Horseshoe Shoal to Georgia because its creation was "primarily avulsive in nature." The Court also placed the newly emerged Bird Island in Georgia.497 U.S. at 405. The Court also set a compromise seaward boundary drawing it perpendicular to a line between Tybee Island and Hilton Head.
Justice White, joined by Justice Marshall, dissented in part. They would draw the boundary at islands at right angles to the tips of the islands back to the middle of the river.497 U.S. at 411-12.
Justice Stevens, joined by Justice Scalia, dissented from the seaward boundary portion of the opinion. This opinion would average the angles of the Georgia and South Carolina coast lines and draw the boundary at an azimuth of this boundary would be approximately 123 1/2 degrees.
Justice Scalia, joined by Justice Kennedy, dissented from the Denwill and Horseshoe Shoal portion of the opinion and would place that land in South Carolina.
Justice Kennedy, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist, dissented from the portions of the opinion finding that newly formed islands belong in whatever state has that portion of the river. Kennedy reads the Treaty as giving all islands to Georgia, so Kennedy would place them in Georgia unless they were lost by prescription and acquiescence. Accordingly, Kennedy agrees with the majority that the Barnwell Islands belong to South Carolina.497 U.S. at 416.
One history text described the case, "In 1990 the United States Supreme Court awarded South Carolina 7,000 acres of water and 3,000 acres of land along the Savannah River, increasing the size of the state by four and a half square miles."
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:Internal territorial disputes of the United States
Category:1990 in United States case law
Category:1990 in Georgia (U.S. state)
Category:1990 in South Carolina
"""

From "Georgia v. Stanton" ==> """
Georgia v. Stanton aka The Library Case, 73 U.S. (6 Wall.) 50 (1868), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that the court does not hold jurisdiction over the political question of enforcement of the Reconstruction Acts against the Southern States.. The court did recognize its original jurisdiction in the matter and its ability to decide issues of the rights of persons or property. Nevertheless, the case before it was not one of persons or property, but the political question of whether the federal government could annul state governments and replace them with new ones. Since it found that the issue raised by the three Southern States was a political one, the court decided it did not possess jurisdiction over the subject matter of the case.
Background
In an attempt to prevent the enforcement of the Reconstruction Acts following the civil war, the state of Georgia filed suit against the Secretary of War and two of his generals. "The case arose under the Court's original jurisdiction."
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 73
References
External links
Category:1868 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Chase Court
Category:Reconstruction Era
Category:Legal history of Georgia (U.S. state)
"""

From "Georgia v. Tennessee Copper Co." ==> """
Georgia v. Tennessee Copper Co., (1907), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held that States, as quasi-sovereigns, have parens patriae standing to sue for environmental harms, in this case fumes from copper mining.
 See also 
 List of United States Supreme Court cases involving standing
References
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1907 in United States case law
"""

From "Georgia, Florida, & Alabama Railway Co. v. Blish Milling Co." ==> """
thumb|right|John Hedding Blish Founder
thumb|right|Elbridge Blish Thompson Sales Manager & Secretary
thumb|right|Blish Milling Company c. 1910
Georgia, Florida, & Alabama Railway Co. v. Blish Milling Co., 241 U.S. 190 (1916), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States.
The Blish Milling Company
The Blish Milling Company of Seymour, Indiana, founded by John Blish, son-in-law of the city founder Meedy Shields, shipped flour to Bainbridge, Georgia via the Georgia, Florida and Alabama Railroad. It arrived at its destination with water damage and the Blish Milling Company sued the railroad and the awarded judgment was upheld in Georgia Court of Appeals. The case was then appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States and set a Precedent.
During this time, Blish Thompson, John Blish's grandson, was company secretary and sales manager. He attended Hanover College and Yale University but tragically lost his life in the sinking of the RMS Lusitania. He was a first class passenger on his way to the Netherlands for a business trip.
Jurisdiction
U.S. Supreme Court 
GEORGIA, F. & A. RY. CO. v. BLISH MILLING CO., 241 U.S. 190 (1916) 
241 U.S. 190
Plaintiffs
GEORGIA, FLORIDA, & ALABAMA RAILWAY COMPANY, Plff. in Err., 
v.
BLISH MILLING COMPANY. 
No. 292.
Dates
Argued and Submitted March 15, 1916. 
Decided May 8, 1916.
Attorneys
[241 U.S. 190, 191]   Messrs. T. S. Hawes, Alexander Akerman, and Charles Akerman for plaintiff in error. 
Messrs. A. L. Miller and E. M. Donalson for defendant in error.
Full summary and opinion
[241 U.S. 190, 192]   
Mr. Justice Hughes delivered the opinion of the court: 
The Blish Milling Company brought this action in trover against the Georgia, Florida, & Alabama Railway Company, and recovered judgment, which was affirmed by the court of appeals of Georgia. 15 Ga. App. 142, 82 S. E. 784. The facts are these: 
On May 13, 1910, the Blish Milling Company shipped from Seymour, Indiana, to Bainbridge, Georgia, a carload of flour consigned to its own order, with direction to notify Draper-Garrett Grocery Company at Bainbridge. The bill of lading was issued by the Baltimore & Ohio Southwestern Railroad Company. The shipper's sight draft upon the Draper- Garrett Grocery Company, for $1,109.89, covering the price of the flour, with a carrying charge, was attached to the bill of lading and forwarded to a bank in Bainbridge for collection. The flour was transferred to another car by the Central of Georgia Railway Company, a connecting carrier, and reached Bainbridge on June 2, 1910, over the line of the Georgia, Florida, & Alabama Railway Company, the plaintiff in error, in accordance with routing. The plaintiff in error, without requiring payment of the draft and surrender of the bill [241 U.S. 190, 193]   of lading (which were ultimately returned to the Blish Milling Company), delivered the car to the Draper-Garrett Grocery Company immediately on its arrival by placing it on the sidetrack of that company. In the course of unloading, the Grocery Company discovered that some of the flour was wet, and thereupon reloaded the part removed and returned the flour to the plaintiff in error. The subsequent course of events is thus stated by the court of appeals (id. pp. 144, 145): 
'The railway company' (that is, the plaintiff in error) 'retook possession of the car and unloaded it, and in a few days sold, as perishable property, a part of the flour alleged to be damaged, and on December 23, 1910, sold the remainder. On June 3, 1910, after the Grocery Company had turned the flour back to the railway company, B. C. Prince, traffic manager of the Georgia, Florida, & Alabama Railway Company, telegraphed to the Blish Milling Company as follows: 'Flour order notify Draper-Garrett Grocery Company refused account damage. Hold at your risk and expense. Advise disposition.' On the next day the Miling Company replied by telegraphing to Prince, 'Sending our representative there. What is nature of damage?' To this Prince replied: 'Flour transferred in route. Slight damage by water, apparently rough handling. When will your representative reach Bainbridge?' The Blish Milling Company replied that its man would be there that night or the next day. On June 7 (after the Milling Company's representative had reached Bainbridge and conferred with the agents of the railway company and with the Grocery Company) the Milling Company sent a final telegram, saying, 'We will make claim against railroad for entire contents of car at invoice price. Must refuse shipment as we cannot handle.' It appears, from the evidence of Mr. Draper, that the price of flour declined after his order was given and before the flour reached Bainbridge. There [241 U.S. 190, 194]   is conflict in the evidence as to a tender of the flour by the railway company to the Milling Company's representative. According to some of the testimony, about 18 barrels of the flour had been sold by the railway company before the alleged tender was made, and therefore it was not within the power of the carrier to tender the shipment in its entirety.' The verdict in favor of the Milling Company was for $1,084.50, from which the court of appeals required a deduction of the amount of the unpaid freight, which was held to have been erroneously included. 
With other defenses the railway company pleaded that the shipper had failed to comply with the following provision of the bill of lading, issued by the initial carrier: 'Claims for loss, damage, or delay must be made in writing to the carrier at the point of delivery or at the point of origin within four months after the delivery of the property, or, in case of failure to make delivery, then within four months after a reasonable time for delivery has elapsed. Unless claims are so made, the carrier shall not be liable.' This defense was overruled. The court of appeals stated that 'so far as appears from the record, no claim was filed by the shipper,' but deemed the provision to be inapplicable. Id. p. 149. 
There are only two questions presented here, and these are thus set forth in the brief of the plaintiff in error: 
'1st. That the plaintiff's exclusive remedy was against the initial carrier, the Baltimore & Ohio Southwestern Railroad Company, under the Carmack amendment of 20 of the Hepburn bill [34 Stat. at L. 593, chap. 3591, Comp. Stat. 1913, 8592]. 
'2d. That, under the stipulation in the bill of lading providing for the filing of claims for loss or damage, the action was barred.' 
The first contention is met by repeated decisions of this court. The connecting carrier is not relieved from liability by the Carmack amendment, but the bill of lading required to be issued by the initial carrier upon [241 U.S. 190, 195]   an interstate shipment governs the entire transportation, and thus fixes the obligations of all participating carriers to the extent that the terms of the bill of lading are applicable and valid. 'The liability of any carrier in the route over which the articles were routed, for loss or damage, is that imposed by the act as measured by the original contract of shipment, so far as it is valid under the act.' Kansas City Southern R. Co. v. Carl, 227 U.S. 639, 648, 57 S. L. ed. 683, 686, 33 Sup. Ct. Rep. 391. See Adams Exp. Co. v. Croninger, 226 U.S. 491, 507, 508 S., 57 L. ed. 314, 320, 321, 44 L.R.A.(N.S.) 257, 33 Sup. Ct. Rep. 148; Cleveland, C. C. & St. L. R. Co. v. Dettlebach, 239 U.S. 588, 591, 60 S. L. ed. —, 36 Sup. Ct. Rep. 177; Southern R. Co. v. Prescott, 240 U.S. 632, 637, 60 S. L. ed. —, 36 Sup. Ct. Rep. 469; Northern P. R. Co. v. Wall, decided April 24, 1916 [ 241 U.S. 87, 60 L. ed. —, 36 Sup. Ct. Rep. 493]. 
These decisions also established that the question as to the proper construction of the bill of lading is a Federal question. The clause with respect to the notice of claims-upon which the plaintiff in error relies in its second contention-specifically covers 'failure to make delivery.' It is said that this is not to be deemed to include a case where there was not only failure to deliver to the consignee, but actual delivery to another, or delivery in violation of instruction. But 'delivery' must mean delivery as required by the contract, and the terms of the stipulation are comprehensive,-fully adequate in their literal and natural meaning to cover all cases where the delivery has not been made as required. When the goods have been misdelivered there is as clearly a 'failure to make delivery' as when the goods have been lost or destroyed; and it is quite as competent in the one case as in the other for the parties to agree upon reasonable notice of the claim as a condition of liability. It may be urged that the carrier is bound to know whether it has delivered to the right person or according to instructions. This argument, however, even with respect to the particular carrier which makes a misdelivery, loses sight of the practical object in view. In fact, the transactions of a railroad company are multitudinous, and are carried on [241 U.S. 190, 196]   through numerous employees of various grades. Ordinarily the managing officers, and those responsible for the settlement and contest of claims, would be without actual knowledge of the facts of a particular transaction. The purpose of the stipulation is not to escape liability, but to facilitate prompt investigation. And, to this end, it is a precaution of obvious wisdom, and in no respect repugnant to public policy, that the carrier by its contracts should require reasonable notice of all claims against it even with respect to its own operations. 
There is, however, a further and controlling consideration. We are dealing with a clause in a bill of lading issued by the initial carrier. The statute casts upon the initial carrier responsibility with respect to the entire transportation. The aim was to establish unity of responsibility (Atlantic Coast Line R. Co. v. Riverside Mills, 219 U.S. 186, 199-203, 55 L. ed. 167, 179-181, 31 L.R.A.(N.S.) 7, 31 Sup. Ct. Rep. 164; New York, P. & N. R. Co. v. Peninsula Produce Exch., 240 U.S. 34, 38, 60 S. L. ed. —, 36 Sup. Ct. Rep. 230), and the words of the statute are comprehensive enough to embrace responsibility for all losses resulting from any failure to discharge a carrier's duty as to any part of the agreed transportation, which, as defined in the Federal act, includes delivery. It is not to be doubted that if, in the case of an interstate shipment under a through bill of lading, the terminal carrier makes a misdelivery, the initial carrier is liable; and when it inserts in its bill of lading a provision requiring reasonable notice of claims 'in case of failure to make delivery,' the fair meaning of the stipulation is that it includes all cases of such failure, as well those due to misdelivery as those due to the loss of the goods. But the provision in question is not to be construed in one way with respect to the initial carrier, and in another with respect to the connecting or terminal carrier. As we have said, the latter takes the goods under the bill of lading issued by the initial carrier, and its obligations are measured by its terms (Kansas City Southern R. Co. v. Carl, 227 U.S. 639, 648, 57 S. L. ed. 683, 686, 33 Sup. Ct. Rep. 391; Southern [241 U.S. 190, 197]   R. Co. v. Prescott, 240 U.S. 632, 637, 60 S. L. —, 36 Sup. Ct. Rep. 469); and if the clause must be deemed to cover a case of misdelivery when the action is brought against the initial carrier, it must equally have that effect in the case of the terminal carrier, which, in the contemplation of the parties, was to make the delivery. The clause gave abundant opportunity for presenting claims, and we regard it as both applicable and valid. 
In this view, it necessarily follows that the effect of the stipulation could not be escaped by the mere form of the action. The action is in trover, but, as the state court said: 'If we look beyond its technical denomination, the scope and effect of the action is nothing more than that of an action for damages against the delivering carrier.' 15 Ga. App. p. 147. It is urged, however, that the carrier, in making the misdelivery, converted the flour and thus abandoned the contract. But the parties could not waive the terms of the contract under which the shipment was made pursuant to the Federal act; nor could the carrier by its conduct give the shipper the right to ignore these terms which were applicable to that conduct, and hold the carrier to a different responsibility from that fixed by the agreement made under the published tariffs and regulations. A different view would antagonize the plain policy of the act and open the door to the very abuses at which the act was aimed. Chicago & A. R. Co. v. Kirby, 225 U.S. 155, 166, 56 S. L. ed. 1033, 1038, 32 Sup. Ct. Rep. 648, Ann. Cas. 1914A, 501; Kansas City Southern R. Co. v. Carl, supra; Atchison, T. & S. F. R. Co. v. Robinson, 233 U.S. 173, 181, 58 S. L. ed. 901, 905, 34 Sup. Ct. Rep. 556; Southern R. Co. v. Prescott, supra. We are not concerned in the present case with any question save as to the applicability of the provision, and its validity, and as we find it to be both applicable and valid, effect must be given to it. 
But, while this is so, we think that the plaintiff in error is not entitled to succeed in its ultimate contention under the stipulation for the reason that it appears that notice [241 U.S. 190, 198]   of the claim was in fact given. It is true that in the statement made by the court of appeals it is said that, so far as appears from the record, 'no claim was filed by the shipper.' We must assume, however, that this was in effect a construction of the provision as requiring a more formal notice than that which was actually sent. For the court had already set forth the uncontroverted facts in detail showing that the shipper (having made an investigation in response to the communication of the traffic manager of the railway company) had telegraphed to the latter, on June 7, 1910, only five days after the arrival of the goods at destination, as follows: 'We will make claim against railroad for entire contents of car at invoice price. Must refuse shipment as we cannot handle.' In the preceding telegrams which passed between the parties, and are detailed by the state court in stating the facts, the shipment had been adequately identified, so that this final telegram, taken with the others, established beyond question the particular shipment to which the claim referred, and was in substance the making of a claim within the meaning of the stipulation,-the object of which was to secure reasonable notice. We think that it sufficiently apprised the carrier of the character of the claim, for while it stated that the claim was for the entire contents of the car 'at invoice price,' this did not constitute such a variance from the claim for the value of the flour as to be misleading; and it is plain that no prejudice resulted. Granting that the stipulation is applicable and valid, it does not require documents in a particular form. It is addressed to a practical exigency and it is to be construed in a practical way. The stipulation required that the claim should be made in writing, but a telegram which, in itself, or taken with other telegrams, contained an adequate statement, must be deemed to satisfy this requirement. See Ryan v. United States, 136 U.S. 68, 83, 34 S. L. ed. 447, 453, 10 Sup. Ct. Rep. 913; Kleinhans v. Jones, [241 U.S. 190, 199]   15 C. C. A. 644, 37 U. S. App. 185, 68 Fed. 742, 745; Godwin v. Francis, L. R. 5 C. P. 295, 39 L. J. C. P. N. S. 121, 22 L. T. N. S. 338; Reg. v. Riley [241 U.S. 190, 1896]   1 Q. B. 309, 314, 321, 65 L. J. Mag. Cas. N. S. 74, 74 L. T. N. S. 254, 44 Week. Rep. 318, 18 Cox, C. C. 285, 65 J. P. 519, 10 Am. Crim. Rep. 402; Howley v. Whipple, 48 N. H. 487, 488; State v. Holmes, 56 Iowa, 588, 590, 41 Am. Rep. 121, 9 N. W. 894. 
Judgment affirmed.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 241
Additional court actions involving Blish Milling Co.
Blish Milling Co. v Detherage, 159 S.W. 816, 155 Ky. 319 Court of Appeals
External links
Present site of defunct Blish Milling Co. from Googlemap streetview
Blish family history
Article on Lusitania Sinking and Blish Thompson
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1916 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the White Court
Category:Railway litigation in 1916
"""

From "Germany v. Philipp" ==> """
Federal Republic of Germany v. Philipp, 592 U.S. ___ (2021), was a United States Supreme Court case that dealt with the applicability of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA) for heirs of victims of the Holocaust to sue Germany in the United States court systems for compensation for items that were taken by the Nazi Party during World War II.  At issue in the case was whether claims fell within the FSIA’s exception to sovereign immunity for “property taken in violation of international law,” 28 U.S.C. §1605(a)(3), given that the sovereign here was alleged to have engaged in a taking of its own nationals’ property; and whether courts can invoke the doctrine of international comity under the FSIA to abstain from exercising jurisdiction based on prudential considerations.  In an unanimous opinion by Chief Justice Roberts, the Court held that FSIA does not allow these survivors to sue Germany in U.S. court, as the sale was an act of expropriation of property rather than an act of genocide, though other means of recovery are still potentially available. 
The decision also resolved a related case, Republic of Hungary v. Simon, which examined the application of the doctrines of international comity and forum non conveniens for expropriation exception cases brought under the FSIA.  The Court decided the case per curiam based on the ruling of Germany v. Philipp on February 3, 2021.
Background
During World War II, the Nazi Party imprisoned numerous people, including a large number of Jewish people, and stripped them of their possessions. In other cases, the Nazi rule forced these people to sell their possessions at significantly reduced prices. At the center of the current case is the Guelph Treasure with an estimated value of  in 2020. The items were purchased by a consortium of Jewish art dealers prior to the war, but they were then forced to sell the collection at a third of its value in 1935 to agents of Hermann Göring. After the war, the Guelph Treasure pieces were moved to the Kunstgewerbemuseum Berlin (Museum of Decorative Arts) which is overseen by the Federal Republic of Germany under the Prussian Cultural Heritage Foundation, where they have remained as part of the exhibits.
Heirs of the Jewish art dealers began seeking means to recover the collection from Germany around 2008, first seeking action within Germany itself. They argued that any post-1933 sale should be treated as an act of coercion and thus considered invalid, but Germany ruled that the dealers sold the collection voluntarily and were compensated fairly, and thus the collection was acquired legitimately. The heirs turned to United States courts to sue Germany under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (FSIA), which normally gives immunities to foreign countries except in certain situations. The heirs claimed that the FSIA allowed for countries to be sued for violations of "rights in property taken in violation of international law", of which the acts of genocide that the Nazi Party performed during World War II would qualify.
The heirs brought suit against Germany and the Prussian Cultural Heritage Foundation to the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, seeking the value of the collection in compensation in exchange for letting Germany retain the collection. Germany moved to dismiss the case, claiming that the FSIA clause related to "rights in property" did not apply to the sale since there was no involvement of a foreign state at the time. The district court denied Germany's motion to dismiss. Germany appealed this to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, which upheld the District Court's refusal to dismiss. Subsequently, Germany filed a petition to the Supreme Court to rule on the applicability of FSIA to the case. The Court certified the case in July 2020.
Supreme Court
Oral hearings for the case were held on December 7, 2020, alongside those of Hungary v. Simon, a related case involving the use of FSIA to compensate heirs to Polish victims of the Holocaust whose possesses were stolen while they were transported to concentration camps. Observers to the oral hearings said that the Justices were wary of placing the United States court system in the middle of foreign affairs, a matter better resolved by the State Department.
The Supreme Court ruled in both cases on February 3, 2021. Chief Justice John Roberts delivered the unanimous opinion of the court for Germany vacating the lower court rulings and remanding the case for further consideration. The court determined that the heirs did not qualify for the "rights in property" allowance under the FSIA, which is reserved for the taking of property from one state by another, and not between a foreign state and individuals. Roberts' opinion believed that they needed to consider the original sale of the art under act of expropriation rather than genocide in determining if FSIA applied. Roberts also relied on an international case law from Jurisdictional Immunities of the State heard by the International Court of Justice, a rarity for the Supreme Court, while had determined for Germany that "a state is not deprived of immunity by reason of the fact that it is accused of serious violations of international human rights law." Roberts wrote that by taking the heirs' position, they would undermine other provisions of FSIA that Congress had explicitly included, and open the United States itself to claims from other foreign courts. Roberts stated in his opinion that there may be other means through which the heirs could seek legal redress from Germany in the United States court systems beyond FSIA, which should be explored with the remanded case.
In Hungary v. Simon, the court issued a per curiam order based on the Germany decision to remand its case back to lower courts for further review.
 References 
 External links 
Category:2021 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act case law
"""

From "Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc." ==> """
Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U.S. 323 (1974), was a landmark decision of the US Supreme Court establishing the standard of First Amendment protection against defamation claims brought by private individuals.  The Court held that, so long as they do not impose liability without fault, states are free to establish their own standards of liability for defamatory statements made about private individuals.  However, the Court also ruled that if the state standard is lower than actual malice, the standard applying to public figures, then only actual damages may be awarded..
The consequence is that strict liability for defamation is unconstitutional in the United States; the plaintiff must be able to show that the defendant acted negligently or with an even higher level of mens rea.  In many other common law countries, strict liability for defamation is still the rule.
Background of the case
In 1968, a Chicago police officer, Richard Nuccio, shot and killed Ronald Nelson.  After the officer was convicted of second-degree murder, Nelson's family retained a lawyer, Elmer Gertz, to represent them in civil litigation against the officer.
A year later, American Opinion, a publication of the John Birch Society, ran a series of articles falsely alleging the existence of a Communist conspiracy to discredit local police agencies and thus facilitate their replacement by a national police force that could more effectively implement the dictatorship they planned to impose on the country. One of those touched on the Nuccio case, claiming that the officer had been framed at his criminal trial and making strong allegations about Gertz. It claimed that he had orchestrated Nuccio's conviction and that he was a member of various communist front organizations. It further implied that he had a lengthy criminal record himself and used various anti-communist terms of abuse ("Leninist", "Communist-fronter") to describe him.
Lower court proceedings
Gertz filed suit in federal court against Robert Welch, Inc. (the John Birch Society's legal name), claiming its article had defamed and injured his reputation as a lawyer.  The John Birch Society moved for summary judgment, arguing that Gertz was a public figure under the recently enunciated Curtis Publishing Co. v. Butts standard,. which applied the New York Times Co. v. Sullivan. standard to anyone who was sufficiently public, not just government officials. Thus, it was argued, their statements about him were specially privileged and the plaintiff would have to demonstrate actual malice. However, the magazine's editor admitted in an affidavit filed with the motion that he had made no independent effort to verify the claims in the article and had simply relied on the author's reputation and previous work.
The court denied the motion, suggesting that Gertz would need to prove only negligence.  At the summing up, however, the court determined that he was neither a public figure nor a public official, and instructed the jury to consider only damages, including punitive damages. Gertz was awarded $50,000.
However the defendants filed a "motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, or in the alternative for a new trial "  which Judge Decker allowed on the grounds that closer reading of the law persuaded him that Times applied insofar as it brought "matters of public interest" into the scope of requiring "actual malice" (knowledge of untruth or reckless disregard for the truth).  Decker opined (in a memorandum opinion) that Gertz had failed to show actual malice.  (Gertz remarks in his book, that since he had been specifically instructed that there was no need to show actual malice, he expected, at this point in the opinion, a new trial to be ordered.)  Decker granted the motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, saying that the law compelled it.
Gertz appealed to contest the applicability of the New York Times standard to this case.  The Seventh Circuit  affirmed the trial court's verdict.
The Court's decision
The Supreme Court decided the case in a 5-4 majority opinion delivered by Lewis Franklin Powell, Jr., with a separate concurrence by Harry Blackmun. All four dissenting justices filed separate opinions.
Majority opinion
After reviewing the case history and prior decisions, Powell began with a reminder that "Under the First Amendment there is no such thing as a false idea ... (it) requires that we protect some falsehood in order to protect speech that matters."
However, he rejected the idea that the mere public interest of the subject should outweigh any consideration of Gertz's status as a private or public figure. The latter, he noted, have access to more ways of counteracting allegations about them than private figures do, and thus they deserved a higher standard to prove libel. He also highly doubted that one could involuntarily become a public figure.
Gertz "had achieved no general fame or notoriety in the community," despite some public service in his past, and therefore did not meet the Sullivan or Curtis tests. "He plainly did not thrust himself into the vortex of this public issue, nor did he engage the public's attention in an attempt to influence its outcome."
"For these reasons, we conclude that the States should retain substantial latitude in their efforts to enforce a legal remedy for defamatory falsehood injurious to the reputation of a private individual," Powell said.
However, in the one aspect of the decision that was favorable to the appellees, the Court also ruled that states could not impose a strict liability standard for defamation (i.e., plaintiffs had to be able to show fault of some kind) and that juries could not be allowed to award punitive damages, such as the $50,000 Gertz had received, absent any showing of actual malice, since juries could use that power to punish unpopular opinions. A new trial was ordered.
Blackmun's short concurrence praised his brethren for clarifying an issue he had felt was left undecided in Rosenbloom v. Metromedia, Inc.,. one of the earlier defamation cases. He also scoffed at fears expressed by dissenters that the press was now too unconstrained: "What the Court has done, I believe, will have little, if any, practical effect on the functioning of responsible journalism."
Dissenting opinions
The minority chose a variety of grounds for its disagreement. In the longest, Byron White accused his colleagues of overreaching, a common theme of his dissents. "The Court, in a few printed pages, has federalized major aspects of libel law by declaring unconstitutional in important respects the prevailing defamation law in all or most of the 50 States," he said. "There are wholly insufficient grounds for scuttling the libel laws of the States in such wholesale fashion, to say nothing of deprecating the reputation interest of ordinary citizens and rendering them powerless to protect themselves... It is an ill-considered exercise of the power entrusted to this Court."
William O. Douglas, on the other hand, felt that libel laws were too strict even as it was, and that leaving liability standards for private figures up to the states was too capricious:
This of course leaves the simple negligence standard as an option with the jury free to impose damages upon a finding that the publisher failed to act as "a reasonable man." With such continued erosion of First Amendment protection, I fear that it may well be the reasonable man who refrains from speaking.Gertz, 418 U.S. at 360 (Douglas, J., dissenting).
William Brennan joined him in fearing that the press in some states could be too easily restricted and practice self-censorship in reporting on public affairs as a result. Warren Burger's short dissent worried that the decision might make it less likely that lawyers would be willing to take the cases of unpopular clients.Gertz, 418 U.S. at 355 (Burger, C.J., dissenting).
Disposition
Gertz won the retrial at District Court, which awarded him $400,000 (including $300,000 in punitive damages). The verdict was sustained on appeal, and the case finally ended when the Court denied the John Birch Society certiorari in 1983.. Gertz, a prominent civil libertarian, said that the jury verdict had not only vindicated him "but struck a blow for responsible journalism."
Subsequent jurisprudence
Since the majority opinion emphatically stated that there was "no such thing as a false idea," observers and libel law experts expected the court to define an opinion privilege against libel the next time an appropriate case came up. It took sixteen years, and they were surprised and disappointed by Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co.,. which explicitly rejected the idea, saying that existing protections it had recognized were sufficient to meet the requirements of the First Amendment.  Only in New York, where state courts have ruled all statements of opinion are protected as long as they do not allege illegal conduct, does the privilege exist.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 418
References
Further reading
Gertz, Elmer, Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc.: The Story of the Landmark Libel Case, Southern Illinois University Press, 1992. .
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States defamation case law
Category:1974 in United States case law
Category:John Birch Society
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
"""

From "Gibbons v. Ogden" ==> """
Gibbons v. Ogden, 22 U.S. (9 Wheat.) 1 (1824), was a landmark decision of the Supreme Court of the United States which held that the power to regulate interstate commerce, which was granted to Congress by the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution, encompassed the power to regulate navigation..John Steele Gordon  "10 Moments That Made American Business," American Heritage, February/March 2007. The decision is credited with supporting the economic growth of the antebellum United States and the creation of national markets. Gibbons v. Ogden has since provided the basis for Congress' regulation of railroads, freeways and television and radio broadcasts.
The case was argued by some of America's most admired and capable attorneys at the time. The exiled Irish patriot Thomas Addis Emmet and Thomas J. Oakley argued for Ogden, and U.S. Attorney General William Wirt and Daniel Webster argued for Gibbons.
Background
In 1798 the New York State Legislature granted to Robert R. Livingston and Robert Fulton exclusive navigation privileges of all the waters within the jurisdiction of that state with boats moved by fire or steam for a term of twenty years. Livingston and Fulton subsequently also petitioned other states and territorial legislatures for similar monopolies in the hope of developing a national network of steamboat lines, but only the Orleans Territory accepted their petition and awarded them a monopoly on the lower Mississippi.David P. Billington, Donald C. Jackson, Martin V. Melosi, The History of Large Federal Dams: Planning, Design, and Construction in the Era of Big Dams, pp 13–14, U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Denver, Colorado, 2005
Aware of the potential of the new steamboat navigation, competitors challenged Livingston and Fulton by arguing that the commerce power of the federal government was exclusive and superseded state laws. Legal challenges followed, and in response, the monopoly attempted to undercut its rivals by selling them franchises or buying their boats. Former New Jersey Governor Aaron Ogden had tried to defy the monopoly but ultimately purchased a license from a Livingston and Fulton assignee in 1815 and entered business with Thomas Gibbons from Georgia. The partnership collapsed three years later, however, when Gibbons operated another steamboat on Ogden's route between Elizabeth-town, New Jersey (now Elizabeth), and New York City, which had been licensed by the United States Congress under a 1793 law regulating the coasting trade. The partners ended up in the New York Court for the Trial of Impeachments, which granted a permanent injunction against Gibbons in 1820.
Case
Aaron Ogden filed a complaint in the Court of Chancery of New York to ask the court to restrain Thomas Gibbons from operating on these waters. Ogden's lawyer contended that states often passed laws on issues regarding interstate matters and should have fully concurrent power with Congress on matters concerning interstate commerce.
Gibbons's lawyer, Daniel Webster, argued that Congress had exclusive national power over interstate commerce according to Article I, Section 8, Clause 3, of the Constitution and that to argue otherwise would result in confusing and contradictory local regulatory policies. The Court of Chancery of New York and the Court of Errors of New York found in favor of Ogden and issued an injunction to restrict Gibbons from operating his boats.
Gibbons appealed to the Supreme Court and argued, as he had in New York, that the monopoly conflicted with federal law. After several delays, the court began discussing the meaning of the commerce clause in 1824, which by that time had become an issue of wider interest. Congress was debating a bill to provide a federal survey of roads and canals.Todd Shallat, Water and Bureaucracy: Origins of the Federal Responsibility for Water Resources, 1787–1838 , pp 13-15, Natural Resources Journal 32 (Winter 1992)
Southerners, in particular, were growing more sensitive to what result a holding for exclusive federal jurisdiction over commerce would mean to them as sectional disputes, especially over slavery, were increasing. Just 18 months prior to oral arguments in the Gibbons v. Ogden case, the people of Charleston, South Carolina, had been dismayed at the revelation of Denmark Vesey's plotted slave revolt. The statehouse quickly followed up the preemptive suppression of the rebellion with the Negro Seamen Act, requiring free black sailors on ships coming into the state to be jailed for the duration of the ship's stay in port. The act was promptly struck down as unconstitutional by Associate Justice Johnson while he was riding federal circuit on grounds that the act violated commercial treaty provisions with Great Britain. South Carolina emphatically rejected Johnson's holding, and talk quickly emerged of nullification and violent disunion. To thread the needle in the Gibbons case, the Court would need to deliver a holding that both defended national power over interstate commerce but did not eradicate state police powers that Southern whites viewed as vital to their very survival.
Decision of Supreme Court
The US Supreme Court ruled in favor of Gibbons. Congress had the right to regulate interstate commerce. The sole decided source of Congress's power to promulgate the law at issue was the Commerce Clause. Accordingly, the Court had to answer whether the law regulated "commerce" that was "among the several states." With respect to "commerce," the Court held that commerce is more than mere traffic and is the trade of commodities. This broader definition includes navigation. The Court interpreted "among" as "intermingled with."
"If, as has always been understood, the sovereignty of Congress, though limited to specified objects, is plenary as to those objects, the power over commerce with foreign nations and among the several States is vested in Congress as absolutely as it would be in a single government, having in its Constitution the same restrictions on the exercise of the power as are found in the Constitution of the United States."
The part of the ruling which stated that any license granted under the Federal Coasting Act of 1793 takes precedence over any similar license granted by a state is also in the spirit of the Supremacy Clause although the Court did not specifically cite that clause.
The Court did not discuss the argument pressed for Gibbons by U.S. Attorney General Wirt that the federal patent laws preempted New York's patent grant to Fulton and Livingston.Marshall, however, wrote in the last two sentences of his opinion, "I have not touched upon the right of the States to grant patents for inventions or improvements generally, because it does not necessarily arise in this cause. It is enough for all the purposes of this decision if they cannot exercise it so as to restrain free intercourse among the States." 221 U.S. at 239. That question remained undecided for the next 140 years until the Supreme Court held in Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Stiffel Co. (1964) that federal patent law preempted similar state laws.
Opinion excerpts
 The power to "regulate Commerce" is:
 In interpreting the power of Congress as to commerce "among the several states":
 Defining how far the power of Congress extends:
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 22
References
Further reading
External links
 Gibbons v. Ogden, Law, and Society in the Early Republic
 Summary of Gibbons v. Ogden  
Category:United States Constitution Article One case law
Category:Legal history of New Jersey
Category:1824 in United States case law
Category:1824 in New Jersey
Category:Port of New York and New Jersey
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Marshall Court
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Gibbs v. Buck" ==> """
Gibbs v. Buck, 307 U.S. 66 (1939), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court had two main holdings. First, an association of copyright holders, ASCAP, may sum their collective costs to meet the damages threshold for federal jurisdiction. Second, a motion to dismiss allegations that raise "grave doubts about the constitutionality" of legislation should be denied.
 References 
External links
Category:1939 in United States case law
Category:United States copyright case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Hughes Court
"""

From "Gibson v. Florida Legislative Investigation Committee" ==> """
Gibson v. Florida Legislative Investigation Committee, 372 U.S. 539 (1963), was a United States Supreme Court case based on the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. It held that a legislative committee cannot compel a subpoenaed witness to give up the membership lists of his organization.
External links
First Amendment Library entry on Gibson v. Florida Legislative Investigation Committee
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:Civil rights movement case law
"""

From "Gibson v. United States" ==> """
Gibson v. United States, 329 U.S. 338 (1946), was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that a Jehovah's Witness minister could appeal his classification without first appearing at induction camp..
References
External links
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Vinson Court
Category:Jehovah's Witnesses litigation in the United States
Category:1946 in religion
Category:Christianity and law in the 20th century
"""

From "Gideon v. Wainwright" ==> """
Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335 (1963), was a landmark U.S. Supreme Court decision in which the Court ruled that the Sixth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution requires U.S. states to provide attorneys to criminal defendants who are unable to afford their own. The case extended the right to counsel, which had been found under the Fifth and Sixth Amendments to impose requirements on the federal government, by imposing those requirements upon the states as well.
Background
Between midnight and 8:00 a.m. on June 3, 1961, a burglary occurred at the Bay Harbor Pool Room in Panama City, Florida. An unknown person broke a door, smashed a cigarette machine and a record player, and stole money from a cash register. Later that day, a witness reported that he had seen Clarence Earl Gideon in the poolroom at around 5:30 that morning, leaving with a wine bottle, Coca-Cola, and change in his pockets. Based on this accusation alone, the police arrested Gideon and charged him with breaking and entering with intent to commit petty larceny.   
Gideon appeared in court alone as he was too poor to afford counsel, whereupon the following conversation took place:
The trial court declined to appoint counsel for Gideon. As a result, he was forced to act as his own counsel and conduct his own defense in court, emphasizing his innocence in the case. At the conclusion of the trial, the jury returned a guilty verdict. The court sentenced Gideon to serve five years in the state prison.
Gideon first filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in the Supreme Court of Florida. In his petition, he claimed his Sixth Amendment right had been violated because the judge refused to appoint counsel. The Florida Supreme Court denied Gideon's petition. Later, from his cell at the Florida State Prison in Raiford, making use of the prison library and writing in pencil on prison stationery, Gideon appealed to the United States Supreme Court in a suit against the Secretary of the Florida Department of Corrections, H. G. Cochran. Cochran retired and was replaced by Louie L. Wainwright before the Supreme Court heard the case. Gideon argued in his appeal that he had been denied counsel and therefore that his Sixth Amendment rights, as applied to the states by the Fourteenth Amendment, had been violated.
The Supreme Court assigned Gideon a prominent Washington, D.C., attorney, future Supreme Court justice Abe Fortas of the law firm Arnold, Fortas & Porter. Fortas was assisted by longtime Arnold, Fortas & Porter partner Abe Krash and future famed legal scholar John Hart Ely, then a third-year student at Yale Law School. Bruce Jacob, who later became Dean of the Mercer University School of Law and Dean of Stetson University College of Law, argued the case for Florida.
During oral arguments before the Supreme Court, Fortas repeatedly asserted that the existing framework for a state trial court to appoint counsel was unworkable."Gideon v. Wainwright." Oyez, December 6, 2018, www.oyez.org/cases/1962/155. Under the existing framework, a magistrate in a preliminary hearing determined whether there were "special circumstances" in the case meriting that the defendant receive counsel. But as Fortas highlighted, that determination occurred too early in the case to be of any use. For example, whether a witness's statement should be barred because it was hearsay is an extremely complicated issue that no layman could readily confront, and such a situation arises only during a trial.
As a second point, Fortas presented during oral argument that it was widely accepted in the legal community that the first thing any reputable lawyer does when accused of a crime is hire an attorney. As an example, Fortas noted that when Clarence Darrow, who was widely known as the greatest criminal attorney in the United States, was charged with jury tampering and suborning perjury, the first thing he did was get an attorney to represent him. Fortas suggested that if a lawyer as prominent as Darrow needed an attorney to represent him in criminal proceedings, then a man without a legal education, or any education for that matter, needed a lawyer too. Fortas's former Yale Law School professor, longtime friend and future Supreme Court colleague Justice William O. Douglas praised his argument as "probably the best single legal argument" in his 36 years on the court.
Court decision
thumb|upright|The first page of Gideon's handwritten petition for a writ of certiorari to the US Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court's decision was announced on March 18, 1963, and delivered by Justice Hugo Black. The decision was announced as being unanimous in favor of Gideon. Two concurring opinions were written by Justices Clark and Harlan. Justice Douglas wrote a separate opinion. The Supreme Court decision specifically cited its previous ruling in Powell v. Alabama (1932). Whether the decision in Powell v. Alabama applied to non-capital cases had sparked heated debate. Betts v. Brady (1942) had earlier held that, unless certain circumstances were present, such as illiteracy or low intelligence of the defendant, or an especially complicated case, there was no need for a court-appointed attorney in state court criminal proceedings. Betts had thus provided the selective application of the Sixth Amendment right to counsel to the states, depending on the circumstances, as the Sixth Amendment had only been held binding in federal cases. Gideon overruled Betts, holding that the assistance of counsel, if desired by a defendant who could not afford to hire counsel, was a fundamental right under the United States Constitution, binding on the states, and essential for a fair trial and due process of law regardless of the circumstances of the case. The Court explained its rationale in these words:
Clark's concurring opinion stated that the Sixth Amendment does not distinguish between capital and non-capital cases, so legal counsel must be provided for an indigent defendant in all cases. Harlan's concurring opinion stated that the mere existence of a serious criminal charge in itself constituted special circumstances requiring the services of counsel at trial.
Gideon v. Wainwright was one of a series of Supreme Court decisions that confirmed the right of defendants in criminal proceedings, upon request, to have counsel appointed both during the trial and on appeal. In the subsequent cases Massiah v. United States, 377 U.S. 201 (1964), and Miranda v. Arizona 384 U.S. 436 (1966), the Supreme Court further extended the rule to apply during police interrogation.
Implications
About 2,000 people were freed in Florida alone as a result of the Gideon decision. The decision did not directly result in Gideon being freed; instead, he received a new trial with the appointment of defense counsel at the government's expense.
Gideon chose W. Fred Turner to be his lawyer in his second trial. The retrial took place on August 5, 1963, five months after the Supreme Court ruling. During the trial, Turner picked apart the testimony of eyewitness Henry Cook. In his opening and closing statements, Turner suggested that Cook likely had been a lookout for a group of young men who broke into the poolroom to steal beer and then grabbed the coins while they were there. Turner also obtained a statement from a cab driver who had taken Gideon from Bay Harbor to a bar in Panama City, stating that Gideon was carrying neither wine, beer, nor Coca-Cola when he picked him up, even though Cook testified that he had watched Gideon walk from the pool hall to a payphone and then wait for a cab. This testimony completely discredited Cook.
The jury acquitted Gideon after one hour of deliberation. After his acquittal, Gideon resumed his previous life and married sometime later. He died of cancer in Fort Lauderdale on January 18, 1972, at age 61. Gideon's family in Missouri accepted his body and laid him to rest in an unmarked grave. A granite headstone was added later. It was inscribed with a quote from a letter Gideon wrote to Abe Fortas, the attorney appointed to represent him in the Supreme Court: "Each era finds an improvement in law for the benefit of mankind."
Impact on courts
The former "incorrect trial" rule, where the government was given a fair amount of latitude in criminal proceedings as long as there were no "shocking departures from fair procedure", was discarded in favor of a firm set of "procedural guarantees" based on the Constitution. The court reversed Betts and adopted rules that did not require a case-by-case analysis, but instead established the requirement of appointed counsel as a matter of right, without a defendant's having to show "special circumstances" that justified the appointment of counsel. In this way, the case helped to refine stare decisis: when a prior appellate court decision should be upheld and what standard should be applied to test a new case against case precedent to achieve acceptable practice and due process of law.
Public defender system
Many changes have been made in the prosecution and legal representation of indigent defendants since the Gideon decision. The decision created and then expanded the need for public defenders, which had previously been rare. For example, immediately following the decision, Florida required public defenders in all of its circuit courts.
The need for more public defenders also led to a need to ensure that they were properly trained in criminal defense, in order to allow defendants to receive as fair a trial as possible. Several states and counties followed suit. Washington, D.C., for instance, has created a training program for their public defenders, who must receive rigorous training before they are allowed to represent defendants, and must continue their training in order to remain current in criminal law, procedure, and practices.Abel, Laura. "2006 Edward v. Sparer Symposium: Civil Gideon: Creating a Constitutional Right to Counsel in the Civil Context: A Right to Counsel in Civil Cases: Lessons from Gideon v. Wainwright". Temple Political & Civil Rights Law Review, Volume 15. Summer 2006. In 2010, a public defender's office in the South Bronx, The Bronx Defenders, created the Center for Holistic Defense, which has helped many state public defender offices and developed a model of public defense called holistic defense or holistic advocacy. In it, criminal defense attorneys work on interdisciplinary teams, alongside civil attorneys, social workers, and legal advocates to help clients with not only direct but also collateral aspects of their criminal cases. More recently the American Bar Association and the National Legal Aid and Defender Association have set minimum training requirements, caseload levels, and experience requirements for defenders.
There is often controversy about whether public defenders' caseloads give them enough time to defend their clients adequately. Some criticize public defenders for encouraging their clients to plead guilty. Some defenders say this is intended to lessen their own workload, while others say it is intended to obtain a lighter sentence by negotiating a plea bargain as compared with going to trial and risking a harsher sentence. Tanya Greene, an ACLU lawyer, has said that that is why 90% to 95% of defendants plead guilty: "You've got so many cases, limited resources, and there's no relief. You go to work, you get more cases. You have to triage."
 Cause of the civil right to counsel movement 
Gideon v. Wainwright marked a key transition in legal aid in the United States. Before Gideon, civil litigants were able to access counsel only based on the following three stringent criteria: whether the case had implications for a private corporation; whether their not receiving counsel would render the trial unfair or in some way compromised in procedure; and whether the case affected the government's interests. 
After Gideon, and amid growing concern about the paucity of resources for poverty lawyering and the resource burden of case-by-case counsel determinations, state judges and legislators saw the benefit of ensuring the right to counsel for civil litigants just as Gideon provided for criminal defendants. Additionally, an influential 1997 article by a federal district court judge helped revitalize the conversation about the need and justification for a right to counsel in civil cases.
In contrast to the self-representation movement, the historical civil right to counsel movement was founded on the premise that systemic representation by counsel "ensures more accurate outcomes in civil cases". Proponents of the movement also argue that a right to counsel "saves federal and state government money by helping to avoid the negative externalities caused by litigants wrongly losing their civil cases (such as increased use of shelters, emergency medical care, foster care, police, and public benefits), and increases the public's faith and investment in the judicial process".
While the movement has gained substantial traction over time (for instance, 18 jurisdictions enacted a right to counsel for tenants facing eviction between 2017 and 2022), some of its opponents have argued that it places an unreasonable financial burden on states that have an inadequate understanding of the costs and resources needed for civil counsel. Others argue that the right may lead to constitutionally inadequate representation, as has happened in criminal cases. One judge said that, post-Gideon, "many defendants were represented only by 'walking violations of the Sixth Amendment' [...] No constitutional right is celebrated so much in the abstract and observed so little in reality as the right to counsel". Since publicly financed counsel is not supported financially by the client, there is no guarantee that the appointed counsel will be adequately trained and experienced in the legal domain they are representing.
 Civil right to counsel: influence on policy and aid provision 
The movement along with the strong correlation between representation and equitable outcomes for low-income litigants in poverty lawyership scholarship has significantly influenced the policies surrounding legal representation. For example, in 2006, the American Bar Association adopted Resolution 112A, urging jurisdictions to provide legal counsel "as a matter of right at public expense to low-income persons in those categories of adversarial proceedings where basic human needs are at stake". Outside of influencing policy, the civil right to counsel movement has fueled approaches to legal aid that aim to alleviate the financial burden civil litigants face. Aid through lawyer substitutes has become more prevalent, involving non-lawyer professionals who can assist clients in legal matters without the supervision of a certified attorney. Similarly, pro bono legal aid, which involves providing legal services without fees in order to promote public good, has gained prominence.
Waiving the right to counsel
Doughty v. Maxwell demonstrates the differences between how states and the federal government address standards for waiver of the right to counsel. In this case, the Supreme Court granted certiorari and reversed the decision of the Ohio court in Doughty, which held that regardless of Gideon, the defendant waived their right to appointed counsel by entering a plea of guilty. The underlying alleged crime and trial in Doughty took place in Ohio, which had its own way of interpreting the right to counsel, as do many states. Pennsylvania and West Virginia also deemed that the right to counsel was waived when a plea of guilty was entered. Depending upon one's viewpoint, rules such as these could be seen as an attempt by a state to establish reasonable rules in criminal cases or as an attempt to save money even at the expense of denying a defendant due process. This varies a great deal from federal law, which generally has stricter guidelines for waiving the right to counsel. An analogous area of criminal law is the circumstances under which a criminal defendant can waive the right to trial. Under federal law, the defendant can only waive their right to trial if it is clear that the defendant understands the "charges, the consequences of the various pleas, and the availability of counsel". State laws on the subject are often less strict, making it easier for prosecutors to obtain a defendant's waiver of the right to trial.
Criticism
In Garza v. Idaho, Justice Clarence Thomas, joined by Justice Neil Gorsuch, filed a dissenting opinion suggesting Gideon was wrongly decided and should be overruled. Justice Samuel Alito joined part of the dissent, but did not join the call to overturn Gideon.
See also
 Gideon's Army, a 2013 documentary film about public defenders in the South
 Gideon's Trumpet, a 1964 book and 1980 TV movie based on this case
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 372
 Miranda warning
 Public defender
References
Further reading
   The article describes how 23 state attorneys-general, led by Walter F. Mondale of Minnesota and Edward J. McCormack, Jr. of Massachusetts, when asked by Florida to participate as amici curiae, surprised the Florida Attorney General by submitting a "friend of the court" brief to the Supreme Court on the side of the accused, and advocating for the right to counsel of criminal defendants to defense counsel at the expense of the state.
External links
 Gideon v. Wainwright from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
Category:United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision
Category:1963 in United States case law
Category:20th-century American trials
Category:United States Sixth Amendment appointment of counsel case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:Legal history of Florida
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
"""

From "Giglio v. United States" ==> """
Giglio v. United States, 405 U.S. 150 (1972), is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court held that the prosecution's failure to inform the jury that a witness had been promised not to be prosecuted in exchange for his testimony was a failure to fulfill the duty to present all material evidence to the jury, and constituted a violation of due process, requiring a new trial..  This is the case even if the failure to disclose was a matter of negligence and not intent.  The case extended the Court's holding in Brady v. Maryland,. requiring such agreements to be disclosed to defense counsel.  As a result of this case, the term Giglio material is sometimes used to refer to any information pertaining to deals that witnesses in a criminal case may have entered into with the government.
 Background 
In June 1966, bank officials at Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. discovered that Robert Taliento, a teller at the bank, had cashed several forged money orders. When he was questioned by the FBI, Taliento confessed that he had supplied John Giglio, the petitioner, with signature cards from one of the bank's customers, which Giglio used to forge $2,300 in money orders. Taliento then processed the forged money orders through the bank.
An affidavit indicated that Assistant U.S. Attorney DiPaola struck a deal with Taliento, promising that he would not be prosecuted for the crime if he testified against Giglio. Taliento testified before a grand jury, resulting in Giglio's indictment.
Giglio's trial, two years after the indictment, was prosecuted by a different prosecutor, Assistant U.S. Attorney Golden. DiPaola did not inform Golden of the deal struck with Taliento, and Taliento assured Golden prior to the commencement of the trial that no such deal had been made. In addition, U.S. Attorney Hoey personally consulted with both Taliento and Taliento's attorney prior to trial, emphasizing that Taliento would definitely be prosecuted if he did not testify, but that if he did testify, whether he was prosecuted would depend on the "good judgment and conscience of the Government."Giglio, 405 U.S. at 153.
At trial, Taliento testified "Nobody told me I wouldn't be prosecuted" and "I believe I still could be prosecuted."Giglio, 405 U.S. at 151. The trial court did not attempt to reconcile the apparent conflict between DiPaola and Golden. It proceeded on the premise that even if DiPaola had made such a promise it was not authorized, and its disclosure to the jury would not have affected the verdict.
Giglio was found guilty and sentenced to five years in prison. While his appeal was pending, his counsel discovered evidence of the government's discussions with Taliento. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to determine whether the evidence that was not disclosed required a new trial under the due process criteria that had been enunciated in Napue v. Illinois  and Brady v. Maryland.
 Opinion of the Court 
The Supreme Court began its analysis by noting that deliberately deceiving the trial court and jury by presenting evidence known to be false had been held to be incompatible with the "rudimentary demands of justice" as early as Mooney v. Holohan..  In Napue, the Court had held that the same result occurs "when the State, although not soliciting false evidence, allows it to go uncorrected when it appears."  In Brady, the Supreme Court had held that, irrespective of the good faith or bad faith of the prosecution, suppression of material, exculpatory evidence required a new trial.
In Giglio's case, the Court found that neither DiPaola's authority nor his failure to inform his superior Hoey or his associate Golden was controlling.Giglio, 405 U.S. at 154.  The Court held that, regardless of whether the failure to disclose was intentional or negligent, disclosing the information remained the responsibility of the prosecutor in its position as spokesman for the government; and that a promise made by one attorney on the case must be attributed to the government.
The Court noted that the government's case relied almost entirely on Taliento's testimony, and without it, there could have been no indictment, and no evidence to take to a jury.  The Court found that this made Taliento's credibility an important issue; any evidence of an agreement or understanding with respect to Taliento's future prosecution was relevant to his credibility, and the jury was entitled to know about it.Giglio, 405 U.S. at 154-55.  The Court held that due process required that Giglio be granted a new trial, and reversed and remanded.Giglio, 405 U.S. at 155.
See also
Brady disclosure
 References 
 External links 
 Supreme Court justices' internal correspondence on Giglio v. United States (Set 1; Set 2), courtesy of the Supreme Court Opinion Writing Database at Washington University in St. Louis
Category:Brady material case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1972 in United States case law
"""

From "Gilbert v. California" ==> """
Gilbert v. California, 388 U.S. 263 (1967), was an important decision of the Supreme Court of the United States, which was argued February 15–16, 1967, and decided June 12, 1967.
The case involved Fourth Amendment and Fifth Amendment rights, the taking of handwriting exemplars, in-court identifications and warrantless searches.
History
Petitioner was convicted of armed robbery and the murder of a police officer. There were separate guilt and penalty stages of the trial before the same jury, which rendered a guilty verdict and imposed the death penalty. Petitioner alleges constitutional errors in the admission of testimony of some of the witnesses that they had also identified him at a lineup, which occurred 16 days after his indictment and after appointment of counsel, who was not notified, and in in-court identifications of other witnesses present at that lineup; in the admission of handwriting exemplars taken from him after arrest; and in the admission of a co-defendant's out-of-court statements mentioning petitioner's part in the crimes, which statements were held to have been improperly admitted against the co-defendant on the latter's appeal. Additionally, he alleges violation of his Fourth Amendment rights by police seizure of photographs of him from his locked apartment after a warrantless entry, and the admission of testimony identifying him from these photographs.
Ruling
1. The taking of handwriting exemplars did not violate petitioner's constitutional rights. pp. 265–267.
(a) The Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination reaches compulsory communications, but a mere handwriting exemplar, in contrast with the content of what is written, is an identifying physical characteristic outside its protection.
(b) The taking of the exemplars was not a "critical" stage of the criminal proceedings entitling petitioner to the assistance of counsel; there is minimal risk that the absence of counsel might derogate from his right to a fair trial.
2. Petitioner's request for reconsideration of Delli Paoli v. United States, (where the Court held that appropriate instructions to the jury would suffice to prevent prejudice to a defendant from references to him in a co-defendant's statement) in connection with his co-defendant's statements, need not be considered in view of the California Supreme Court's holding rejecting the Delli Paoli rationale but finding that any error to petitioner by the admission of the statements was harmless.
3. A closer examination of the record than was possible when certiorari was granted reveals that the facts with respect to the search and seizure claim are not sufficiently clear to permit resolution of that question, and certiorari on this issue is vacated as improvidently granted.
4. The admission of the in-court identifications of petitioner without first determining that they were not tainted by the illegal lineup procedure but were of independent origin was constitutional error.
(a) Since the record does not permit an informed judgment whether the in-court identifications at the two stages of the trial had an independent source, petitioner is entitled only to a vacation of his conviction, pending proceedings in California courts allowing the State to establish that the in-court identifications had an independent source or that their introduction in evidence was harmless error.
(b) With respect to testimony of witnesses that they identified petitioner at the lineup, which is a direct result of an illegal procedure, the State is not entitled to show that such testimony had an independent source but the California courts must, unless "able to declare a belief that it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt", grant petitioner a new trial if such testimony was at the guilt stage, or grant appropriate relief if it was at the penalty stage.altlaw website
References
Further reading
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:United States Fourth Amendment case law
Category:United States Fifth Amendment self-incrimination case law
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:1967 in California
Category:Legal history of California
"""

From "Giles v. California" ==> """
Giles v. California, 554 U.S. 353 (2008), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that for testimonial statements to be admissible under the forfeiture exception to hearsay, the defendant must have intended to make the witness unavailable for trial.Giles v. California, 2008 WL 2511298
Factual background
Dwayne Giles was charged with murdering his girlfriend. During the trial, prosecutors were able to introduce statements made by Giles' girlfriend to police about a domestic violence incident between her and Giles. Giles was convicted, and his conviction was affirmed by the California Supreme Court.Giles v. California, 128 S.Ct. 2678, 2682 (2008)  The court reasoned that the report of domestic violence was admissible under the forfeiture rule codified in California Evidence Code § 1370 because Giles had presumably made the declarant unavailable by murdering her. Generally, the girlfriend's statements to the police would be inadmissible as out-of-court hearsay, but the testimony was admitted due to an exception to the hearsay rule which allows the admission of out-of-court statements by a witness when the defendant has made that witness unavailable to testify in court. The Supreme Court granted certiorari.
Majority opinion
In a majority opinion by Justice Scalia, the Court held that a defendant only forfeited his confrontation rights when he intended to procure the unavailability of the witness.  The Court examined the history of the common law forfeiture right, finding that every case since 1666 required that the defendant intend to make the witness unavailable for trial.  The Court noted that subsequent history also still required an intent element, with only a few modern exceptions.Giles, 128 S.Ct. at 2685
The decision of the California Supreme Court was vacated and the case was remanded for further proceedings.
Concurring opinions
Justice Thomas' concurrence
In his concurring opinion, Justice Thomas argued that the domestic violence report by the victim to the police was not testimonial and thus not barred by the confrontation clause.Giles, 128 S.Ct. at 2693
Justice Alito's concurrence
In his concurring opinion, Justice Alito questioned whether the statements at issue were actually testimonial in nature.Giles, 128 S.Ct. at 2694
Justice Souter's concurrence in part
In an opinion concurring in part joined by Justice Ginsburg,  Justice Souter agreed with the Court's historical analysis, but stressed as most persuasive the idea that finding forfeiture for crimes like the one at issue was too circular.  In the present case, for the victim's statements to be let in, it would need to be shown (in a preliminary hearing by a preponderance of the evidence) that the defendant had killed her, even though that was the very crime for which he was being tried.Giles, 128 S.Ct. at 2694-95
Dissenting opinion
In a dissenting opinion joined by Justices Stevens and Kennedy, Justice Breyer argued that the defendant's knowledge that murdering his girlfriend would make her unavailable to testify should have been enough to fulfill the intent requirement of the majority opinion.Giles, 128 S.Ct. at 2696
Impact
Giles has been criticized as hindering prosecutions for domestic violence.  Commentators have argued that Giles, however, still allows courts to infer intent to silence the victim from the dynamics of the abusive relationship.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 554
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:Confrontation Clause case law
Category:2008 in United States case law
Category:2008 in California
Category:Legal history of California
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
"""

From "Giles v. Harris" ==> """
Giles v. Harris, 189 U.S. 475 (1903), was an early 20th-century United States Supreme Court case in which the Court upheld a state constitution's requirements for voter registration and qualifications. Although the plaintiff accused the state of discriminating in practice against black citizens, the Court found that the requirements applied to all citizens and refused to review the results "in practice," which it considered overseeing the state's process. As there was no stated intent in law to disenfranchise blacks, the Court upheld the state law.
The African-American educator Booker T. Washington secretly arranged for funding and representation for Jackson W. Giles in this lawsuit and the ensuing Giles v. Teasley (1904).  He worked extensively behind the scenes to direct and raise funds for other lawsuits and segregation challenges as well.Richard H. Pildes, Democracy, Anti-Democracy, and the Canon, Constitutional Commentary, vol.17, 2000, pp.13-14 Accessed 10 March 2008
Background
The plaintiff, Jackson W. Giles, sued on behalf of more than 5000 black citizens of Montgomery, Alabama, such as himself in seeking to have the federal court require the state to register them to vote. The suit was brought in response to a number of provisions in the Alabama state constitution, which combined to prevent blacks from being able to register. Giles was literate and had voted in Montgomery for 30 years, from 1871 to 1901, before the new constitution was passed.
One of the new provisions held that any person registered before January 1, 1903, as most whites were, would thereafter be registered for life. That was a type of grandfather clause. Any person not registered at that time, as most blacks were not, would have to satisfy a number of requirements before being allowed to register. This gave local officials authority to bar voters. They included a test of the potential registrant's understanding of the duties and obligations of citizenship. This test was administered by white election officials, who conducted it in a subjective manner that resulted in most whites' being approved to register and most blacks being rejected. 
The district court dismissed the case on the grounds that the suit was not seeking enough in damages to bring it within the jurisdiction of the federal courts. At the time, a statute was in place requiring that cases brought under federal question jurisdiction satisfy an amount-in-controversy requirement of $2000. Giles had not specified any amount of monetary damages. The plaintiff appealed the dismissal to the Supreme Court. He appealed against the decision.
Issue
Did federal courts have the authority to hear a case brought against state government officials based on the assertion that those officials were part of a statewide conspiracy to deprive blacks of the right to vote?
Decision
The Supreme Court, in an opinion written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., decided to uphold the dismissal of the case, for two reasons: 
 First, the Court noted that the plaintiffs were asserting that the entire registration system was unconstitutional, but the only relief they sought was to be registered. The Court suggested that it would solve nothing for the names of the plaintiffs to be added to the voter rolls while the entire voting process remained illegal.
 Second, the Court noted that under the doctrine set forth in Hans v. Louisiana (1890), the Eleventh Amendment prohibited the plaintiff from suing the state directly in a United States federal court. Since the federal court has no power to issue an order to the state, the only way that the plaintiff's ability to vote could be enforced would be for the court to monitor the entire election process, which would be difficult in light of the overwhelming desire of the white population to prevent blacks from voting.
Dissenting opinions
Justice John Marshall Harlan and Justice David Josiah Brewer both dissented from the Court's opinion. Harlan contended that the court could have resolved the issue based on the amount-in-controversy requirement and did not need to address the power of the federal courts to hear the merits of this suit. Harlan and Brewer both asserted that if the question was solely one of the power of federal courts to hear the case, the Court should find that such power exists.
Aftermath
In Giles v. Teasley, Jackson Giles sought to meet some of the Court's grounds for its rulings, but his challenge was rejected. It was not until many years later that the Court overturned Giles v. Harris in a series of cases: they established that the right to vote was protected by the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and federal courts have broad power to address deprivations of constitutional rights of citizens within states. After congressional passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, the federal government was authorized to oversee, monitor and enforce voter registration and elections to ensure that African Americans (and other minorities) were allowed to register and vote. It still took years and more court cases to achieve.
When Giles v. Harris was brought to the Supreme Court, some members of the Court (and the Executive Branch) did not conceive of exercising such federal powers years after Reconstruction had ended. However, the legislative branch had exercised such power in challenges until the time of Giles v. Harris. In the 19th century, the House Elections Committee repeatedly refused to seat members reported elected by their states when it found that the voting or registration process had been compromised. Since the excluded members were inevitably Democrats, partisan politics could play a role in these decisions; certainly such members were unseated only when Republicans held the majority in the House. After the Giles v. Harris ruling, the legislative branch stopped unseating members because of such concerns. The issue of disenfranchisement of blacks was repeatedly brought up by concerned congressmen. For instance, in the 1920s, a Republican representative proposed readjusting apportionment to decrease southern seats in relation to the populations they had disfranchised. By that time, the Southern Democrats had so much power that they could defeat any such proposals.
See also  
 Ex parte Young, 209 U.S. 123 (1908)  
 Gomillion v. Lightfoot,  364 U.S. 334 (1960)  
 Guinn v. United States, 238 U.S. 347 (1915)
 References 
Further reading
 Brenner, Samuel (2009), "'Airbrushed out of the Constitutional Canon': The Evolving Understanding of Giles v. Harris, 1903–1925", Michigan Law Review, 107 (March 2009), 853–79, .  
 Gerard N. Magliocca (2011), The Tragedy of William Jennings Bryan: Constitutional Law and the Politics of Backlash, New Haven, CT:  Yale.
External links
Category:1903 in United States case law
Category:African-American history of Alabama
Category:History of voting rights in the United States
Category:Political repression in the United States
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Fifteenth Amendment case law
Category:United States Eleventh Amendment case law
Category:United States elections case law
Category:Legal history of Alabama
Category:History of Montgomery, Alabama
Category:Alabama elections
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Fuller Court
Category:Minority rights case law
"""

From "Gill v. Whitford" ==> """
Gill v. Whitford, 585 U.S. ___ (2018), was a United States Supreme Court case involving the constitutionality of partisan gerrymandering. Other forms of gerrymandering based on racial or ethnic grounds had been deemed unconstitutional, and while the Supreme Court had identified that extreme partisan gerrymandering could also be unconstitutional, the Court had not agreed on how this could be defined, leaving the question to lower courts to decide.  That issue was later resolved in Rucho v. Common Cause, in which the Court decided that partisan gerrymanders presented a nonjusticiable political question.
Gill arose following the 2011 redistricting plan for the State of Wisconsin created by Republican legislators to maximize the likelihood that the Republicans would be able to secure additional seats in the State legislature over the next few election cycles. The plan was challenged by Democratic citizens, claiming the redistricting plan caused their votes to be "wasted". The case was filed in 2015, and by 2016, the District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin ruled in favor of the Democrats, based on the evaluation of the efficiency gap measure developed for this case, and ordered Wisconsin to redo its districts by 2017. The State appealed the ruling to the Supreme Court, which heard the case in October 2017.
During the Court's deliberations, it also accepted to hear the merits of another partisan gerrymandering case, Benisek v. Lamone,. related to the 2011 redistricting of Maryland's 6th congressional district, for which it heard oral arguments in March 2018. While the majority of political scientists agree that Wisconsin's map was heavily biased, it was expected that the case would center on whether the efficiency gap measures and other metrics provided by political scientists meet the criteria that Justice Anthony Kennedy set forth in his concurring opinion in Vieth v. Jubelirer (2004), a previous Supreme Court case dealing with partisan gerrymandering.
Ruling on June 18, 2018, the Court remanded the case to lower courts, finding that the plaintiffs had not demonstrated standing for the case in demonstration of harm, though the Justices were split on to what degree the plaintiffs must show "concrete and particularized injuries".
Background
In the United States, each state has a number of members of the House of Representatives proportional to the state's population determined by the US Census conducted every ten years under Article One of the United States Constitution, with each state having at least one Representative regardless of its population size. A state that has more than one representative must redistrict after the new census to ensure that each district continues to have an equal number of people. Once set, a voter residing in a specific district may only vote in the Representative election for that district. Many states further use Census data to determine the internal state districts that are used to determine representation in the state government.
The process of redistricting has become highly politicized since redistricting is typically done by the political party that holds the majority of state elected officials. Notably, the practice of gerrymandering, redistricting that draws convoluted district boundaries to favor or disadvantage certain socioeconomic groups, has frequently been used to improve the party's chances of securing elections in the future. Although the US Supreme Court has ruled that redistricting that discriminates on racial or ethnic grounds is unconstitutional, it had been reluctant to issue a similarly-strong ruling for partisan redistricting. The Court has ruled that excessive partisan gerrymandering violates the Constitution. However, the ruling has yet to adopt a standard for determining partisan gerrymandering in redistricting, with proposed tests being too ambiguous for the courts to apply. In the decision for the 2004 case Vieth v. Jubelirer, which ruled that perceived partisan gerrymandering in Pennsylvania was not unconstitutional, the nine Justices were split. The four Justices in the plurality believed that it was impossible to define a standard to judge partisan gerrymandering, and four others could not agree on an existing standard to be used. Justice Anthony Kennedy, in his concurrence with the plurality, believed that some manageable standard for determining partisan gerrymandering could be developed and challenged lower courts to help identify this standard.
Wisconsin redistricting
In 2011, Republican legislators in Wisconsin redrew the state Assembly districts based on the latest 2010 census data. This effort was driven by the Republican Party's REDMAP (Redistricting Majority Project) to assure the party had control of the United States House of Representatives and state legislatures, principally through favorable redistricting. The 2011 mapmakers developed a model for evaluating voters' party preferences in aggregate, and drew up spreadsheets identifying likely winners in various proposed districts, labelling these districts as "assertive" or "aggressive" to indicate how likely each was to elect a Republican. They also collaborated with a political science professor, who determined "that Republicans would maintain a majority under any likely voting scenario." Under the "final map," mapmakers determined that "Republicans could expect to win 59 Assembly seats, with 38 safe Republican seats, 14 leaning Republican, 10 swing, 4 leaning Democratic, and 33 safe Democratic seats." The new redistricting map was approved by the State as Act 43, in August 2011. Reflecting this, in the 2012 elections, the Republicans gained 60.6% of the seats in the State Assembly, despite receiving only 48.6% of the statewide vote.
District Court
On July 8, 2015, the case was filed with the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Wisconsin arguing that Wisconsin's 2011 state assembly map was unconstitutional partisan gerrymandering favoring the Republican-controlled legislature which discriminated against Democratic voters. The case was filed by the Campaign Legal Center (CLC), representing twelve plaintiffs that were registered Democrats. The lead plaintiff, Professor William Whitford, from University of Wisconsin, stated, "In a democracy citizens are supposed to choose their legislators. In Wisconsin, legislators have chosen their voters." The plaintiffs argued that the map violates the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantee of equal protection. Whitford's complaint specifically claimed that the redrawn maps purposely diluted Democratic voters so that they would be wasted votes (that is, "cracking" the votes) while organizing a small number of districts to pack in a large number of Democratic voters to limit the number of seats the party would win ("packing" the votes). The District Court case was originally filed as Whitford v. Nichol, as Gerald Nicole had been the chairman of the state elections board; he was succeeded by Beverly Gill during the course of the case.
thumb|Chart of the 2014 Wisconsin State Assembly
In 2016, a three-judge federal panel allowed the case to proceed to trial, the first time a case regarding gerrymandering has proceeded in three decades. On November 21, 2016, a 2–1 decision declared that the map was unconstitutional.Whitford v. Gill,  To assess the validity of the map, the panel developed a three-pronged test that asked if the redistricting  [was] intended to place a severe impediment on the effectiveness of the votes of individual citizens on the basis of their political affiliation, (2) has that effect, and (3) cannot be justified on other, legitimate legislative grounds."Whitford, 218 F. Supp. 3d at 884. The panel judged these prongs based on whether they created an entrenchment of power, specifically defined as "making that party—and therefore the state government—impervious to the interests of citizens affiliated with other political parties",Whitford, 218 F. Supp. 3d at 886. which has been the basis for unconstitutional gerrymandering in the past. In the panel, Judge Kenneth Francis Ripple’s opinion, joined by Judge Barbara Brandriff Crabb, was that the map worked better than its drafters had hoped. "It secured for Republicans a lasting Assembly majority. It did so by allocating votes among the newly created districts in such a way that, in any likely electoral scenario, the number of Republican seats would not drop below 50%."Whitford, 218 F. Supp. 3d at 898.
The panel also used the Efficiency Gap measure, developed in 2014 by law professor and lead attorney for the plaintiffs Nicholas Stephanopoulos, and political scientist Eric McGhee. Wasted votes and efficiency gap are defined on pp. 850–852. The Efficiency Gap relates the number of wasted votes for each party across the state, with a gaps of 0% equating to a fair distribution. By definition, an Efficiency Gap of more than 7% would have allowed the Republicans to retain their advantage throughout the life of the Act 43 map. The panel determined that the Efficiency Gap was 13% and 10% for the 2012 and 2014 elections, respectively, exceeding the 7% criteria.
Judge William C. Griesbach dissented, believing that there were more appropriate measures they could take to prevent partisan gerrymandering, such as requiring a non-partisan redistricting panel. Griesbach also believed that the entrenchment principle would not be accepted by the Supreme Court over more traditional methods of measuring deviation, and that the use of the relatively new Efficiency Gap measure mischaracterizes the nature of a wasted vote.
The District Court's decision was seen as potentially satisfying the requirements for a test requested by the Supreme Court in Vieth; the three-prong test provided by the Court was able to distinguish between inherent and invidious gerrymandering through the narrowly defined anti-entrenchment principle through the lifetime of the districting map. It also introduced reproducible measurements through the Efficiency Gap that allow biases in redistricting schemes to be quantified.
The panel deferred its ruling on the remedy which was handed down on January 27, 2017.Whitford v. Gill,  The District Court ordered the State of Wisconsin to redraw their districts by November 1, 2017, as remedy for the case, using proposals brought by the plaintiffs to guide their decisions.
Supreme Court
Appeal
The State announced its intentions to appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States following the District Court's ruling in November 2016. Due to special procedures in the Supreme Court involving voters' rights cases, the Supreme Court was required to take the case, though whether they would summarily rule to affirm or reverse, or hear the case in full, would be up to the discretion of the Court. The State asked that the action in the District Court be put on hold until the appeal is decided. The State requested that the Supreme Court overturn the trial court's decision and allow the Legislature to continue drawing its assembly maps. The State was joined through amicus curiae briefs filed by twelve other states led by Texas. Separately, the CLC and its co-counsel from the District Court filed a motion to affirm the District Court's ruling on May 8, 2017.
In June 2017, the Supreme Court agreed to hear the state's challenge to the District Court's decision in the case Gill v. Whitford, granting the request to put the remapping action on hold. It was the first time that the Supreme Court has evaluated partisan redistricting based on the First Amendment's freedom of association clause in addition to the Equal Protection Clause. The case received at least 54 amicus curiae briefs across numerous fields. Among these were several by political scholars that had the consensus that "by any measure, Wisconsin's 2010 redistricting plan is extremely biased". These scholars introduced other metrics besides the efficiency gaps that equally demonstrated the partisan bias in Wisconsin's plan, which were expected to be considered to be evaluated by the Justices.
Oral arguments were heard on October 3, 2017, as the first before the Court in its new term. Oral arguments were given by Paul Smith of the CLC, representing the original plaintiffs, and by Misha Tseytlin, the Wisconsin Solicitor General. Erin E. Murphy participated in oral argument as an amicus on behalf of Wisconsin's State Senate. Smith argued that while the Court's previous attempts to regulate partisan gerrymandering failed due to lack of a usable measure, modern statistics and advanced computing available today made it very easy for the Wisconsin Republicans to create their favorable redistricting plan, but these tools would be just as useful to determine when partisan gerrymandering had occurred. Smith also reiterated that the Supreme Court was "the only institution in the United States ... that can solve this problem". Tseytlin warned the Court that should they find against the State, that redistricting would become heavily influenced by social science metrics, and that it would "shift districting from elected public officials to the courts".
Court observers identified that the Justices were split from the oral session. The four Justices that were considered liberal appeared to side with the original plaintiffs in arguing that the redistricting plan was biased, with Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg proposing that if they did not intervene here, Republicans would likely be able to stack other states in a similar manner, and it would de-incentive voters not favored by such redistricting plans to vote. Four of the conservative Justices felt the Court should not intervene, with Chief Justice John Roberts fearing that if they get involved, it would open up for more redistricting challenges that the Supreme Court would need to take up, and could harm the Court's credibility. The conservative Justices also questioned if the defendants had legal standing to bring the case forward in the first place.
The decision was expected to hinge on Justice Kennedy, who had held a middle ground in Vieth and wrote in his opinion about the need to find a "manageable standard" to determine if a partisan gerrymandering had occurred. Commentators observed that the stay of the District Court order was split 5–4, with Kennedy supporting the majority. During the oral arguments, Kennedy had appeared to side with the conservatives on asking about the legitimacy of the original plaintiffs in bringing the case, but asked both sides difficult questions relating to the redistricting approaches, leaving it difficult for observers to tell which way he would decide. However, some writers expected that he would side with the lower court and not for the appellants.
Subsequent to the oral arguments, the Court had agreed to hear one other partisan redistricting case in the same term: Benisek v. Lamone, accepted in December 2017 and heard by the Court in March 2018, which was based on Democratic-favored redistricting of Maryland's 6th congressional district.
Opinion of the Court
This court ruled on the plaintiffs lacked standing in the evidence they brought to the court, and remanded the case so that they could present evidence in favor of their standing. Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the unanimous decision to remand the case, arguing that the plaintiffs in the Wisconsin cases could not argue that there was harm to them due to the redistricting as presented in the current case, pointing out that Whitford, a Democrat, lived in a heavily-Democratic district. Instead, Roberts suggested there may be other forms of harm that the plaintiffs could demonstrate, such as by considering the impact of the redistricting on the entire state rather than one district.
Concurrences
Justice Elena Kagan wrote a concurring opinion, joined by Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, and Sonia Sotomayor, which identified steps that the plaintiffs could use in the remanded case to demonstrate harm. Justice Clarence Thomas wrote another concurrence in part joined by Neil Gorsuch, supporting the majority opinion but believing the Court should have vacated the case because he believed the plaintiffs had no standing. The District Court re-hearing was scheduled to start in April 2019.
The Gill decision was issued on the same day as Benisek, in which a per curiam decision did not rule on the gerrymandering issues but instead on a procedural aspect of the case. Many observers felt the Court had punted the issue of partisan gerrymandering, and may wait to decide on the issue in North Carolina v. Covington, a pending petition before the Supreme Court that the Court has already been involved with in January 2018 by blocking an injunction issued by the Appeals Court.
Subsequent developments
Political scientists had warned that a decision upholding the decision of the Wisconsin government would likely lead to democratic backsliding in the United States, as it may have led to the further use of gerrymandering and subsequently vast swathes of uncompetitive districts. These political scientists stated that if the case was upheld, it had the potential to  establish political polarization, as incumbents' main threats would be extremist challengers in political primaries.
The 2018 general elections in Wisconsin, following the Supreme Court's decision in Gill which retained the existing districting maps pending hearing of the lower court, further demonstrated significant imbalance in voting profiles. For the State Assembly, 54% of the popular vote supported Democratic candidates, but the Republicans ended up maintaining their 63-seat majority. The efficiency gap, estimated to be 10% in 2014, increased to 15% based on election results.
See also
 Baker v. Carr (1962)
 Davis v. Bandemer (1986)
 League of United Latin American Citizens v. Perry (2006)
 Rucho v. Common Cause (2019)
References
Further reading
External links
 Case page at SCOTUSblog
Category:Wisconsin Legislature
Category:United States electoral redistricting case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Roberts Court
Category:Gerrymandering in the United States
"""

From "Gillespie v. United States Steel Corp." ==> """
Gillespie v. United States Steel Corp., 379 U.S. 148 (1964), was a Supreme Court case that held that pre-trial appeals may be made on non-final issues if the trial judge, in his discretion, certifies a question of controlling law to the appellate court and the appellate court allows the appeal..
The Petitioner, the administrator of her son Daniel Gillespie's estate, brought suit against the Respondent after her son fell and drowned while working as a seaman on the Respondent's ship. The Petitioner claimed that she, as well as the decedent's dependant brother and sisters, had a right of recovery under the Jones Act and the Ohio wrongful death statute because the vessel was not seaworthy according to maritime law. She also claimed under both acts damages based on the decedent's pain and suffering.
The District Court held that the Jones Act was the only act on which the Petitioner could proceed with her claims. The District Court also struck the claims of the brother and sisters, holding that they were not beneficiaries under the Jones Act while their mother was living.
The Petitioner appealed to the Court of Appeals and the Respondent moved to dismiss the appeal asserting that the District Court had not made a final decision. The Petitioner, joined by the brother and sisters filed with the Court of Appeals a petition for a writ of mandamus ordering the District Judge to vacate his original order and enter a new one. The Court of Appeals proceeded to determine the controversy on the merits as though it were submitted on appeal and denied the petition for the writ and affirmed the District Court's order.
In light of the circumstances, the Supreme Court of the United States (Supreme Court) believed the Court of Appeals properly implemented the same policy Congress sought to promote in Section:1292(b) by treating this obviously marginal case as final and appealable.
Though the Court of Appeals review of this case could have been seen as piecemeal, it did not appear that the inconvenience and cost of trying the case was increased just because the Court of Appeals decided on the issues raised, instead of making the parties go to trial on the very same issues.
There was a possibility that an injustice would befall the brother and sisters of the decedent since many years could have passed since their claim to recovery was cut off as long as the District Court's decision stood. The Supreme Court held that the questions in this case were fundamental to the further conduct of the case and the Court of Appeals handled this case properly.
Justice John Harlan (J. Harlan) dissented and argued that the Supreme Court substantially affirmed the judgment of the Court of Appeals and the parties were remanded to a trial on the merits only after they incurred needless delay and expense in consequence of the loose practices sanctioned by the Court of Appeals and by the Supreme Court. This case is an example of a vice inherent in a system, which permits piecemeal litigation in a lawsuit.
Discussion
Though the Court of Appeals review of this case could have been seen as piecemeal, it did not appear that the inconvenience and cost of trying the case was increased just because the Court of Appeals decided on the issues raised, instead of making the parties go to trial on the very same issues.
There was a possibility that an injustice would befall the brother and sisters of the decedent since many years could have passed since their claim to recovery was cut off as long as the District Court's decision stood. The Supreme Court held that the questions in this case were fundamental to the further conduct of the case and the Court of Appeals handled this case properly.
References
External links
Category:1964 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Gillette v. United States" ==> """
Gillette v. United States, 401 U.S. 437 (1971), is a decision from the Supreme Court of the United States, adding constraints on the terms of conscientious objection resulting from draftees in the Selective Service..
 Background and Consolidation 
Gillette v. United States was argued under the consolidation of Gillette v. United States and Negre v. Larsen. Guy Gillette was convicted for failing to report for induction to service in Vietnam after his requests for conscientious objection were rejected. Gillette's reasons for objection were based on the grounds of a moral disposition towards fighting in the Vietnam War specifically, not that of all wars, to which the draft board denied. Louis Negre sought objection to Vietnam on the grounds of religious objection to what he as a Catholic referred to as "unjust killings."  Inevitably, Negre was deployed against his will to Vietnam after “the Army 'assigned four enlisted personnel to seize his arms and legs and carry him on board the aircraft which carried him to Vietnam.'”  In a post-decision interview Negre clarifies the incorrect Court description of his pacifism by claiming "I want to say that I am not a pacifist, but I did not oppose other wars at the time because I was not being asked to fight in other wars at the time;"  which further draws the line between Catholic objectors and members of Quaker or Mennonite faiths which have pacifist trends rooted in their origins. In its core the case of Gillette v. United States, as explained by Justice Marshall, is "maintaining a fair system" for determining "who serves when not all serve."
 Humanism and objection 
Gillette, in his petition, states his objections to combat in Vietnam as the following: "I object to any assignment in the United States Armed Forces while this unnecessary and unjust war is being waged, on the grounds of religious belief specifically 'Humanism'. This essentially means respect and love for man, faith in his inherent goodness and perfectability, and confidence in his capability to improve some of the pains of the human condition."  Gillette argues that the section of the Selective Service Act discriminates against his Humanist view which may be seen as not being a "well-recognized religious sect or organization" which received protection from serving in wars in the Draft Act of 1917. . Since the adaptation of the conscientious objection clause it has been repeatedly supported that only religious factions, such as the Quakers and Mennonites, that advocate pacifism in all respects can be subject to conscientious objection.
 Decision of the Court 
Justice Thurgood Marshall wrote the opinion of court, in an 8-1 vote, decided March 8, 1971. In the opinion, Marshall observes that "the section [§ 6(j) of the [ Selective Service Act of 1967 ] says that anyone who is conscientiously opposed to all war shall be relieved of military service" covers all religious objection to all wars with "no particular sectarian affiliation or theological position required." [6]
Douglas in his dissent juxtaposes the position of Gillette, and his belief in "humanism," to that of John Sisson in Sisson v. United States. Douglas goes on further to claim "There is no doubt that the views of Gillette are sincere, genuine, and profound. The District Court in the present case faced squarely the issue presented in Sisson, and, being unable to distinguish the case on the facts, refused to follow Sisson." Douglas continues on to extend the right to judge a war as just, or unjust, to each individual "who must make on the basis of his own conscience after studying the facts." Citing both the Fifth Commandment and the Pastoral Constitution as reasons for members of the Catholic Church such as Negre to object to each war they would otherwise be forced to partake in which they may judge combat as the killing of "innocent people." 
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Burger Court
Category:1971 in United States case law
"""

From "Gilmer v. Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp." ==> """
Gilmer v. Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp., 500 U.S. 20 (1991), is a 1991 case in which the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that the Federal Arbitration Act requires enforcement of an arbitration clause to compel arbitration of statutory Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 claims. A regional brokerage house, Interstate Johnson Lane later became part of Wachovia Securities.
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:1991 in United States case law
Category:Ageism case law
Category:United States arbitration case law
Category:United States Commerce Clause case law
Category:Wells Fargo
"""

From "Ginsberg v. New York" ==> """
Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U.S. 629 (1968), was a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that material that is not obscene may nonetheless be harmful for children, and its marketing may be regulated.
Background
Under New York law, it was illegal to willfully sell to a minor under 17 any picture that depicts nudity, is harmful to minors, and any magazine taken as a whole is harmful to minors.
Sam Ginsberg and his wife operated Sam's Stationery and Luncheonette in Bellmore, Long Island. In it they sold magazines including those deemed to be pornographic. He was prosecuted from two informants who testified that Ginsberg personally sold two 16-year-old boys the magazines containing pornographic images of women, both called "Sir", and, "Mr" Annual. It was insisted upon by their parents to buy them so they could lay the grounds for prosecution. He was tried in Nassau County District Court and found guilty. The court had found that the pictures were harmful to minors under the law.
The conviction was upheld by the Appellate Term of the Supreme Court of New York and was denied an appeal to the New York Court of Appeals.
Ginsberg argued before the court that the State of New York did not have the power to classify two different sets of the population in regards to obscene material and that it was an unconstitutional deprivation of liberty. He cited Meyer v. Nebraska, Pierce v. Society of Sisters and Prince v. Massachusetts, in all of which cases the court sided with the minors.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Brennan delivered the opinion of the court. The court rejected Ginsberg's argument that New York had deprived minors of their liberty. The court found that it was well within the state's power to protect minors and that just because the material is not classified as obscene to adults it may still be regulated with minors.
Dissent
Justice Douglas wrote a dissent where he strongly objected to the majority's decision. He found the First Amendment to be an absolute that harbored no exclusion for the obscenity that the rest of the court had found. While he admitted that the material that had been sold to minors could be harmful, Douglas was concerned that the ruling would set a precedent that could be perpetuated to "protect" other segments of society from anything the government might deem obscene. He finished by saying the definition of obscenity is impossible to determine because it is highly subjective and laments that the court is forced to sit as the nation's board of censors.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 390
List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Warren Court
List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
External links
 Ginsberg v. New York, www.oyez.org
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States obscenity case law
Category:1968 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
"""

From "Ginzburg v. United States" ==> """
Ginzburg v. United States, 383 U.S. 463 (1966), was a decision by the United States Supreme Court involving the application of the First Amendment to Federal obscenity laws. One of a trio of cases (with Memoirs v. Massachusetts and Mishkin v. New York released on the same day), Ginzburg was part of the Supreme Court's attempt to refine the definitions of obscenity after the landmark 1957 case Roth v. United States..
Obscenity law
The First Amendment puts protection for expressive content in terms that are both sweeping and absolute: "Congress shall make no law... abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press"  Despite this broad protection, the roots of U.S. attempts to legally suppress obscenity extend back to the English common law offense of obscene libel and censorship of stage plays by the Master of the Revels.
American definitions of obscene material were variable and sporadic until 1879, when the test adopted in the English case Regina v. Hicklin (1868) was used in the prosecution of D. M. Bennett.  This test regarded all material tending "to deprave and corrupt those whose minds are open to such immoral influences" as obscene, regardless of its artistic or literary merit. This same test was adopted by the United States Supreme Court in Rosen v. United States, 161 U.S. 29 (1896).  Under this test, works such as Honoré de Balzac's Contes Drolatiques, Gustave Flaubert's Madame Bovary, James Joyce's Ulysses, and D. H. Lawrence's Lady Chatterley's Lover had all been subject to suppression under the federal Comstock Laws.
In the 1957 case Roth v. United States, 354 U.S. 476, the Supreme Court created a new, stricter definition of obscene material as media where "...to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material, taken as a whole, appeals to prurient interest." This definition repudiated the former practice of finding the most shocking passages and presenting them out of context. The new definition led to much confusion, however, over what terms such as "contemporary community standards" meant in practice.
Although Roth had altered the legal landscape, it did not invalidate Federal laws against mailing of obscene materials. Title 18, section 1461 of the U.S. Code declared "Every obscene, lewd, lascivious, indecent, filthy or vile article..."  and "Every ...letter, circular, book, pamphlet, advertisement...giving information...where, or how, or from whom...any of such...articles, or things may be obtained..." unmailable in the United States. The penalty for mailing materials covered by this prohibition was a fine of up to $5,000, up to five years' imprisonment, or both, for a first offense.
Prior history
Ralph Ginzburg owned or controlled three companies: Documentary Books, Inc., Eros Magazine, Inc. and Liaison News Letter, Inc. Documentary Books was the publisher of "Rey Anthony's" The Housewife's Handbook on Selective Promiscuity, while Eros was described by its publisher as "frankly and avowedly concerned with erotica..." and the Liaison News Letter professed a dedication to "keeping sex an art and preventing it from becoming a science.". Ginzburg's companies mailed advertisements nationwide for these three publications in 1962.  At least one of these advertisements said that the publications were protected by "recent court decisions", presumably referring to Roth.
Ginzburg and his companies were charged with 28 counts of violating 18 U.S.C. 1461 and found guilty on June 14, 1963. Ginzburg was sentenced to five years in prison and fines of $42,000 were levied against him and his companies. The trial judge in the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, Ralph C. Body, summarized his findings on the three publications' possible merits as: "They are all dirt for dirt's sake and dirt for money's sake."  On appeal to the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, Ginzburg challenged the convictions on the basis that the publications were not "obscene" within the meaning of the Roth decision, claiming they had "...redeeming social importance with respect to literary and artistic values." The Appeals Court ruled by a 3-0 decision that all three publications were without social, literary, or artistic value, violated contemporary community standards, and appealed solely to prurient interests, making them obscene within the meaning of the statute. They affirmed the convictions and Ginzburg appealed to the Supreme Court.
Decision
The Court endorsed the determinations of the lower courts that Ginzburg's publications were obscene but extended the grounds for determining the merit (or lack thereof) of challenged publications.  Brennan noted that "...each of the accused publications was originated or sold as stock in trade of the sordid business of pandering". The analysis of the publications focused almost entirely on Ginzburg's marketing, saying "The 'leer of the sensualist' also permeates the advertising for the three publications."  Among other points, the decision noted that Ginzburg had first sought to mail these publications from Blue Ball and Intercourse in Pennsylvania before being allowed bulk mailing privileges from Middlesex, New Jersey and "...that these hamlets were chosen only for the value their names would have in furthering petitioners' efforts to sell their publications on the basis of salacious appeal."
Although the publications were defended on the basis that portions of them had possible merit, the Court rejected this defense.  The non-obscene portions were held to be a smokescreen which was belied by the publisher's presentation of them as appealing only to the titillation of the reader.  "We perceive no threat to First Amendment guarantees in thus holding that in close cases evidence of pandering may be probative with respect to the nature of the material in question and thus satisfy the Roth test."
Effects of the decision
Ginzburg's original conviction was upheld and he served eight months in prison.
Roth v. United States had declared that obscene speech was not speech protected by the First Amendment, while also holding that speech with "even the slightest redeeming social importance" was not obscene. Between 1957 and 1965 the Supreme Court had heard fourteen cases that partially or wholly dealt with obscenity and attempts to apply the Roth standard in both state and Federal court cases.  In none of these cases did the Court affirm an obscenity conviction but the confusing and sometimes contradictory opinions that accompanied these judgments made it clear how difficult it was to apply the tests announced in the abstract in Roth to actual cases.
Ginzburg was the first post-1957 case where the Court affirmed a conviction but it did so by greatly reinterpreting the Roth test. The Roth test and even the previous Hicklin test both examined the contents of the challenged publication in a vacuum.  By extending the analysis of Ginzburg's publications to his marketing of them, the Court had created a new type of variable obscenity that depended on external indicators of obscenity. Justice Harlan's dissent criticized this expansion as the materials would not be obscene without these external factors: "...the Court in the last analysis sustains the convictions on the express assumption that the items held to be obscene are not, viewing them strictly, obscene at all."
Obscenity determinations by the lower courts were made more difficult by this decision. Adding to the difficulty, the three obscenity cases announced on that date produced a total of fourteen separate opinions. Justice Black in his dissent protested that: "...not even the most learned judge, much less a layman, is capable of knowing in advance of an ultimate decision in his particular case by this Court whether certain material comes within the area of 'obscenity' as that term is confused by the Court today." One legal scholar likened the result of these three decisions to the Tower of Babel.  This state of confusion would persist until the Miller v. California case in 1973.
See also
 List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 383
 List of United States Supreme Court cases
Notes
References
External links
338 F.2d 12–Full text of opinion in the Third Circuit
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:1967 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
"""

From "Girouard v. United States" ==> """
Girouard v. United States, 328 U.S. 61 (1946), was a case decided by the Supreme Court of the United States. It concerned a pacifist applicant for naturalization who in the interview declared not to be willing to fight for the defense of the United States. The case questioned a precedent set by United States v. Schwimmer in 1929 that denied an applicant entry to the United States because of her pacifist stance.  Girouard v. United States overturned that precedent by voting in favor of James Girouard's religious freedom through allowing him to uphold his Seventh-day Adventist beliefs. Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone died the day of the decision..United States v. Girouard – Religious Freedom Page . Religiousfreedom.lib.virginia.edu. Retrieved on 2011-03-23.
Background
James Girouard was a Canadian citizen who applied to become an American citizen.  When asked if he would fight for the U.S., he responded "No, I am a Seventh-day Adventist." Girouard stated that he believed in the democratic ideal, but asserted that he was an uncompromising pacifist. The response was similar to Rosika Schwimmer's (United States v. Schwimmer) who said, "My cosmic consciousness of belonging to the human family is shared by all those who believe that all human beings are the children of God."
Decision
thumb|left|130px|Justice William O. Douglas wrote the majority opinion.
The Court held 5–3 that citizenship should be allowed. The majority stated that the oath aliens are required to take to become citizens does not require them to bear arms in defense of the United States. The court also drew support from the War Powers Act of 1941, enacted by Congress in 1942, which relaxed naturalization requirements for aliens who served in the United States Armed Forces during World War II, including those who served in non-combatant roles. The court explained that serving in a combatant role is not the only way to uphold and defend the US Constitution and that Girouard should not be denied citizenship because of his religious pacifism.
Dissent and death of Chief Justice Stone
Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone argued against granting citizenship in his dissent, joined by Justices Reed and Frankfurter. Stone cited the Nationality Act of 1940 and explained that it was the method that Congress chose for determining whether aliens met the requirements to become citizens.
thumb|upright|Chief Justice Harlan F. Stone
He argued that the War Powers Act of 1942 did not apply in the case because the aliens covered under the 1942 act had already served in the armed forces in defense of the United States, and it was not intended to include those who had not previously rendered military service to the United States.
Stone became ill immediately after reading (or, according to one author, while readingMurphy, The Legend and Life of William O. Douglas, p. 243 (New York:  Random House, 2003)) his dissenting opinion in open court. The Court went into an immediate recess, and medical assistance was summoned. Stone died later that day at his home in Washington, D.C.
See also
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 328
 United States v. Schwimmer
Notes
Girouard v. United States overturned three previous Supreme Court decisions.  They were:
References
External links
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Stone Court
Category:1946 in United States case law
Category:United States immigration and naturalization case law
Category:Pacifism in the United States
"""

From "Gitlitz v. Commissioner" ==> """
Gitlitz v. Commissioner, 531 U.S. 206 (2001), was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001. The case concerned a technical question of tax law dealing with the tax attributes of an S corporation.
Background
In 1991, P. D. W. & A., Inc., an insolvent corporation taxed under Subchapter S, excluded its entire discharge of indebtedness amount from its gross income.. David Gitlitz and other shareholders were assessed tax deficiencies because they used the untaxed discharge of indebtedness to increase their basis in S corporation stock and to deduct suspended losses. Eventually, the Tax Court held that Gitlitz could not use the S corporation's untaxed discharge of indebtedness to increase their basis in corporate stock.531 U.S. at 211. In affirming, the Court of Appeals held that the discharge of indebtedness amount first had to be used to reduce certain tax attributes of the S corporation and that only the leftover amount could be used to increase their basis.531 U.S. at 211-212. Gitlitz appealed and the U.S. Supreme Court decided to hear the case.
Opinion of the Court
Justice Thomas wrote the decision of the Court which reversed the Court of Appeals. He wrote that excluded discharged debt is an "item of income",531 U.S. at 217. which passes through to shareholders and increases their basis in an S corporation's stock and that pass-through is performed before the reduction of an S corporation's tax attributes. He wrote that it "simply does not say that discharge of indebtedness ceases to be an item of income when the S corporation is insolvent. Instead it provides only that discharge of indebtedness ceases to be included in gross income." "In order to determine the 'tax imposed,' an S corporation shareholder must adjust his basis in his corporate stock and pass through all items of income and loss. Consequently, the attribute reduction must be made after the basis adjustment and pass-through."531 U.S. at 216-218. 
Only Justice Breyer did not join Thomas's opinion. He disagreed with the statutory interpretation of the decision, believing that examining the direct language of the provision would have led the Court to a contrary result.531 U.S. at 221 (Breyer, J., dissenting).
See also
 Internal Revenue Code
References
External links
 Audio of the Opinion Announcement at the OYEZ Project 
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:2001 in United States case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Rehnquist Court
Category:United States taxation and revenue case law
"""

From "Gitlow v. New York" ==> """
Gitlow v. New York, 268 U.S. 652 (1925), was a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court holding that the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution had extended the First Amendment's provisions protecting freedom of speech and freedom of the press to apply to the governments of U.S. states. Along with Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad Co. v. City of Chicago (1897), it was one of the first major cases involving the incorporation of the Bill of Rights. It was also one of a series of Supreme Court cases that defined the scope of the First Amendment's protection of free speech and established the standard to which a state or the federal government would be held when it criminalized speech or writing.
The case arose from the conviction under New York state law of Socialist politician and journalist Benjamin Gitlow for the publication of a "left-wing manifesto" in 1919. In a majority opinion joined by six other justices, Associate Justice Edward Terry Sanford upheld the conviction under the bad tendency test, writing that government may suppress or punish speech that directly advocates the unlawful overthrow of the government. Associate Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. dissented, arguing that state and federal governments should only be permitted to limit free speech under the "clear and present danger" test that he had previously laid out in Schenck v. United States (1919).
In his majority opinion, Sanford laid out the grounds for incorporation of freedom of speech and freedom of the press, holding that they were among the rights protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Later Supreme Court cases such as De Jonge v. Oregon (1937) would incorporate other provisions of the Bill of Rights on the same basis as Gitlow.
Background
New York's Criminal Anarchy Law was passed in 1902 following the assassination of President William McKinley by an anarchist in Buffalo, New York, in September 1901. Under the Criminal Anarchy Law, people seen as activists supporting the destruction of American government through revolutionary means could be arrested in an attempt to prevent American Bolsheviks from gaining a national following.
Following the Red Scare of 1919–20, a variety of leftists, either anarchists, sympathizers with the Bolshevik Revolution, labor activists, or members of a communist or socialist party, were convicted for violating the Espionage Act of 1917 and Sedition Act of 1918 on the basis of their writings or statements. Benjamin Gitlow, a member of the Socialist Party of America, who had served in the New York State Assembly, was charged with criminal anarchy under New York's Criminal Anarchy Law of 1902 for publishing in July 1919 a document called "Left wing manifesto" in The Revolutionary Age, a newspaper for which he served as business manager. Gitlow's trial counsel was renowned defense attorney Clarence Darrow.I confess; the truth about American communism : Gitlow, Benjamin, 1891-1965. Eastman, Max 1883-1969 : Free Download, Borrow, and Streaming : Internet Archive His trial lasted from January 22 to February 5, 1920.
His defense contended that the Manifesto represented historical analysis rather than advocacy. Moreover, he claimed that he should not be arrested for his writing since the manifesto's distribution was not the inciting incident for any actions against the government. The prosecution refuted Gitlow's claim, stating, "Prosecutions have been for the use of words or printed arguments urging actions which if carried out by the reader or hearer would have resulted in the commission of a crime." The prosecution claimed that the Manifesto's intent was to convince American readers to commit crimes, and that in itself should be punishable by law. It took the jury three hours to convict Gitlow on February 11, 1920 and sentenced to 5 to 10 years in prison. He served more than two years at Sing Sing prison before his motion to appeal was granted and he was released on bail. State courts of appeal upheld his conviction.New York Times: "Gitlow Goes Back to Serve his Term," November 10, 1925, accessed June 17, 2012 
Gitlow was the first major First Amendment case that the American Civil Liberties Union argued before the Supreme Court.
The Court had to consider whether it could review a challenge to a state law on the basis that it violated the federal constitution. If it determined that such a challenge lay within the scope of its authority, then it had to review the application of the law to the case at hand, the specific violation of the statute.
Decision
Free speech
The Supreme Court upheld Gitlow's conviction 7–2, with Louis Brandeis and Oliver W. Holmes dissenting on the grounds that even "indefinite" advocacy of overthrowing government should be protected speech.
The Court upheld Gitlow's conviction on the basis that the government may suppress or punish speech that directly advocates the unlawful overthrow of the government and it upheld the constitutionality of the state statute at issue, which made it a crime to advocate the duty, need, or appropriateness of overthrowing government by force or violence.
Justice Edward Terry Sanford's majority opinion attempted to define more clearly the "clear and present danger" test developed a few years earlier in Schenck v. United States.. He embraced "the bad tendency test" found in Shaffer v. United States,  which held that a "State may punish utterances endangering the foundations of government and threatening its overthrow by unlawful means" because such speech clearly "present[s] a sufficient danger to the public peace and to the security of the State." 
According to Sanford, a "single revolutionary spark may kindle a fire that, smoldering for a time, may burst into a sweeping and destructive conflagration." He said the Manifesto contained "the language of direct incitement" and was not "the expression of philosophical abstraction."
In his dissent, Holmes, the author of Schenck'''s clear and present danger test, wrote that he believed it was still the appropriate test to employ in judging the limits of freedom of expression. Joined by Brandeis, he argued that Gitlow presented no present danger because only a small minority of people shared the views presented in the manifesto and because it directed an uprising at some "indefinite time in the future." Moreover, he responded to Sanford's kindling metaphor by refuting the claim that the Manifesto is an example of "incitement." 
Holmes states, "It is said that this manifesto was more than a theory, that it was an incitement. Every idea is an incitement. It offers itself for belief and if believed it is acted on unless some other belief outweighs it or some failure of energy stifles the movement at its birth. The only difference between an expression of opinion and an incitement in the narrower sense is the speaker's enthusiasm for the result. Eloquence may set fire to reason, but, whatever may be thought of the redundant discourse before us, it had no chance of starting a present conflagration. If, in the long run, the beliefs expressed in proletarian dictatorship are destined to be accepted by the dominant forces of the community, the only meaning of free speech is that they should be given their chance and have their way."
Incorporation
The Supreme Court previously held, in Barron v. Baltimore, that the Constitution's Bill of Rights applied only to the federal government, that states were free to enforce statutes that restricted the rights enumerated in the Bill of Rights, and that the federal courts could not interfere with the enforcement of such statutes.. Gitlow v. New York partly reversed that precedent and began a trend toward its near complete reversal. The Supreme Court now holds that almost every provision of the Bill of Rights applies to both the federal government and the states, with the exception of the Third and Seventh Amendments, and the Fifth Amendment's grand jury provision.Encyclopedia of American Civil Rights and Liberties: Revised and Expanded
The Supreme Court relied on the "due process clause" of the Fourteenth Amendment, which prohibits a state from depriving "any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law." The Court stated that "For present purposes we may and do assume that" the rights of freedom of speech and freedom of the press were "among the fundamental personal rights and 'liberties' protected by the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment from impairment by the states".
Aftermath
On November 9, 1925, Gitlow surrendered to New York Authorities for transportation back to Sing Sing Prison to finish his sentence. On December 11, 1925, New York Gov. Al Smith pardoned him, saying that while Gitlow had been "properly and legally convicted", he needed to consider "whether or not he has been sufficiently punished for a political crime." He concluded that "no additional punishment would act as a deterrent to those who would preach an erroneous doctrine of Government." Gitlow was later briefly elected General Secretary of the American Communist Party in 1929.
The Court used the doctrine first enunciated in Gitlow in other cases, such as De Jonge v. Oregon,. Wolf v. Colorado,. and Gideon v. Wainwright,. to extend the reach of the Bill of Rights. Constitutional scholars refer to this as the "incorporation doctrine," meaning that the Supreme Court has identified rights specified in the Bill of Rights and incorporated'' them into the liberties covered by the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. In 2010, the Supreme Court ruled in McDonald v. Chicago that the 2nd Amendment Right to "keep and bear arms," for lawful purposes such as self-defense is both a fundamental and individual right of all law-abiding Citizens over 21 years of age and of sound mind as self-defense is the "central component" of the 2nd Amendment, and these Rights are "fully applicable" in all of the 50 States..
Footnotes
Further reading
External links
 First Amendment Library entry for Gitlow v. New York
 Exploring Constitutional Conflicts: Clear and Present Danger
Category:1925 in United States case law
Category:Incorporation case law
Category:United States Free Speech Clause case law
Category:United States Supreme Court cases
Category:United States Supreme Court cases of the Taft Court
Category:American Civil Liberties Union litigation
Category:Legal history of New York (state)
Category:History of the Socialist Party of America
